now , why does it matter for human health ?
here &apos;s a graph of the pcb-belastung of dolphins in the sarasota bay .
and i remember sitting at my desk , and i thought , &quot; now i know it . what a great scientific discovery , &quot; but it was so terrible .
they &apos;re closed over the world all over the same reason , and i think that &apos;s what we should let .
i showed you at the beginning of how much we have the ecosystem of monterey bay &apos;s ecosystem , and the konservenindustrie and all the other kinds of problems .
hhhh -- hhhhhh -- hhhhhhh .
at the same time , he had asked his mother , &quot; do you know the book of michael morpurgo ? &quot; schlachtross ?
we really were frightened .
craig here moves the head .
you saw the skeleton .
we have this ability .
in fact , our modern ways of something is a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of a sense , but i think we should recognize what price .
clay shirky , this great chronist of all , has the premise that will be put on the prüfstand , in such wonderful ways .
today , there are so many new foundations , the schenkungen and investment that brought together to bring people together , in a larger context .
and i &apos;m hopeful , because not only philanthropy is organisiert , also other great parts of social social social and business business , hard to do that business as business as the &quot; business . &quot;
i &apos;m going to take this picture close to me . it &apos;s in my office , because i always felt a mystische connection to these two men , i &apos;ve never learned the two .
my own research to cell phones and internettelefonie shows that 80 percent of the phone calls actually go to four people . 80 percent .
whenever they have a moment , they &apos;re sharing with each other .
and with modern bureaucracy , a very rationaler approach , where there was a clear separation between the private environment and the public environment .
we &apos;re worried that texting , texting , facebook of the zwischenmenschlichen intimacy damage , but stefana broadbents research shows how the kommunikationstechnologien tiefer can be encouraging , to communicate love about the hürden for distance and arbeitsplatzregularien .
one of the things that we developed in the lab -- we &apos;ve developed several vehicles -- is how we think the first autonomous driftauto of the world .
for example , the brain tends tends to generate a lot of alpha-wellen .
not challenging task .
for the time , we spend some dollars about $ 60,000 in the year to send a people to prison .
their family lives live for eight generations in a city called whitesville , west virginia .
yeah .
we can create these local markets and incentives to use materials to use materials as materials for the manufacturing .
and we should invest in there .
and he won &apos;t , you know , you can &apos;t believe it in a rennbahn in los angeles -- a reason to love in the 1940ern .
i started my company to help communities across the country , to help their own existing potential to improve the entire quality of life .
and before you don &apos;t have children , you won &apos;t understand what i mean . &quot;
these deaf people , in the adult , they found community .
it always takes time .
it &apos;s only a straftat against a person , and someone with no one is not a person . &quot;
to testreihen people , it &apos;s not a lot of people .
but i found out that i was the kids i born , so love that i don &apos;t want to introduce me to a life without her .
he wouldn &apos;t reach his legs right .
i come from a privileged family . i &apos;ve been lucky .
it &apos;s about two weeks old . and there they are .
this is the beginning 2000 . my son , dimitri -- this is here today , many of you here are here , and i &apos;ve got cambodia and built up of our school , just as they were connected to the internet .
think about it -- because there are other people like bill gates who said , &quot; man , you have a real computer . &quot;
latin is also quite rare . let &apos;s look at some languages .
and guess what ? we won it .
we make a case for putting no more extra information technology to keep prices down .
for a gemüsepflanze , my apartment is about as alien as space .
and we can take care of the issues .
talking about a fiskalklippe , so i said to be parteiisch , even though i don &apos;t know what the party was supporting or angreift .
wealth will entrissen people who don &apos;t want to be bezeichnen .
in the subject , there are bigger uneinigkeit .
none of these most important theories was a full success .
we fear that the world is .
and while a lot of these work , we found something , or i found something that really fascinated me , maybe you can remember .
in fact , it &apos;s just happening here -- from light to dark in six seconds .
i see your faces very carefully .
that &apos;s not a term of joy .
this lady here has even a particularly assymmetrisches face , and both sides of it are beautiful .
this thing here , it flackert light on it , so it gets an object , so it &apos;s going to get a kinetisches object , just by doing the way brilliant that &apos;s done through the reflection .
i had to move this part , but only one millimeter .
and one of the things i showed you before , of course , was a very complex .
it &apos;s going to win or loses it at that moment .
the emotional band between this object and to shape them is a elektrochemikalischer partytrick , which is happening before they even think about it .
i don &apos;t think we need to meet that choice .
it &apos;s also a thought we &apos;ve forgotten .
i think it takes for necessary to return to the tradition of the global .
again , we don &apos;t think that way .
and at the end of the gespräches they all stand up and say , &quot; thank you , &quot; thank you , thank you , thank you jane . &quot;
and the other thing is that art is not to explain that artists should not tell their beweggründe , because if they verrieten them , that would destroy the magic and we might just find it too .
art would be one of the tools that we can improve our society .
we may not agree with the überein , which religions want us to teach us , but we can admire the institutional way they do it .
absolutely . i meet , how many of you , people who say , &quot; isn &apos;t something bigger than we all , but something else else ? &quot;
because you could agree to 90 percent because you have a similar view of that many things , and you &apos;re in the other side of other opinion .
and so he led me from places like chile -- the atacama desert in chile -- in underground mines , in the japanese in the japanese alps , in north america , to the south pole .
it &apos;s the largest seas in the world . it &apos;s 800 kilometers long .
and you won &apos;t believe it , but that &apos;s going to be called the unermesslich of big telescope .
this was a hut by robert falcon &apos;s scott and his men , when they came to antarctica , on their first expedition to the south pole .
remember , these whole verkabelung are doing people in extreme cold , in unter-null temperatures .
this is an interesting statement , i &apos;ll end up with this end .
what people first are doing is a book of book that you can look for within the book , and it &apos;s fun .
there were a lot of people there .
but how do we scan them all ?
we &apos;ve reached the 10 cents a page , when we &apos;re working with big volume .
i &apos;m not sure what borrow the leihen .
a day , about two or three bands .
with 15 dollars an hour of video , and about 100 to 150 dollars an hour , we can put the material online and put it on the net .
the question is , is this the world we want to live ?
flowers are going to get lastwagenweise .
we all know that the earth has problems .
and after the form of spores , they verfaulen .
if you go through the landscape , it &apos;s going up to your fußstapfen , and it &apos;s trying to react with the geröll .
across all of the landmassen .
some of these mushrooms are very happy .
this is a extraordinarily rare seltener .
i did something that no one would have done .
the box of life -- you get a dvd from the ted conference -- you &apos;re giving earth and you have water , and you have both mykorrhizale and endophytische fungi , as well as the sporen mushrooms .
i lived in biosphere 2 .
we wanted to know : is life adaptive enough ?
i sort of ate the constantly on the other .
and the doctor looked at how we really went well .
and all of them were going to me .
eritrea , once a part of ethiopia , is one of these places that are amazing beautiful and incredibly beautiful , and i have no idea how people do it , to live there .
this , this beautiful picture , this is the amazon .
this is actually a auengegend .
i had to think about how to take it and cut , but also how you choose the right person to come into a op-saal .
you set the break , you took blood , you put blood , looked at the blood , put it on the culture , it &apos;s going to go into the antiserum .
but we need a boxencrew , boxencrews for patients .
and so medicine feels at sometimes .
we looked at baufirmen for the wolkenkratzer , we looked at the luftfahrtindustrie , and we found that they have technology and education , and then they have something : they have checklisten .
and it &apos;s just hard to spread .
so these are really , really many bees , and that &apos;s very significant .
so that means that beekeepers can replace their dead peoples , and they could give them low losses .
they take their own their family and their family siedeln their families to twice a year .
honeybees are in minority .
let &apos;s take a cave in new york with a bestand of 15,000 bats , now that &apos;s a thousand . that &apos;s as if san francisco within three years of the half of the brain system .
now , not all of us , or are the lawn that we can turn , and that &apos;s how you can always be a meadow in a topf anpflanzen .
and i was also gepfiffen on the holy night with my wife .
and to defend my title -- like judoka and other athletes , i thought i would do it in 2005 , and won again .
this is very promising .
why ?
the whale whale , the biggest living thing on our planet . that &apos;s wrong , completely wrong .
while the night , they roll their leaves and reduce the movement , and during the day , the leaves will be open -- there &apos;s a lot more movement .
he wrote some very interesting letters to one of his friends , j.d. hooker , at the time , the president of the royal society , so the largest scientific authority in the u.k. were talking about a pflanzengehirn .
so , the human man had only been inspired by humans or animals , when he was making a robot .
she doesn &apos;t know she &apos;s being filmed .
and then when it became a shared experience , it was funny and something that you could laugh .
i was inspired by this .
this is in 2005 .
they were two of my boys who had hidden cameras in reisetaschen .
it &apos;s a wonderful way to spend a wochenendnachmittag with a stadion view at a stadion .
the idea is still in the early stages , but it &apos;s actually happening that we have .
this is ted .
and this is the bann that i want to break .
now , kids who are not yet mündig are a special case .
they &apos;re a kind of ektosymbiont .
the discovered that natural selection is brilliant , incredible genius .
this is what we &apos;ve done on this planenten .
the ant is not alone .
you &apos;ve just heard this guy .
i guess that really .
well , i don &apos;t think that .
now maybe we should be able to take it .
it &apos;s the devil one . &quot;
so they &apos;re actually a chord , each one of them is a personal chord .
men , if you don &apos;t understand anything , you &apos;re going to be able to hear it with expansivem , and you can change your relationships .
the third problem with the headphones is the case of the taubheit , lärmbedingte schwerhörigkeit .
klangheilung is a wonderful way .
i &apos;m going to leave you with more weiterem that it &apos;s very good for you .
he said , &quot; i don &apos;t know , but i can show you . &quot;
look at what &apos;s there in the middle .
they look at that direction , so i &apos;ll leave it here .
we &apos;re also sendeten of this guy .
it &apos;s actually seven billion händepaare that all of your own passion are going to follow , and all of them as part of the world , and create this world -- in their hinterhöfen and in their own .
and yet you can hear black holes , even though they &apos;re invisible , the reason they play on space-time like a drum .
and the sun is not going to end up as a black hole .
now we &apos;ve never seen a shadow of a black loches , but black holes can hear , even though they &apos;re invisible .
we can predict how that sound .
it should also give a mission for space , which hopefully will be going to be going to be going to be the next 10 years . it &apos;s called lisa .
it &apos;s closer and closer -- 40,000 years ago , we &apos;ve made a höhlenbilder .
trees represent a standstill .
i think that &apos;s what i &apos;m doing .
we &apos;re critical towards the west , the view of the west , of what our identity is , the picture of what we &apos;re drawn about , about our women , about our politics , about our religion .
but instead , i found a country that was completely ideological and i didn &apos;t do it anymore .
that iran once was a weltliche society , and we had democracy , and that democracy has been stolen by the american government and the british government .
i &apos;m standing here to say that iranian women found a new voice , and their voice gives me my voice .
this one is a big one , a ganzheit , focus .
there is no american compassion .
maybe the swami has right .
they &apos;re learning swimming by swimming . they &apos;re going to drive wheel driving .
the fossil record of this animal is only found in this area in south america -- a beautiful clear field here -- and in this part of africa .
you just look at these videos . if you get bored , you just go on .
but i was thrilled , and i kept on this .
the khan academy of the videos are also there .
this is the shifting and reflect on functions .
red means they &apos;re festhängen .
a lot of the efforts of the efforts to make human a human is focused on the teacher to teachers .
and the collaboration that they had with los altos , how did they have come ?
is it ready for the big toss ?
a few months ago , i got a call from a pflegeheim i work .
but it &apos;s a complete thing like a stummfilm . &quot;
she said , &quot; who is this charles bonnet ? &quot;
for example , when his enkelinnen went to him , he said , &quot; and who are these gutaussehenden boys ? &quot;
and then , if you were left , the young suddenly flew up , 30 feet up , and disappeared .
these characteristics of dialogue , they don &apos;t have these charles-bonnet-halluzinationen .
there &apos;s a area in the anterioren part of this inferior , in the teeth and your eyes , and this part of the fusiform is active when people have the entstellten hallucinations .
&quot; kermit means nothing . &quot;
sometimes i find them interesting , and i have a lot of images from my notizbüchern .
microsoft widder : i &apos;ve made these footage with a special camera that fits with the sensitivity of the darkness of the darkness .
and this crab , for example , sondert into the water , just like a squid or a krake , creating a tintenwolke .
this looks like a plant , but it &apos;s actually an animal .
there &apos;s a little bit that it &apos;s responding to it .
it was going to attack the head of the kalmar .
a approach would be to draw a painting .
if we resolve the double double double double double double double double , they see that these things look like teeth .
it &apos;s been verpackt and aufgewickelt .
one is a würstchen .
again , these are all akkurate , scientific ableitungen .
hold your eyes open and your head in motion .
the ability to have concepts intuitive intuitive images with objects and processes .
if the themenbereich is still very thin , you can become care and hard work to the world , the world &apos;s most important .
i &apos;m here to commit to , to help us change the way people and other creatures are fertigbringen .
not through the druckpresse , but it allows by collective action that creates from the ground .
the other great narrative of social media is the tragedy of the allmende .
toyota , instead of auszuspielen against the netzwerk , they treat them like a network and train them to produce better , even though they &apos;re also training them to produce better for their competition .
thank you .
thank you .
we &apos;re doing two different things .
in fact , all of the things that are in the case , and the difficulty turns in , and atembeschwerden , in the face , it &apos;s challenging conditions .
first we did a little experiment where we gave people to legosteine and asked them to build something .
and if you said yes , we gave them a new one , and as they were doing this aufbauten , we have the other thing that they had built , again , apart apart .
there was a very nice relationship between the love of lego and the number of building legos .
and i think the ceo of basically didn &apos;t understand how important meaning .
but i should point out , by the way , that in the condition , in the condition that people could have cheat .
people didn &apos;t want them .
and we had two kinds of people .
now think about children .
and i think that in the industrial revolution of adam smith was true as karl marx , but we really have umgerüstet . and now we &apos;re in the knowledge .
this is a normal conflict in today &apos;s modern conflict , because children are very easy to send in the war .
and my mother &apos;s mother &apos;s day , but so bad , that she was to make our story more glaubwürdiger , all boys and girls had given new vietnamesische names .
afghanistan is one of the poorest countries in the world , and 70 percent of the population are illiterate .
they didn &apos;t want to do that . it &apos;s just happening . they lost control .
and 70 percent won &apos;t get their lives back .
i think that all of my energy has given me .
that &apos;s the european average for the neuwagen .
on the top right , there &apos;s a parallel energy consumption per person , about like canada , about 300 light bulbs per person , but population density is 300 times more than 1,000 people per square kilometer .
if you really want to get a lot out of solar cells , you &apos;d have to take the traditional bayerischen landwirtschaftsmethoden , which you can &apos;t just do the roof , but also covered the landscape with solar cells .
and a third way is nuclear .
i tried it . it works . some call it the lifestyle lifestyle .
i was like boy , for the last time i was a musician , i wanted to be a musician and god , i became , i &apos;ve become it .
he &apos;s a young community in caracas who absolvierte his kontrabassstunden in the juniorenorchester of the sans agustin .
and that &apos;s ermutigt them to try to put new goals and progress on the various opportunities that music has to offer .
this is a verstohlene technology that helps you to take the right pill to the right time .
so what we call simple , unterbrechende technologies , and this is the first of five sentences that i &apos;m going to talk about in this talk .
this is what happened this year . she went to the frühruhestand .
is the first word &quot; doctor . &quot;
many of these generation will not push the button , even if you have a notrufsystem , because you don &apos;t want to fall to the load on the load , even if you paid for a long 30 dollars a month .
the color is different spaces in the house .
i &apos;m going to show you some of the latest and fiesesten invention of cybercriminals .
if you want your competitors to go off the line , you will .
how do you get a usb-stick to einzuschleichen yourself into a company ?
so let &apos;s imagine that our angreifer , we call it from a spaß , bösen hacker , is something that &apos;s called a fieses .
there are some other interesting things that the cybercriminals are uploaded .
now , you &apos;re probably wondering what happened to these people .
in the case of the 761 , i could identify the hotels that they were recently , very with punktgenauer precision on the globe .
thank you .
the alttiere can recognize the jungtiere , the jungtiere can recognize the alttiere .
and you &apos;re in something which is probably the blood vessels that go through the bone .
we all know that these bones are versteinert , and when you appear in the acid , there &apos;s nothing left left .
the nichtvogeldinosaurier are the big , schwerfälligen , who are extinct .
transgenese is really cool .
a friend , a colleague , dr. hans larsson at mcgill university , also , he &apos;s been doing atavismen .
people always say , &quot; why do you do this ?
finally , i started writing my book to show the worldwide scale of this problem , and this shows a aufstellung of the individual nations after the geschätzten level of food waste in every country in the world .
so imagine , these nine , which i found in the garbage , they represent the world &apos;s worldwide , okay ? at the beginning we have nine .
this farmer , about 16.000 pounds of anbau , he didn &apos;t have a sheet of spinat , because a little bit of grass , the kosmetisch , the kosmetisch , are fed to the pigs .
it &apos;s a living organism , i cut a piece of a piece , put it in a vase , and it was still another two weeks .
and if you use these things , you don &apos;t need to do it .
i &apos;ll give you a few durchgehen . &quot;
on the left to thymiamata .
we need to change the stuff .
this is , of course , einstein , niels bohr , the great fermatsche sentence , and i &apos;m not sure that the james coburn or richard harris is .
and you can see how the ikosaeder disappears in the dodekaeder and then they just merge together .
what a gutaussehende cat .
it was a horse .
&quot; 10 milligramm , 20 . &quot;
so , i said , if i put a circle , i &apos;ll see what &apos;s coming out of the patterns and boom , the red system .
you have to be right ! it &apos;s about measurements , the erweiterungen .
there were only two more dannys on the internet .
i &apos;ll be later speaking to this later .
i mean , i mean , all of the &quot; off , &quot; which would be like a call of their kabelanbieters , but for the whole world .
it could definitely be made by people here in the audience .
if we had a chance for example , 350 years ago , we had a chance to have been chance , we were talking about the momentanen innovation of the military , about the massive festungen of vauban , and we could predict an era of stability in the world or in europe .
now , in this environment , where you don &apos;t know whether the potential enemy to be prepared for defense or attack , and whether the weapons are driving to attack , this environment is what most people are doing to auszulösen a conflict .
it &apos;s a huge blue area .
so if you &apos;ve ever imagined you in the time , you can go back to see what a dinosaur looked like , this is a dinosaur .
she can &apos;t always shoot her strings , and she must be down the pants first .
he never seems to want to be a specific girl .
but what i did was a abenteuererzählung .
you don &apos;t have to worry about the readers &apos;s readers fall because , if you &apos;re a redenden shark , you &apos;ll have your doubt back to the front door .
it &apos;s going to be a kind of urgency , as as long as possible , as long as possible .
my stellenbeschreibung was wonderful vage : begutachtung the wild and öffentlichkeitsarbeit .
that means that i &apos;m going to math and magic to magic to make something i call &quot; mathemagie . &quot;
audience : 25. .
audience : 987 .
audience : seven , seven , seven .
well , i &apos;m going to try and i &apos;m trying to do the impossible -- or at least an unlikely .
audience : november . what ?
of course , i could make an answer , and they wouldn &apos;t know . i &apos;m prepared .
ok , oh , ok -- you also have a 10-stellen-rechner ?
let me explain what this is .
i would love to talk about astronomy , but i think the number of people who are interested in strahlungsübergänge in nicht-grauen , and lichtpolarisation are interested in the upper atmosphere of jupiter , is the number of people who fit in a wartehäuschen .
no , if you want to know how society will be 20 years , you ask a kindergärtnerin .
just two weeks ago , i have -- you know , i made small , middle , big kleinflaschen for the exhibition .
my mentor . he came up and spent an hour hour for hour .
i take a mittagspausen .
right ? that &apos;s simple physics .
when you put it in the book , it &apos;s actually 343 .
and i think , well , that square is the square of the length is proportional to the periodendauer .
you would think , with all this extra space , we would have a lot of space for all of our stuff .
it &apos;s time i &apos;m going to get it out of that .
would i have a little more freedom ?
north of the churchill , manitoba , in october and november , there &apos;s no ice on the arctic bay .
it took a lot of years of personenbezogenen spielgeschichten before i really started to realize that i really didn &apos;t understand it completely .
frank wilson has written a book called &quot; the hand . &quot;
so what does this do for the brain ?
it took a really long time -- i had to runterkriegen a homer runterkriegen and ihn through the fmri and spect durchbekommen and mehrfache eegs , but as a stubenhocker , he has a schrumpfhirn .
your own personal spielgeschichte is unique and often not what we think about .
he &apos;s a charakterisiert by a sense of energetischer fokussierung , complete vereinnahmung and success in doing .
how do you prevent the media to interpret your work or the science , which is now your work to be in , about like the mozartmetapher , about like , &quot; oh , the mrts show -- that play is the intelligence in the way .
the difference between our nachos and the landläufigen is that our actually sind are a dessert .
and then , after a short tauchbad of liquid nitrogen to get these perfect brateffekt , we really have something that looks like , tastes and acts like the original .
so , the ipcc , the ipcc in paris , his report about the people who were able to make a difference .
alisa miller is news about the news .
it allows you to think of the negative forms you create , while you &apos;re going to nachgeht your everyday verrichtungen .
for this project , we developed a kind of intelligent simultaner untertitel .
no matter where i &apos;m -- it &apos;s got a process that tries to map my eyes .
inside a 400 pounds of heavy roboterarm i &apos;ve been able to have been able to have a friend of .
there were thousands of people , and we think they were infected with hiv .
: : deep in a remote region of cameroon , two jaeger track of their prey .
but they will also be able to ask them a different question .
but if we found out in these laendlichen , we found that no one had television there , so they didn &apos;t know their face .
unnoetig to say that these viruses in the past are probably more extinct in these laendlichen societies .
you &apos;re told what you &apos;re doing with a 140 sign or less and people who are interested in this updates .
we built a programmierschnittstelle , which means that programmers can write software that interact with twitter .
&quot; ... give you more information and follow your intuitionen @ # . &quot;
and all i read , books were the people who were in the ausländer , i was convinced that books , of nature , had had to contain , and they had to act about things that i couldn &apos;t relate to .
all i &apos;ve heard about her was how poor they were , so that it had been impossible for me to see something else as an arm .
and i realized that i realized that my american roommate had heard different versions of the single story in their lifetime , just like this professor , who once told me that my novel was &quot; authentic afrikanisch . &quot;
now , you begin to meet the history of native americans with the pfeilen , and not the time the british , told a whole other story .
i always had the feeling that it was impossible to deal with a place or a person if you don &apos;t have to deal with all the stories of that place or this person .
i &apos;ll give every summer in lagos , and i find it amazing how many people are einschreiben , how many people would have to write to tell stories .
in a recent recently , experiment were actually done in a group of adults who are scanned brains in a brain scanner -- while subjects listening to experts .
why did my doctor , when i was surgery , &quot; ms. , passen , would you pay for not a hyperpyrexie ? &quot; instead of whose he would have just say that i must be careful , not having a high fever .
my father is sick of alzheimer &apos;s disease .
and reading is as good as it is impossible .
it &apos;s also hard to be difficult .
so we need to be able to be able to change the laws and economic boundaries .
in the sense , we also have our promise to give our promise .
if you have trouble , you know , what the average consumer in the u.s. in the u.s. is in the global economic environment .
if you want a fish , you get a woman and you get a woman , you get a fish . &quot;
and if it &apos;s going to take a long ride , you can still move and on the island of the island .
this is what &apos;s been the u.s. state of the u.s.
in india , you don &apos;t understand where the problem is , because most indians , every time , are going to be tanken every single or three .
all we need is 10 percent of the produced energy .
we don &apos;t put it right away . maybe we let the children free and keep the slaves .
the arguments of what &apos;s called the id , the same old arguments are always being widerlegt and over and over again , since darwin &apos;s time , until day .
now , the natural selection of natural selection is so amazing elegant , because you &apos;re explaining the problem of explaining complexity , in form of nothing else than simplicity .
now the next one : &quot; the president of the royal society had gewähren a strong internal belief &quot; -- -- &quot; ... &quot; that an asteroid killed the dinosaurs . &quot;
she feels in a belagerten minority , but how do the american atheists are actually zahlenmäßig ?
i don &apos;t have any given figures for topwissenschaftler other areas like history or philosophy , but i would be amazed if you were different .
darwin was that atheism was right and good for the intelligenzija , that the most people who probably , quote , quote , &quot; not the right for that .
if people like -- if atheists as stephen hawking and albert einstein use the word &quot; god , &quot; then , of course , it &apos;s as practical metaphor for this deep , mystischen part of the physics we don &apos;t understand .
and the launch cost was about 500 dollars , about the value of 10,000 dollars .
once in wireless , you had a person who had license , you could put it in a territory , and it had to decide whether this was license or ownership .
it &apos;s because there &apos;s a certain sense of sense , or an economist that you have , like wikipedia , ) a certain set of social relations .
i don &apos;t have a slides , so you &apos;ll have to have to get to me .
a research of the wirtschaftskomission for africa has shown that there are a clear aufwärtstrend in 28 african countries .
the state was not supposed to help in the production of the service , because it &apos;s inefficient and inkompetent in this area .
but what it immediately was beseitigte was the schwankungen that had dominated our economic development -- meaning , if the oil prices was high , our economy grew very fast .
we do the same thing in the versicherungssektor .
otherwise , otherwise , i had to have a wish you see this .
he called them : &quot; massive fatale diskontinuitäten , &quot; which means that they could kill up to 100 million people in the next 50 years .
until recently we didn &apos;t need to know how a vaccine was working .
the main challenge for these two viruses is that they change constantly .
these drugs are not cure , but they &apos;re going to ask a huge triumph of science because they are an automated todesurteil from a hiv-diagnose at least for those who have access to them .
but you know , the research that has been on hiv has helped us to progress with the progress of the progress .
this was a slow , mühevoller process that was dependent on hühnereiern , millions of living chicken .
and the abseits of radical gestiegenen production and the huge kosteneinsparungen of the e. coli method that i &apos;ve just talked about -- look at the gewonnene time -- that &apos;s gerettete life .
so the challenge is a full force .
the question is just why ?
do you think the african union is going to organize a conference like this ?
there &apos;s some things you need to know .
the speaker who was here on the stage , idrim mohammed , deutete that we had hundsmiserable leaders in africa .
by stealing it from their leidenden people .
traditionally the african governments hate the african -- they hate .
they decide what they do .
he doesn &apos;t get help from government , and he &apos;s building a second , grösseres boat .
one thing that would connect us all together .
scott &apos;s the results were full of it .
and the challenge for the physical filters , these personalisierten filters , is that they &apos;re going to be doing this balance , because they &apos;re going to go to the point of what they click on .
it &apos;s supposed to be in new ideas and new people and strangers .
and the man replied , &quot; really , beautiful abstieg , what ? &quot;
i know you &apos;re waiting for another bad umweltnachrichten -- i &apos;m just fun -- but now , i &apos;m going to show a little bit of a wiederholung , and then i &apos;ll show you new materials about possible solutions .
until the fillmstart in may , there will be an update on version 2.0 , where you can get directly to buy ausgleichseinheiten .
even in all the republicans here , it &apos;s not supposed to go to parteipolitik .
what really impressed me about the gulf of the gulf is that they &apos;re ausgesprochene .
and there &apos;s no one &apos;s trying to try to use no more , except a few people trying to continue to use the beach .
we have heard that bacteria eat it .
this tunfische durchschwimmen across the ocean .
when the japanese pearl pearl harbor harbor , they were at least zurueck .
in the case of the birds , i don &apos;t want to make a abfaelligen bemerkungen , like to make the birds .
okay , people who consider a conservative , if you really wanted to be conservative and really patriotisch , then you should send this korporationen to the hoelle .
it &apos;s about right and wrong .
and i developed a system to produce medical isotope .
all right , i &apos;m more than my genes &quot; -- all together .
i didn &apos;t ask you to too much because it &apos;s true , but to remind you .
they contain a molecule that we know as a neurotransmitter .
and this is just a mäusegehirn . it &apos;s much smaller than a human gehrin .
now , neurons , like trees , can grow new branches and lose old .
and we can even talk about the bewusstseinsstrom .
if you really have that number , you can easily make a sense that there are huge potential for your brain for the brain .
potentially , this technology will be able to meet ourselves through the auseinandernehmen and the zusammensetzen of our own brain .
he &apos;s working on music videos and commercials , the directors bureau .
so we &apos;ve been prepared a quick experiment to show you this .
ks : no , not .
while he did , he noticed an unexpected thing .
ks : how does it work , there &apos;s a matrix of färbemitteln .
ridiculous , or ?
and a couple of months ago , a friend sent me a link to this guy , eduardo sousa .
a huge amount of food for a couple of weeks .
but he still did that .
so his farm is incredible .
and it was that he found this wild plant , the lupine .
and then they fly around .
i finally got to try them before i went .
no salt , no pepper , no oil , no gewürze .
what is hell ?
at least , it &apos;s supposed to be .
farmers who rely on nature , to find solutions to find answers , instead of nature , the solutions to respond .
and to change the old fire , to change two great stories of oil and electricity , both of the two of the fünftel of the fossil fuel of the fossil water .
our fuel is mobility is about three fifth of cars .
you can make it quiet : it &apos;s harder than titan .
so , trucks and airplanes can use realistic hydrogen or advanced biofuels .
also , better light and büromaterial and so forth , maximale kühllast around a third .
already , in about 20 us-staaten , private installateure solarzellen solarzellen solarzellen , without financial losses on their roofs , and lower their nebenkosten .
and what we &apos;re also doing is , it &apos;s going to replace the same cost , about six trillion dollars in kapitalwert -- although we can buy more of what we have or new nuclear power and the sogenanntes coal , or renewable renewable that are more zentralisiert .
so , in results , and not incentives , to focus , can be reformstau and conflict to the vereinenden solution of the energieprobleme america .
later , i realized that what i had ate was two tagesrationen of his family .
these simple überlagerung shows that donors are in areas where the least kids go to school , not funded schools . this is what makes new questions , and there are foreign aid that they need most ?
two years ago , on average april april , in 2010 , i called my father .
i &apos;m not trying to design the toothbrush .
we remember , and can this in every book of my zehnjährigen son that life emerged four billion years ago -- four billion points two ?
that &apos;s similar , i &apos;m not sure .
there are risks , there &apos;s falling . a trap : the vertical .
you have time thinking , you &apos;ve got time to do something , to talk about art and things like that .
you go back to the future , back , back , back , that &apos;s back .
they &apos;re all coming from families where most people are at home , usually the mother or grandmother , and they come to their education and their structure here .
we can bring them to right and on the left so that they can &apos;t obey and know the consequences when they &apos;re eating orders .
let them go online . &quot;
it &apos;s a vorherzusehen .
they said , &quot; well , it &apos;s enough for regierungsarbeit .
then you can support us . this is the task of guys . &quot;
but i have to have my dog .
you can hear and make it happen .
for example , we take the reiseanbieter .
if you think about the idea of wikipedia , everyone &apos;s content in the content , and at the end , you have the largest encyclopedia in the world .
there are many people who have the same dream .
a website has been built .
there was no leader .
extremism has become tolerance .
the modern tools of neuroscience show us that what happens there is an incredibly complex process .
we can apart sounds of our own language , but not the alien languages .
we &apos;re going to try to do this by the american babies who never heard a second language at the beginning of the critical period of time .
it looks like a haartrockner from mars .
science on one hand has a very rational approach to her environment , while art on the other side is an emotional approach to his environment .
now i have a live-demonstration over here to show you this .
let me demonstrate that over here .
the dalai lama once said , &quot; love and compassion are notwendigkeiten .
the stofffetzen were abgewickelt from a little girl whose body burned massivst .
it &apos;s part of the human being .
and if compassion is so good for us , why don &apos;t we choose to compassion ?
the wound of the maggots .
suppose you like it , and frankly , who don &apos;t like it ?
we start with a 1x1-quadrat , and then we &apos;ll take another 1x1-quadrat next to this .
then there was a aron kader , a palästinenser-amerikaner .
i said , &quot; he &apos;s already dead .
&quot; i have what verbockt ! &quot; i don &apos;t have a memo . what &apos;s going on ?
i said , &quot; what do you do here ? &quot;
so i went to the lobby and i saw these indian guys .
marco tempest : when you ask him to deception , he said , &quot; ansager : magic is the only way that &apos;s a single career .
where is the queen ?
i &apos;m going to demonstrate how closely terrorism with our everyday lives .
at the time i interviewed the red brigades , i also discovered that whose life was not determined by ideology and politics , but by economic constraints .
i think a lot of people thought that i thought it was a little bit .
but especially , they had to organized crime in the serious geschäftsbeziehungen .
this money was made in koffern and containern -- in cash , you understand .
no one wants the us-finanzaufsicht to control his circumstances and monitor his geschäftsbeziehungen with clients .
some of you might think , &quot; wait a minute . it doesn &apos;t necessarily look like a hochsee-ruderer . &quot;
so i wanted to leave my wohlfühlbereich , but what i didn &apos;t have seen was that it was incredibly uncomfortable to leave his wohlfühlbereich .
and i really learned that the bigger the challenge , the greater the sense of a special performance , when you get to the end .
now , i thought the atlantic is big , but the pacific is really big .
but it didn &apos;t go without missgeschicke .
it &apos;s this little green disk on the horizon , which makes it very nervous because of rising levels .
we can start to make better , more , more , more powerful decisions .
roz savage : why i &apos;m going to rudere across the pacific pacific
this is the world trade center-baugelände on the cover .
why ? why ? why would you want to do that ?
he doesn &apos;t see any of the things . he doesn &apos;t use any extra time .
they were able to make this .
and the last thing it &apos;s all about comfort , it &apos;s about that they &apos;re good at places where they haven &apos;t really felt good at all .
and that &apos;s hard when you don &apos;t know who you are .
and i asked myself , how can it be so easy to give my dreams ?
it &apos;s not that hard to hereinzulegen someone , and one day at school , i said , &quot; yeah , you can abschreiben my homework , &quot; and i gave him the wrong answers i wrote down in the night before .
we were both versetzt on the back of the hinteren in class so we wouldn &apos;t be able to do with the papierkügelchen .
maybe you brought your prellungen and zerbrochenen teeth , but never told them , because how can you stand yourself if everyone else wants to buried you below ?
this is french science .
well , you go .
if you look at these trucks here ; it &apos;s the greatest truck of its species on earth .
it &apos;s also one of the reasons why it &apos;s the biggest and the fastest growing oil production in canada , and it &apos;s also why canada now is the number three in terms of co2-produktion per capita .
and as a dad , i can &apos;t imagine what it does to do a soul .
by doing this , we remove a big part of our greatest kohlenstoffsenke , and we replace it with most greenhouse oil oil from the future .
the hauptgegenstand of their work is the bindi that you can buy in every store and the millions of indian women put on your forehead every day . it &apos;s a ritual that is related to the institution of marriage .
raqib , shaw was born in kolkata , raised in kashmir , in london .
i hope you can convince you that complex and complicated are not always the same thing .
the eingekreiste knotenpunkt is the one we want to change -- the public support for government .
so i suggested that in my first tedtalk that we should spend 21 billion hours a week a week .
only 30 minutes of online-spiele in a day , it &apos;s been reichten for a significant improvement of mood and langfristiger increase in joy .
why is a game ?
how could a such thing could be so serious , sometimes lebensbedrohlichen situations ?
there are four kinds of strength , or resilience that contribute to function growth , and there are scientifically bestätigte things that you can do every day to build that resilience , you need no trauma .
through more practice , she &apos;s empowered .
and here &apos;s a secret for you : if you shake someone &apos;s hand for six seconds long , your blood flow will increase in your blood , the vertrauens-hormon .
and in this project , we actually have hundreds of people around the world around the world , and we &apos;re doing it with us , actually , thousands of people in this project , in many of its different aspects .
and then some people came out of chicago , and they said , &quot; end , &quot; end , the motto of chicago is a global warming festival . we have a 280 gallery and we want you to fill it with your reef . &quot;
wool and nässe are not just two concepts that fit well .
euklid said , &quot; how can i define parallel lines ? &quot;
infinity . it &apos;s captured .
so , we have , from wool , duch , the proof that the most famous math is wrong with the mathematics .
and their individual beliefs , and their employment with this mathematical method .
this particular rekursive property -- the self-esteem -- i think , is the holy grail of neuroscience , neuroscience , and eventually we &apos;ll hope to understand what &apos;s going on .
this person is otherwise in klarem &apos;s minds and intelligent , but when he sees his mother , his wahnvorstellung , and he says it &apos;s not his mother .
so if this area is damaged , you lose the ability to see faces .
tables and chairs and flusen -- nothing like that in normal people . if i &apos;m now showing him a picture of his mother , the elektrodermale activity remains low .
he knows that his arm is not there . nonetheless , it &apos;s a überzeugendes , sensorisches experience .
and you can &apos;t help it , you can solve the phantomschmerz , the phantom in the phantom .
and my pain has gone . &quot;
he said , &quot; no , the last three days , i didn &apos;t have a phantom , and so no phantomschmerzen in the elbow , no verkrampfung , no phantomschmerz in the unterarm . all my pain disappeared .
cis is blue , fis is green , another sound may be yellow .
that &apos;s the key .
what is that is that it &apos;s that it &apos;s ?
your sexualverhalten is to menschenähnlich , which most of us are not going to be .
this is kanzi .
none of the things you see in this video is antrainiert .
well done .
he learned that when he both benützt hands , with his own gezielten , streifenden hieben , much more bigger and more schärfere .
a framework is a hut in the forest .
does it look where the sound comes from ?
because we believe it &apos;s not biology , but the culture .
and some stars die in spectacular supernova-explosionen that have these remains of remains .
on the right , gravity is gravity . einstein &apos;s explaining this .
and beyond that , it creates new kinds of transformation .
it was too early on , but he was a moral wegweiser , a inspiration , who was concerned about control of the weapons .
suppose we have , in fact , aliens , we &apos;ve looked at our blassblauen point from far outside the cosmos , and not only for 40 years , but it &apos;s been the 4,5 billion years of history .
martin rees : is this our last century ?
and it &apos;s going to get worse , &quot; then i would take a picture of it and do a dozen hochglanzabzüge .
well , these are students , so they gave a lot of money for things like ohrringe and make-up .
and then we asked them how happy they are .
but enormous different incentives .
these are verkaufs-teams in belgien .
the teams we gave money to spend each other , to be spending each other , they were to be other teams and dominierten in the end of the liga .
when we hear about the kriegsgefahren , the high redekunst , we often believe that this is one of the most powerful conflict in the middle east , its roots as the age of the region .
ironically , that was at a time when the hauptinteresse of iran was held to peace with washington , and not the destruction of israel .
this is an analogy that is , you know , the diplomatie of diplomacy , is diplomacy , is inevitable .
you can search for certain verbrauchsarten , or you can look at the different regions and compare them .
the map of port au-prince at the end of 2009 wasn &apos;t as good as you could be , not as well as the map of california .
the trick is this .
and he said to explanation , &quot; he wasn &apos;t an environmental . &quot;
this system wants to keep the status quo , also , status level of status status .
so it &apos;s not about my subject that &apos;s most important . that &apos;s not .
we can &apos;t do anything . &quot;
lawrence lawrence : we , the citizens , have to bring the republic of the republic .
for example , some people in this room will be with sputnik to the scholarship with a scholarship .
this is at least in my pen . &quot;
each one is a little bit of irre .
i don &apos;t want to say that the law of entropy isn &apos;t true , it &apos;s true .
this is the angriff attack .
if you look at north america , it &apos;s like so many things in the united states , in the united states , are one active . they &apos;re ignore each other .
each of your herzschläge is based on this critical region , which is the sinusknoten that have about 10,000 independent cells , which every piept , an electronic rhythm -- a high tension , a low -- to send the ventrikeln a signal to pump .
they were in a while of synchrony , but it &apos;s drifteten apart .
so i want to show you a couple of interviews with people who were opening up on the bridge and describe what happened .
now , you don &apos;t normally normally for a metronom , but we all walk -- we &apos;re going to go back and walk back to work .
am : this is a few tons , so it &apos;s going to go very fast .
but the höchstgeschätzte scientist in his field .
i didn &apos;t say what the list was , but it was in alphabetischer order , and i told you , you should search your name , your familiennamen , or your mother &apos;s mother &apos;s mother .
also , maybe this might be , perhaps , maybe a weizenart , which is not worth wirtschaftlich at the moment , a resilience against disease or schädlinge or another trait that is useful for climate change , and the others don &apos;t have .
we &apos;re going to see children in television .
the idea with the ground was that it &apos;s cold , so you have natural temperatures under the gefrierpunkt .
and if anything happens , then you can come and pick it up .
thank you .
look at your body position ! this is not right .
maybe any lady , a lady ? thank you .
you &apos;ve only tried two concepts -- two in the united states , and one in the russians .
insane ! i have to talk about innovation cycles -- the things are developing , there &apos;s a lot of activity , and then they &apos;re replaced and die by something else .
i can &apos;t tell you when it &apos;s going on , because i don &apos;t want the competition to know my date .
i mean , i mean , i &apos;m really interesting that &apos;s going to happen here .
ok , let &apos;s talk a little bit about the commercial development of the bemannten space .
it &apos;s like the air .
after a few years , he &apos;s ready to give up , but one day he has an epiphany .
and institutions will be naked , and if you &apos;re naked , well , the consequences is .
the fourth meaning of openness , and the fourth principle is machtgewinn .
the zahnpasta is out of the tube .
you know that bees and fish live in school .
all around us , a medical revolution , a revolution that will help us , to beat some of the worst diseases of our society , including cancer .
this is a tumor , dark , gray , a unheilbare mass , wachsend in a brain .
and you can see that the ring of the blood supply disappears after the treatment disappears .
but the real question is , how do they work in practice ?
here &apos;s what happens when we add a erdbeer-extrakt , it &apos;s preventing angiogenesis in a very effective way .
but more interesting is from the study that the men who developed the prostata-krebs , which is , which is more tomato sauce , in the end of the bottom of the blood vessels that have feeding their cancer .
albert von once said that , &quot; discoveries are made of seeing what all of you have seen , and think what nobody else has thought . &quot;
i &apos;m a rätselkolumnist in discover magazine .
it &apos;s got fun to do , unlike the ordinary problems that i don &apos;t really have a particularly good puzzle of puzzle , the problem that i &apos;m not really .
one is the background of the other .
you can &apos;t be able to do it , but on a computer , it goes on . over to the computer , over the computer .
i wanted to make a sequel .
in which direction , the ones are going to fall ?
so , there are games like &quot; brain &apos;s brain for the &quot; the nintendo , a riesenhit . &quot;
it looks like a black character . where is it ?
i really believe that a girl is so powerful that we all had to train , not to be that .
i remember , for example , my father , who was very , very violent , i hit .
we &apos;re so used to berauben girls of the anspruchs , to be protagonistinnen their own life that we actually did them to objects and have turned them into the goods .
and she looked in the eyes of her baby and said , &quot; of course , i love my baby . how could i not love my baby ?
when we were there , they were doing a ritual where they were weggelaufen , who are weggelaufen with their families .
and i &apos;m going to be in your own life on your side . &quot;
i love it that i don &apos;t take things slightly easily .
why should you want me to be zusperren ?
so , in the actual process , all six teenagers said , and they bezeugten the identifizierungen that they had done by the fotostrecke .
but the incident happened in the middle of january , in the northern hemisphere , at 7 o &apos;clock .
that &apos;s 10 feet away .
and what does this example show -- what is important to keep in memory ?
he was a very religious man .
i got a fullbright-stipendium and traveling a year by africa , where i asked people why they built fractals , which is a great job when you can get it .
and that &apos;s going to be on some villages to the smallest level .
it &apos;s not really mathematical knowledge .
he said , &quot; if i lived in the jungle , i would use just long strohreihen because it &apos;s very fast and it &apos;s very cheap .
just , odd makes odd .
we have a pilotprogramm in ghana .
the bad news is that it &apos;s .
instead of turning friends to friends or relatives , she looked at the davids of work .
today , agile development will be applied in a hundred countries , and goes to the chefetagen .
fear of losing the radfahren .
we &apos;re making a few rules and keep them solid .
the conversation is going to work better . &quot;
just as i came home to get here , one of my daughters started .
and we developed a decade .
i was a teenager , for the first time , &quot; anna karenina &quot; and the famous first sentence i read : &quot; all happy families are all the happy families .
i want to show you how something that &apos;s going to look like this beautiful .
and when i put this in the water , you can see a silberne beschichtung , and this beschichtung is the luftschicht that &apos;s keeping the water from the benetzen of the paddels . it &apos;s going to stay dry .
and plato with all the boys in his cave . sweeney : uuuuh ...
i &apos;ll show you .
but it was not a long success .
one thing i want to be clear about is that not all neurochirurgen cowboystiefel .
we can turn them up or turn it down , or turn on , or to turn it up .
he &apos;s one of five children .
i showed you that we can apply it in the circuits of mood in cases of depression .
we &apos;re understanding what these circuits are and what the areas of the brain are in the brain , are responsible for the clinical signs of the disease .
evolution is actually more like a tüftler as an engineer .
that &apos;s enough .
what we discovered is , if you look at the leg of a human leg , or the schabe or a crab or a kängurus , the relative beinsteifheit of that feather is equal to all the one we &apos;ve seen .
okay . the point is , it &apos;s really hard to say , right ? it &apos;s incredible , students have tried it , and they couldn &apos;t tell it .
he does this with a druckempfindlichen glue .
what we do is we take the hair as a model , and we put them together with a different colleague from berkeley .
showed that from the verheirateten gehobenen , two-thirds of the most third of the most young men are only one third of the most women of women .
i left san francisco monday , my heimatort , and i flew to this conference .
and we go out at the end , looking at us and say , &quot; how did it go to you ? &quot;
there &apos;s a famous study of harvard business school about a woman called called &quot; heidi . &quot;
and i got my hand back , and i realized that all other women , and then you thought more questions , just by men .
a woman came with me in this , and i looked at her -- she looked at a little bit young .
thank you .
they don &apos;t usually do it as they should , but they do .
so not fear was the bestimmende factor .
but it &apos;s true in the middle of the black .
so i want to talk about this to talk about how we spread in this country , how we get to information .
and so you &apos;re in verständlicher , clear language , and it works .
we &apos;re telling them that everything is fine ; they &apos;re okay .
and this patient is about 50 , we can actually tell you very much about how big your risk is to get prostate cancer .
they don &apos;t need to be the bildungsniveau of the audience in this room .
and this bee has probably accepted , &quot; i &apos;m going to get this apfelbaum , that flower , i get the nectar and then i get off . &quot;
and when you talk about nature , as a writer , my favorite subject is , what is the idea of the aldo-leopold-test ?
well , we &apos;re all equally equally .
the only technology here is the cheap elektrozaun : pretty new , angeschlossen , it &apos;s a autobatterie , even i could put a koppel of 10 dollars in 15 minutes .
if a wiederkäuer grast , the grass of this altitude becomes this gekürzt , and it &apos;s going to happen to something interesting .
and now i say i want to build a game of games at the world , but it &apos;s not quite true , because it &apos;s already in development ; it &apos;s happening .
if not , it &apos;s a shame . there &apos;s nothing you can do .
they come to a certain time , they get their drinks for half .
and then you can achieve a different way .
and it &apos;s powerful .
digg is a kommunale dynamic that tries to find the best news , the most exciting stories .
we talked the last time before we talked to you .
you also see that , if i turn this around , i hope i don &apos;t really erschüttere the world .
you can see , it started .
this is one of our engineers .
mendel , who actually had high-school students to teach , i discovered the law of vererbung , just as a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of
raise your hands .
it makes it a place where it &apos;s fun to work .
and so this is something that we &apos;re working on , and we &apos;ve even got people excited about it and crazy enough that they work on it , that &apos;s really their goal .
thank you .
so , what was going to be in brunel , as he said , he wanted to reach for his passengers , the experience was to paint through the landscape .
what does life make easier ?
and part of it , they bewerkstelligten this by building a great new facility that used their basement to use their hospitals .
today , the industrial systems of the time have brunels ausgedient , and they were actually becoming part of the current problem .
and so , like , we can go to the brunel , by having a greater impact .
from my beharrlichkeit , beriet , the kellner , the kellner , the kellner .
mark lipper , and i &apos;ve tried to answer that question in a series of studies , right now .
yet , it &apos;s exactly what the american paradigm demands .
but for the osteuropäer , the plötzliche availability of all these konsumprodukten were like a sintflut .
americans even discover that unbegrenzte choices in theory seem more attractive than in practice .
and französiche parents would say more things like , &quot; noah was just for the short time , but it taught us so much .
robert frost once said this , &quot; it &apos;s poetry that &apos;s lost in translation . &quot;
&quot; well , it &apos;s a very elegant nuance of pink . &quot;
the three problems have one in common : they are menschgemachte problems that are controlled by forces .
so thank you .
it &apos;s supposed to replace competition with collaboration .
and then we build a sechs-meter-version that we can test the maximale of machines , and we can get very , very quickly .
girl 5 : no .
and so i realized that the techwelt of the best is not being understood as a geschäftszyklus , but as a heilbringende movement .
the atombombe enters the stage .
and then the 92 nuclear power that would provide the energy , the rest of los angeles auffüllen .
and then you take it and you put it on your screen &apos;s screen , and you &apos;re reibt from inside to the outside , right .
if you replace the word or today &apos;s internet , it &apos;s very real , that his attitude is now very aufschlussreich . let &apos;s hear it in .
i think it was this exchange that led to the computer .
ph : i hope you &apos;re understanding how subversiv that is .
and ultimately , the race has won a lot of momentum than the phone company .
mm : because it has given the audience a role , something to do .
they produce things for 1,500 , 800 dollars a minute .
and where tv has a abgekriegt , which is built , is a very exciting new kind of communication , and we have the zusammenschluss of two industries and a new way of thinking about it .
this is an architect architect and designer .
color can beleben simple blocks , simple materials : when i go through new york , i &apos;m holding .
it has given me to give me a little bit about -- maybe there &apos;s a yellow day in san francisco , and we all talk about a few installations .
the effort that has laid down to the public space in the day is significant , almost a international model .
even the parts of the aircraft had french names .
he said , &quot; well , there &apos;s more girls . &quot;
and that was , finally , i was a couple of hochs and tiefs , in the design of the chair i &apos;m going to show you a second .
he said , they have one of the new , better chairs .
or they &apos;re moving up into the position .
i knew , but i knew , and i knew , in the offices , where there was bürostühle , that there was no one who would ever get to the idea , zurückzugreifen , to turn and to anzupassen the kopfstütze to bring them in position .
and it &apos;s dengue-fieber in windeseile .
two days ago , or yesterday , i couldn &apos;t remember that , i read in a reuters-meldung , that madeira has the first dengue-erkrankungen vermeldet , about 52 million cases , with about 400 wahrscheinlichen cases .
we need something that really drosselt the bestand , so it &apos;s not the disease .
here &apos;s a typical situation : males meet females , all sorts of blood .
so , frachtkosten are not our biggest problem .
&quot; why now ? &quot; why here ?
and most of the time i &apos;m not taking away from that , even though i &apos;m a weitgereister weltenbummler .
and look at the available data .
now , our mobile phones can now have a story of our wohnorte .
bill davenhall : your health depends on where you live .
that &apos;s my grandfather .
the simple reason that nobody is talking about it .
and as the beginning , plants are moving through water from the ground .
this is the title of a remarkable article from a 2009-ausgabe of nature , who lostrat the conversation about the phosphorus crisis .
80 percent of them , they &apos;re missing .
and instead of a dose of 100 percent , we take one of 25 percent .
we have a working technology , and one that is going to be mildern by some korrekter use some of the druckpunkte mildern that we &apos;re doing in the world &apos;s phosphorreserven .
and he was a sogenannter teratologist : he looked at all the missgestalten and mutations to find rules and laws rather than looking at the norms .
and in this example , you can see the individual steps are repeat , but they are repeat without being modular .
as an architect , i &apos;m just thinking about relationships between the pieces and all of the things that are more important to design in terms of business .
we were näherten at the level of the typologie of the building where we could build the five separate towers , but they should all be verschmelzen to a single monolithischen mass .
again , we come back , a few years later , in 2003 , and we &apos;ll see that this landscape is actually more gesagt to look than a schleswig-holstein than a rainforest .
the difference is particularly in bewässerungsanlagen in the desert , or maybe golfplätze in scottsdale , whatever they want .
there &apos;s a lot of toxic waste , a lot of things that are illegal and they &apos;re now in the air .
we &apos;ve doubled the amount of nitrogen and phosphorus in the world , just through fertilizers that cause huge problems with water water ; rivers , lakes and even oceans , and it &apos;s also the most important einzelfaktor for artensterben .
but we can do that and there are opportunities to get it .
irrigation is the largest wasserverbraucherin in the paneten .
have to work together .
so , what is that , what is that , &quot; system d ? &quot;
we want to see our products in the store . &quot;
all system system doesn &apos;t pay taxes .
we interact with the world through our hands .
what do you do ?
we use biological verstärker to produce these nervensignale -- muscles .
this is what it looks like .
here we were deinnervierten , or cut the nerve free , from small parts of the muskels and other than other than that , we gave us our hoch-runter -- the signal , two others that gave us our hand -- signal .
ak : it works well .
but i can &apos;t put an electrode in front of an electrode , and i can say , &quot; there . &quot;
and this is our goal to have a little clinically anwendbares to carry .
this is jesse and he &apos;s drückt a schaumspielzeug .
so thank you .
sub-saharan africa has been a condition , because there are 22 million people living with hiv , which are geschätzte percent of the 30 million people who are infected .
governments have to be able to create effective prüfsysteme for ethical aspects in clinical trials , which are approved in the different developing countries . ethikkommissionen are eingerichtet by government and the finanzierern of the study .
the main problems we face is so a high consumption and a lot of people .
so they all meet the criteria that usually enjoy people .
so you can see this current that goes north -- the humboldt-strom in this case -- that &apos;s enough to the galapagos , and this tiefenwasserstrom , the cromwell-strom that starts to the galapagos .
we also know that not only are galápagos-pinguine , but the magellan-pinguine and other pinguinarten .
i &apos;d like to show you that penguins in mitleidenschaft .
turbo has angewöhnt , mit his schnabel to the door . we &apos;ll bring it in and he comes in here .
and then there &apos;s another one that comes out of the very comfortable .
now , here &apos;s a fundamental problem that we haven &apos;t solved : our basic political geography .
they &apos;re two of these two together .
again , again , in case of mongolia , china doesn &apos;t have russia . it &apos;s least .
for ärmere countries , china reduced its zölle , so that laos and cambodia were selling to be cheaper and dependent on exporten to china .
what i want to introduce you to here is , i call staatenbildung , day after day .
these two arrows form an bow , an bogen of pendelzügen and other infrastructure that connects the west bank with the lower streifen .
most of them .
so what &apos;s next ? what is the future of european union ?
53 countries , and far most of the most respected lines lines on the map .
that dream exists its time .
does it go bad ? it doesn &apos;t seem like that .
okay .
and the hormone igf-1 increases growth .
so how can a hormone finally have the speed of aging ?
we think that insulin and hormones are hormones , which are particularly active under the circumstances of the circumstances -- in good times -- if food is available for the food , and not a lot of stress in the environment .
we don &apos;t know the details about how it works , but we know that foxo genes have an impact on the lifespan of people .
and basically , you could change genes .
so it &apos;s possible that the process i talked about , which is , in the worm , it &apos;s going to be done very quickly , a different normal sollwert , like a bird , so that the bird can live much longer .
you never see a kind of display like this , because nike wants you to buy your shoes .
they all show heroes , the auserwählt .
it &apos;s like trying to walk against a backsteinwand .
this view is that many ausgestellte medikamentenrezepte like prozac , essentially , change the chemistry of the brain as if it was the brain of a chemical soup .
and my namensgebender colleague , seymour benzer , he believes this .
and what we found was that the screening we found that a 12-year-old , a lot longer took to abzuregen and abzuregen and when we were the genes that were playing in this mutation , we could find a dopaminrezeptor .
and this question has been asked for a long time , but in flies , we can actually test it .
so , it &apos;s the mosquitos find us in the dark by erschnüffeln us . they smell .
just so you can see it , this is the cheese .
people actually told me that they &apos;re going to be gestochen by mosquitos .
in großbrittannien , in großbrittannien .
and every time i felt the schaurigen look at the eyes of the eyes of verurteilter &apos;s dilemma behind me .
and as herrausstellte , fat is one of the best sources for adult stem cells .
as we speak , we &apos;re about 117 clinical trials for study the use of stem cells to leberkrankheiten .
we &apos;re very happy because we have the possibility of having these angels in the world , not only in our country : venezuela . in our entire world .
so what happens if what &apos;s happening ?
but here you see what &apos;s really going on .
i can &apos;t tell you about this because i &apos;ve stopped the headline .
jenna mccarthy : what they don &apos;t know about before
but how ?
it &apos;s even better . it seems that we can make these tools with help of material that &apos;s in the dna .
the animal jumps , it &apos;s going to spread its wings , it vibriert it , but it can &apos;t really be able to get out there , because the fly &apos;s captured between two glasscheiben .
for a smart creature like our fly , it &apos;s not that rule is not in stone , but it changes while the animal learns through experience .
and by many of these experiments , we were able to get the identity of the critic &apos;s identity to 12 cells .
there &apos;s a couple of ideas in the computerwissenschaft and artificial intelligence , how you might do that , but we still haven &apos;t solved a single example of how intelligent behavior of the physical interaction of the physical interaction with living matter .
here &apos;s a libby , or actually a ultraschallbild of the libby .
ed : all right . tb : okay . let &apos;s go to the middle , a little bit more .
and for their own experience , i know that hospitals are a very dangerous place to be a very dangerous place for young people .
here &apos;s a picture of my abschlussteam from the legacy .
one of them , i &apos;m telling you , this kind of pflegeanpassung , which is all of the goals , from your goals to your genes , the bahnbrechendste that we &apos;re going to see in our lifetime in health .
they don &apos;t stick with a klettverschluss or glue .
here we have the robot .
marc raibert built the hüpfroboter uniroo .
what would happen if they were going to climb the bottom of the blattes and they would come to be a böe , or we would shake the sheet ? &quot;
and so , wirs did , and he does this .
of course , completely different than you would see that in a naturfilm .
we &apos;re going to look at rising sea level .
and i would say , the people who work in the ocean and think about goals , we &apos;re the opinion to be much lower .
this is the ship i was in antarctica for the last three months of antarctica .
if this ice is melting sea level by six meters .
what was the cause ?
in both cases , the bad news is the coral of the galapagos islands .
you have the relationship to the temperature .
but then you end up in the end , you see the thermometeraufzeichnungen in black .
we have very interesting ways of the atmosphere of the atmosphere , and we &apos;ve done this in the atmosphere of the atmosphere , and we &apos;ve only done this with eisbohrkernen , but in this case , we go back 20 million years .
and this is the task that einstein has asked : figure out how gravity works .
einstein had already room and time and time and curves besetzt to describe gravity .
but deep down in the structure of the space , the idea , could give it more dimensions than we see there .
and just as the strings of a cello can put it differently , they can vibrate in different patterns .
not yet .
and this is just an interesting mathematical engineering that might be able to explain some of the einstmals traits of the world , or can we actually demonstrate these extra dimensions ?
so we &apos;ve put two pieces of pieces on top of these things .
now , can you see the predator that &apos;s going to attack it ?
and what &apos;s true of sensory information is true for all the information that &apos;s true .
and we &apos;re looking at 30 seconds of what a big hammer is in a 18 minutes long talk .
why ? because if the kachel in this shadow would be in the shadow , and the same amount of light would reflect on your eye as the kachel outside the shadow , it would have to reflect , simply after laws of physics .
how do you know ?
and she comes in the hive , finds a blank honigtopf and übergibt -- and that &apos;s honey .
he finds him . insane , right ?
do you agree ? yes ?
there &apos;s no right or wrong there .
in 2010 in new york , in 2010 .
we &apos;re also a species of the storyteller .
now some things : understanding of security , the risks , the dangers , the gegenmaßnahmen , how they work .
but in a modern and complex world , they need models to understand the many risks we face .
think of cancer , avian flu , flu flu , sars .
there was no new insights , but less fear .
and there &apos;s another cognitive bias : i call it bestätigungsfehler by accept the data that we use to confirm our data , and abzulehnen the data that we disagree with our glaubensatz .
i &apos;m familiar with another group , i &apos;m familiar with , i know , i could make sure my airplane was safe to fly .
this is the people who are ängstigte .
and he was found near here , at stanford .
they had good circumstances with their teachers , students .
so let me ask you some questions to find out if that &apos;s a good choice . &quot;
i took , anybody , they put a setze to get them or save it , and i was able to raise my volunteer for a volunteer , but i found that nobody did .
we opened up the first part of 2009 .
robert hammond : a park in the sky , building a park in the sky .
and groups were very often called terrorists .
you need a einschließenden process where the core of this very complicated society can handle its problems .
it &apos;s about that we probably probably see a revolution in the history of the arab world , a revolution from the ground , a volksrevolution .
paradox is that the vorletzte decade was so promising , and it &apos;s from a main reason .
at once , the ngos , they don &apos;t call their slogans anymore , but they took them into negotiations , to part because they were vertraten the victims of these weapons .
thank you very much for your attention .
but i don &apos;t think that &quot; monsteret &quot; is something good .
so this was completely smooth .
it &apos;s a little bit crazy to work on a new nuklearreaktor .
and i try to use a very scientific approach .
they said , &quot; well , you know , this strange rich man in the movie ? &quot;
it &apos;s a big tooth . &quot;
and the last day , the sun comes out , the orcas come , they come right to the boat . it &apos;s fantastic .
i &apos;m going to admit that i &apos;m a little nervous , because i &apos;m going to tell you a couple of radical things about how we &apos;re going to think about cancer , to a audience that many people who are carrying a lot more of knowledge than i do .
the part of the genome we can read is the list of the ingredients .
it &apos;s a huge amount of information in genetics , just by looking at the genetic resemblance .
and i , &quot; okay . at least this guy &apos;s good . &quot;
so we basically measure each isotop as a own .
if you have malaria , we give them chinin , or some of the derivate .
where we really need to get it , is the process that just just , and that is at the level of the proteomischen activity on the level of the level of the body , the body doesn &apos;t even cure for it ?
danny hillis : cancer &apos;s understanding of proteomics
they are all members of tribes .
it &apos;s not enough to give up these people .
because at stage three , most of us are .
this is their lobby .
there was no plan . never before anybody tried this .
in fact , martin luther king &apos;s bekanntester sentence in stage three .
so i &apos;m sitting here in this chair and i &apos;m doing nothing . &quot;
and all of a sudden they took the papierzettel out and tried to figure out , &quot; how are we asking the population of sub-saharan africa ? &quot;
automatically , we put the little bits of plastic up .
these ein- , or zweistöckigen , who were designed to make a lot of things to get the taxes for the floor to stand up , not as permanent buildings .
they duchschauen the stability and safety that can offer the lap of an uncle , is comparing them with the wackeligen konstruktion of a neurotischen nichte .
but from my perspective , compassion has a problem .
and it &apos;s the most erbauendste form of sofortiger gratification .
i can &apos;t really explain it , and he doesn &apos;t .
stories like this , the characters like these are practical , in a world that will be willing to take compassion , the übermäßigen of the suffering that we could otherwise otherwise .
gandhi was a really fehlerhafter man .
and the first day our gruppenleiterin would antreten us and we taught our motto that we had to give to the rest of the summer , to bring the gemeinschaftssinn .
this is one of two or three of them known .
here are some examples .
it turns out that we can &apos;t be part of a group , without the other feeling of mimic the opinion of others .
so this is the world we live today .
and so i &apos;m trying to learn my grandfather &apos;s my grandfather &apos;s own way .
okay , number two : go to the wild .
and imagine this , you know , an internal picture : i was born in a very small village in mexico , in , unfortunately , very ärmlichen , and my parents had no higher education .
and so we believe that through all the changes that happen , we face incredible chances today .
it &apos;s an initiative that &apos;s based on simple , erreichbare , and menschzentrierte solutions .
we have now , now , 30 different technologists , in 18 different countries , and we were able to connect million people in the effort to keep learning what this particular segment needs and demands .
and my dad came to me and i said , &quot; you know , i remember that every generation has to do better than the previous one .
i know a lot of people who are very smart and yet say , &quot; why can &apos;t i solve my problem ? &quot;
i started with 1980 around with another family .
don &apos;t you think we have the responsibility to take care seriously ? &quot;
i still drive the same four years old ford as it before .
but this is not a good life .
this is what he &apos;s praying .
believe it or not , don &apos;t make any difference for me .
so he said , &quot; what do you think in your hand ? &quot;
what is this in your hand ? &quot; -- i said , &quot; it &apos;s a basketball , and this basketball represents your identity , which is what you &apos;re .
when my kids were little , i went into her room , sat down to her bed , watching my children sleep .
it &apos;s less than i had a vorausberechnet -- i &apos;ve been rechnete with three to 10 million -- but yet , it &apos;s a very significant number .
in a village , we have 100 laptops , each one with a different collection of 100 books , so that the village suddenly have a thousand books .
right , the famous chinese characters for rastplatz .
they answer the question : how does it feel to realize that you &apos;re going to be irrt ?
we &apos;re really learning this really bad lesson .
think about a moment of what it is , right now , to feel right .
and unlike all other animals , we are obsessed with trying to figure out .
and i have to tell you that i thought i write this incredibly nerdige book about a subject that everybody hate , for an audience that would never be .
the effect of this is not just wogender goldener wheat , but mountains of grains .
in 1986 , they came from vietnam to america .
and the answer to that was lapidar : &quot; that &apos;s even worse . &quot;
our personalfluktuation dropped to a third of the durchschnitts in our industry , and in the five years of the dotcom crashs , our betriebsgröße has tripled .
and bhutan , for the ones that don &apos;t know , is the youngest democracy in the world , only two years old .
it &apos;s actually , in the west , we &apos;re going to hunt after happiness , as happiness is something that we have to capture , a thing , or maybe several things we need to get .
and we ask 10 simple questions -- this is the simplicity .
what we really need to learn as leaders is that we can change the qualtität of production by creating the right conditions , so our employees can live their calling .
bl : okay . one , two , three .
and it &apos;s going to tell you , you &apos;re going to get your innenohr , you move . but your eyes are moving in the way that boat , and say , &quot; i &apos;m still quiet . &quot;
amy , do you get up ?
the method is : what did you do ? the result : what did you see ?
i just read one .
real scientific education should give people a voice and empower them to express this too . why amy is amy the last word in this short story .
poor people don &apos;t have this possibility of choice .
we were zurückgeworfen in the &apos; 70s .
and to get there , we have to recognize that the principle of a wegwerfkultur is not just the species we &apos;ve talked about , but also our society .
today , 60 years later , i can tell you why it &apos;s possible .
i &apos;m sure , i &apos;m sure , you know , i &apos;ve got a lot of you , &quot; yeah , great things up there -- but how do i get up there ?
i was a professor at u.c. davis system , and i got a lot of attention , and that would allow me to finance the launch of the program .
we have eight motors in this vehicle .
thank you .
they fall apart , they fall apart and they end up here .
i mean , people are wondering whether cell phones are safe .
you have a spule .
because , remember the original idea of dr. soljacic : the piepende cell phone .
and for those who can &apos;t read it , it says , &quot; it seems like it &apos;s actually a kind of kabelloser technology . &quot;
green or natural bestattungen , where not einbalsamiert , are a step in the right direction , but they don &apos;t care about the most existenten of the gifte in our bodies .
first , a beerdigungsanzug , angereichert with pilzsporen , who suit death death .
and months later , i learned who he really was .
i &apos;m looking for a cure .
i say , &quot; keep it alive , if you can . &quot;
even with this eindeutigen paper in our hands , we have definiert the hope again .
it &apos;s a feature .
suddenly he knows he was defeated .
and to give you this to you , we need to put them back on the driver &apos;s .
we beflogen the area , we put it in , we sent people in , we put the buildings inside the inside , the katastrophengebiete , and we helped the first einsätzen to search and rescue .
if i do that , i don &apos;t lose the original details . in the opposite , i could write history here .
you &apos;re going to be zurückgehalten by the public opinion .
that &apos;s not very good .
and that one of them is a democracy .
so here &apos;s the question : which country did better , china or india ?
because the indian man has a benefit from two years to the indian woman .
what &apos;s political change is they introduced dorfwahlen .
china , so i think , has still been a few of the things , ungeschliffene , all in terms of social capital , public health , a sense of equality that you don &apos;t have in india .
it was a place where people with verschiedenster herkunft and with various wissensgebieten and austauschten .
and now they have the problem that they spent all the money to do help with these advanced electronics in these countries , and now everything is unbrauchbar .
a little bit of a chaotic environment where people have come out , where people were more like new , interesting , unvorhersehbare , auseinandersetzungen , people can get people .
about one or two decades ago , a wonderful stipendiat did a wonderful stipendiat called howard gruber and read darwin &apos;s notebook from this period .
she erkundigen at their colleagues , but everyone said , &quot; no , i didn &apos;t think it was thinking about it .
is it also the other way ?
in the 1970s , &quot; a percent of the national income of the national income in the united states .
many of these political factors can be roughly summarized in the category of capitalism , political change that a group of good insidern are helping , but actually nothing good for us to bring it .
and as you can see , as you can see globalization and technological revolution , that global legislation of money is creating , it &apos;s much more difficult to judge the whole .
that &apos;s why they spend on unprecedented amounts of time and resources to train their children .
we &apos;ve created the modern sozialstaat .
this is his little hand .
one of them will die of all of them .
this was a huge amount of disappointment to us , because we had believed in a new development .
i think that in places like oregon , where you can take a ärztliche sterbehilfe , and you can eat a toxic dose , only half a percent people have ever done .
so , long talk short , very long ago , they came to canada .
but i heard about cancer as most of the most most important disease of our time , how does the good good and the bad ones ?
some articles went to say that skelettmuskelgewebe is resistant to cancer , and beyond it , not only against cancer , but it &apos;s not only to spread from skeletal muscle .
16 percent , that is that there were these nadelspitzengroßen tumors in skeletal muscle , but only 16 percent of the actual metastases -- what nahelegt that muscle muscle might be able to control angiogenesis , able to control the tumors that the blood vessels for themselves .
it &apos;s a very far more hergeholte idea , but i really believe that that &apos;s possible .
after that , my translator left .
she was the girl who aussuchte the other for her team .
and i wrote a letter to my best friends in atlanta , georgia , who had a 11 year-old son .
&quot; what did he say ? &quot; i asked the translator .
so the two came to lunch , and we were thrown out of the restaurant .
he had children from korea , and he found families for them .
they &apos;re gekauert a lot of time on the dictionary .
so i open this out the window , looking out , and see how fire flammen from the side of the hotel to the height . the hotel is burning .
so we ran into the bathroom , we took it , and we thought it was our faces and the children .
until the adoption is through . a year ! what does it take for that long ?
this is your kochlehrerin .
this is a sydney who will be three years old in a few days .
but there was no evidence .
there are small planets , there are bigger planets , there are big planets .
but there &apos;s a lot more to do .
so the question is : is this chemical phenomenon universal , or is it something that depends on the planet ?
and this deep gründende , underlying point is that science is the way that we know the life of the life .
okay , let &apos;s say this is the size of the universe , with all the galaxies , with all the stars , okay , from here to there .
thank you very much .
you see , in uganda absinkt and in the zimbabwe absinkt , russia had to come to a percent of the percent .
they find the highest hiv rates in the world in african countries , and yet they find in senegal , down here , the same rate as in the united states .
look at kenya here .
it might be that it &apos;s something else that the transmission is more common .
we know that about 106 billion people have ever lived .
this was not just an economic story .
and the result is even more than a greater divergence in a shorter time than it was in germany .
it &apos;s the same with institutions .
you have to only give me to eat . &quot;
he was wrong .
now , i want to end with three questions about the future billion , shortly before the united states , if the united states is losing its place as a number of one economy in china .
no , we will be durchhalten , despite the huge amount of water that we have to put in , regardless of the evidence that we have lost our work ethic and other parts of our historical elans .
niall , thank you .
there are many kinds of spider spider spider .
spider silk is almost entirely of protein .
the fibers that can make a single spider is quite diverse .
and also , spinnenseiden have a huge potential for their ability to raketenabwehr .
what i want to notice is not the meerjungfrauparade , as well as it as she might be , but the photos .
you have to have a physical structure .
there are more photos . there are more photographers .
this sounds strange in our ears , but what &apos;s happening is that 80 percent of the most mitwirkenden unterdurchschnittlich have contributed to a lot .
the first thing that happens when you &apos;re a problem is that the first goal of the institution is instantly to change as the goal is to change .
the inventor don &apos;t know what the invention is .
there are people in the states , trying to figure out whether a bloggers are journalists or not .
it was made by making their kommunikationsmuster , which use many of these tools , analysierte . no doubt the u.s. intelligence agencies are doing the same work for the attacks in the last week .
you have kleie , which is probably the most part of the bread , or the fibers , because it &apos;s just full of fibers , because it &apos;s made of fibers .
it &apos;s all in its place . first .
we call it &quot; gare . &quot;
but let &apos;s take a look at the different steps , under the gesichtspunkt of the possible compounds , a tieferen plane -- my search is about the answer to the question , &quot; what is this special about bread ? &quot;
this is transformation , two different things .
and if you &apos;re shaped , you go back to further prove that you &apos;re alive and develop character .
if you make this bread , you can use any kind of treber to use any beer .
it will become a kind of refrain , as we &apos;re working through this talk .
it takes very , very long , for writing these scores , and i &apos;m working on a piece of the 180 pages long , and that &apos;s a big part of my life , and i &apos;m raufe the hair .
it &apos;s been demonstrated by brian mcwhorter who is an extraordinary artist .
so , you &apos;ll give you a little bit of the piece of the piece .
what we did -- we have a betty rapacholi , one of my students , and i -- we gave the babies two dishes with food : a bowl of rohem broccoli , and a dish with leckeren goldfisch-kräcker .
i mean , the last of the end , when we look at babies , they seem pretty useless .
and our babies and children are much longer dependent on us than the babies each other species .
the befund is what makes them to change the hypothesis .
now there are two things that are really interesting about it .
boy : that &apos;s why .
our consciousness about this thing is going to be extremely bright and vivid , and everything else is going to be dark .
so , &quot; babies and young children are like the research and entwicklungsabteilung of human species , &quot; the psychologin alison alison , and their research study how babies are doing a while they &apos;re doing a while they &apos;re doing a little bit of raffiniert information , and make decisions .
if i could just borrow you for a little bit for a little bit of a little demonstration , to show the difference -- because it &apos;s actually quite a trivial .
and then you repeat this process over and over and over and something more brauchbares -- in this case , the character , like i , walking straight .
what we really wanted was the whole human body .
you can &apos;t do that .
so here &apos;s a couple of simple scenes that he &apos;s going to have .
i &apos;m not sure why , but we still did it .
some of the things that are already using software is already doing this , and we &apos;re going to get a couple of our stuntmännern into a couple of big filmproduktionen .
we thought he just would keep the balance .
and this is learning to go to the töpfchen -- like most of you , i hope you know .
but i have to say , i &apos;ll never forget what happened when i was 13 years old .
i &apos;m convinced art and creativity are essential to develop empathy .
if you &apos;re ever lonely , you write a new york times , then you get hundreds of emails . most of what i &apos;ve done today is reported by frustration .
some stories are just classic , and yet it &apos;s so .
it versank . no one has ever bought it .
there &apos;s a boundary that we don &apos;t want to cross . so what is the solution ?
this is microsoft word , ok . if you want to make a new , empty document in word -- that might happen .
i think there are actually two microsofts .
the other products have been supported by microsoft with an open standard , rather than apples firmeneigenen .
and genause , when someone is writing a hassbrief -- what happens every day -- i say , &quot; i don &apos;t get it . &quot;
but when i was looking at the mächtigeren technologies , nanotechnology , gentechnologie , and others in the emerging world &apos;s digital technologies , i was very big about the missbrauchspotenzial .
and to cut the risk of this new thing , we can eventually limit the ability to begrenzen the individuals that basically erteilt access to the power of the power .
i think the challenge that we face -- i &apos;m very sure that this will happen -- the challenge is , will we design these bildungsmaterialien with the background that will be used to use us from this device ?
and if you build a three-dimensional structure , for example , you can have all kinds of incredible properties .
and to give you a sense of the last of small fund fund -- he belief on 400 million dollars , so that &apos;s quite significant for us .
and if you use the concept of the foreign system , you can use a lot of more mächtigere , the instanz of the market -- use feedback to deliver feedback .
12 years ago , caves started to me , and i was verlagerte my research in this direction .
so wonderful and düstere things .
there &apos;s ice under the surface .
so they &apos;re a langsamere form of life .
it &apos;s actually so much energy in this cave that there are actually a large number of höhlenfische .
we can see them .
we noticed a few years ago that caves have many characteristics that were used by the people and other organisms used to be used to habitat .
whenever you put a goal , to your own set of steps , you have to take some steps to take off , some of the way .
and so it &apos;s also archimedes , the great greek mathematician .
and they were fälschungen , and it was suffered from an enormous schimmelbefall .
that means before we could start to digitize the archimdes , we had to take the book apart .
and this is what it looks like .
but by flying around the electrons around the speed of light , they &apos;ll give you a röntgenstrahlung .
this was a bad idea , because philipp of mazedonien had a son named alexander &apos;s great , and she lost the battle of chaironeia .
because at the moment , institutions , they have institutions to be able to get their data with urheberrechtsbeschränkungen and so forth .
the original bottle of bottle was one of the most enthusiastischen weinliebhaber of the 18th century .
i asked myself , 160 dollars for this .
it has four terms .
a wiederkehrendes scheme is that many of these things are from japan -- they &apos;ll notice it .
i mean , a freihändig , klopapier-freie toilet .
there was an object that i couldn &apos;t get in the fingers , and that was the 1947er of the 47 .
and i can &apos;t -- call my taste a banausens -- so it &apos;s not necessarily significant that i was not impressed , but i wasn &apos;t the only one there with this reaction .
at the beginning of this year , a virtual asteroid was sold for 330.000 real dollars .
the really interesting thing about that is that you can measure it .
now , i could design a game called piecraft , by just to bring a million pies or a thousand pies .
if you &apos;re real boxes , we can &apos;t do much , but in a game we say , &quot; ok . &quot;
this is absolutely critical and the virtualität is gorgeous in it .
and i &apos;d like to tell you a quick story , so 1999 -- there was a video game called everquest .
it &apos;s about how to be transformed as an individual engagement through the psychological and neurological insights that we get when we observe people playing play .
it &apos;s a kind of versteinerter zahnbelag that is officially called a zahnstein .
i &apos;m a ellen , and i &apos;m totally obsessed with food .
there &apos;s hunger in america , 49 million people , and almost 16.7 million children .
and their farms are also big .
it &apos;s the 30 anniversary of genverändertem grain and the big gulp , of chicken mcnuggets , hochkonzentriertem fruktosehaltigem maissirup , the landwirtschaftskrise in america and the change of the way we &apos;ve agriculture international .
this is a bauhelm that i got two years ago , and this was at one of the greatest projects i and my company ever involved .
but i &apos;m going to just point down to the beginning of the process , and i &apos;m talking about three very pedantische .
if we are so good , what we do , we should not be able to create an architectural manifestation , which is absolutely reibungslos to the kunden- and projektseitigen engpässe ?
architectural architectural practice was , ehlich , simple .
and this is the actual lohn .
the second technology we &apos;re using , we &apos;re using things that you know from the seitenbühnen of an opera .
and this is what they see the ebenerdige configuration .
i &apos;m going to talk about how you collect stories , in a little bit of a unkonventionelle way .
one of these projects is about a year and a half .
these are the images that are automatically created .
as i awake awake , i had the camera around the neck .
you can see a timeline that shows you the exciting moments of history .
it &apos;s bartenwal . well , it &apos;s going to go .
a 28-jähriger inhaber of a handy-geschäfts .
a 80-jähriger , umherziehender farmer .
what if you found the truth after just a year , what would you do the next 35 years of your life ?
&quot; money deserve and open a business , &quot; indian straßenarbeiter .
and as the anesthesia , he told them he wanted to be in this , and he had given me a little bit of a zweiprozentige chance .
don &apos;t understand me , i &apos;ve been very benefits .
and it &apos;s almost impossible , except in steno , and then communication is limited .
very funny people , if lol means that .
you don &apos;t do that .
if anybody in 1973 had seen a black board from 1993 , the slang would have been a little bit different from the time of &quot; love , &quot; but he understood what was there .
i &apos;m about the zeitlimit , i wanted to say , if you &apos;re in new york , you can look at my work at the whitney at the whitney at the whitney , and also in the bitforms gallerie in chelsea .
afghanistan is not an existential threat to global security .
and the same is true for the troops .
instead , there was a litanei of erstaunlichem optimism .
diplomats are in botschaftsgeländen .
and finally , we have to understand that the secret of what we were in bosnia and in kosovo did the secret of our success of success to the great part of our humility -- in the very careful way of our engagements .
rory , they were speaking to libya .
so here you see two examples .
this is an example of the same system , on one finger , to basically show you what it looks like .
there are also teststreifen that are going to be eingetaucht , but if you &apos;re going to betrachen these teststreifen , these are used for a different kind of urinanalyse .
the selektionsproblem . this is a very hard problem i &apos;m not going to be erleutern .
there &apos;s another , very interesting connection , and this is that what you want to do is to keep on leiten information , in general , quite bad telefonsystem .
so , i think it &apos;s got the minimale food that we can probably reach to make things .
and we decided we shouldn &apos;t think about it in terms of the cost , but in terms of simplicity .
there &apos;s a book that says , &quot; what &apos;s the matter that &apos;s going to do ? &quot;
so we have to ask ourselves .
but nonetheless , you don &apos;t interact with people who are not as you are .
so we can think of things like the straßenverlauf .
i &apos;m kidding , but only half i say you &apos;re going to believe in the hospital if you &apos;re going to end with a missing stick , without any previous cat-scan , mri and orthopädische konsultation .
then bell turned to his students .
within a few years , in the late 19th century , and early 20th century , suddenly , the doctor &apos;s doctor , trying to try to figure out a diagnosis , the barbier .
between the perception of the patient and the doctors in terms of the best health care system is a real contradiction .
another experience i did in texas , before i went to stanford , i was affected .
the bad news is that we don &apos;t know the very important cause , and you can see , you can do that ? you can do that . &quot;
i remember this so many huge , ausgehölte , verfolgte eyes that aufschauten me in this ritual .
some call us entlarver , a more unfreundliche term .
in this case , we have the test .
you &apos;re back in the back here , and here says , &quot; then a miracle happened .
and there was no way to 1655 .
religious ikonographie .
harder to move the dead to an answer .
my friend simon singh , a teilchenphysiker , nunmehr dozent , wrote the book &quot; the big bang &quot; and so forth .
and now you open your eyes .
you can be completely open it , and it &apos;s wasserundurchlässig .
but it really felt me to think about these guys , at least most , the most , know what they &apos;re doing for a living .
everybody thought that was impossible .
you can produce a lot of change . you can build roads .
and this is something that people want to do .
you don &apos;t need everyone .
hugo chavez did the unzufriedene arbeiter- and middle class in venezuela . he has only led them .
and so it goes on and on .
they connect people .
the reason ? today &apos;s modern medicine uses a 60 years old method .
there &apos;s a hook .
this makes him 168 times faster , over 26 times cheaper and over 400 times more than our current standardtest for pancreatic cancer .
my experience with the islamic world are quite different .
there &apos;s a character .
and why does sex sex babies , and why does babies mean a erotic disaster ?
because it &apos;s the secret of the erotik .
especially important to this description of the other or my self -- that &apos;s the same thing -- especially interesting , that there are no bedürftigkeit in desire .
this is your dreh- and angelpunkt , that &apos;s biology , the natural instinct .
so then , this is the desire , and this study of curiosity , entdeckerdrang .
you know that there is a erotischen space that belongs to everyone alone .
other places in the country had similar spaces .
in a gothischen cathedral , this kind of music is perfect .
ok .
this is going to be used in smaller rooms .
so early hip-hop-gruppen have some place .
so i asked myself , ok , is this a model for design , these anpassung that we &apos;re doing ?
thank you very much .
and then he turned to me and said , &quot; there &apos;s a standing there .
how do we solve the next three problems i want to bring in the language ?
albert einstein -- i was speaking to someone who was in princeton , and i met mr. einstein .
what is life about ? why am i here ?
i never read a speech or a talk or a lecture .
and it was about 300 people there .
he talked about his personal experience .
a french historian said two centuries later , &quot; rarely has a powerful spirit to be in such great humility to the authority of jesus christ . &quot;
or he was what he was saying .
i &apos;m not going to trauern the ermordeten .
but for that , you have to sit about 10 minutes and take a woman in the arm that &apos;s not there .
i never was in .
harvest baby-zähne , harvest .
and i said tears in my eyes , &quot; no . &quot;
in 2010 , a young woman is standing in front of president and says , like her and her siblings , their siblings , their parents died in war .
we go to rural areas , and everything we do , as it happens in this room , we create a space .
i failed .
i want to look back in a 20 , and see that there &apos;s a liberianisches girl , a ghanaisches , nigerianisches girl on the ted stage .
lg : you like to happen .
and the computer scientist realized , computers can do the necessary routinearbeit to make sense of insights and decisions .
every interaction is always recorded by more sensors , your phone card , your computer . it &apos;s a lot of data , and we get the opportunity to understand our own .
these records were human bezugsformate .
by being introduced by a verbesserter process , which is a task for 40 people over three months , to a simple task for three people in 40 hours . they &apos;re all siege .
we should stop looking outside .
dinner with my wife and children , i drive home .
because people say , &quot; shit , man , i don &apos;t have time to be fit .
she became a much larger dog than i thought .
these effects affect all of us .
the boom of the national autobahnbaus gesellte gesellte to our problems .
think about fahrradläden , getränkestände .
in the age of katrina , we have more common .
and you all have probably done that , and if you don &apos;t , you have to .
help me make green for the new black , help me make sustainability sexy .
so i thought this would be an opportunity to use scratch to make a interactive card for my mother .
but i &apos;m skeptical about what this terminus is .
in this case , you take a bewegungsblock , put it on a stack and the stack of blöcken , the behavior of the different characters in a game or a story , in this case , the big fish .
if you learn to code , you can program to learn .
when kids like victor , like victor , they learn important concepts like variables , but that &apos;s just the beginning .
what i &apos;d like to talk about today to give you a background is the idea that cars are art .
i want to talk about that .
and i think that this thought that great cars is a soul , very useful , you all know that . you know a car with soul at the first sight . you know how strong it is .
this is one of my favorite lieblingsgemälde , which really describes our relationship with cars .
right ? and they decided it would be cheaper to rent a studio and six or seven wohnungen ehemaliges house in malibu .
there was a lot of dialogue .
i think we felt very close to each other day , and we trennten the strings through , and we schmiedeten the concept for the real nature of real teamarbeit and creativity .
we didn &apos;t bring it to boston .
so i just have a little lab to have a little lab .
now we &apos;ve done clinical trials in four maus-modellen of this disease .
we don &apos;t have a team of verkaufs- and marketingpersonal that can be able to positionieren that medicines to the market .
100 billion is the only number you need to know .
what you need to think about is that we have a universe to do with a hundred billion galaxies , with the number of a hundred billion stars .
and he didn &apos;t explain why the entropy was ever low .
unlike the low entropy of the early universe , even though we don &apos;t know the answer to that , we have a good theory that can explain this , if this theory is true , and that the theory of the dark energy .
and therefore , though the universe will forever , and ordinary matter and radiation will be verflüchtigen , always give a certain amount of radiation , some of the thermal fluctuations , even in the empty space .
but we also give big fluctuations .
it &apos;s cool .
it &apos;s a rücksichtslose fact that you &apos;re not accept and not to be able to question .
i had never been using a computer .
it was a future i couldn &apos;t accept .
now i want to go out to all of the places like me , to say , to the african and the poor who are struggling with their dreams .
no matter what i did in my real world was just about the little device of my little device in the digital world , eight years ago , in 2000 .
i took this very literally , i took my fahrradhelm , and i put it a little bit schieff , which is the projektor daraufpasste .
the camera is not just the way that i &apos;m not just talking about , but it &apos;s also able to understand what things i hold in my hand .
and why just comuter ? we can just play with the world .
all the work you saw in india is about my learning in india .
this is juan carlos , king of spain .
this is going to be the third park in rio , june this year .
again , you don &apos;t have to dig deep down under earth to build a stop .
i &apos;ll give you a quick example .
almost every year we have these terrible erdrutsche .
we &apos;re under the average of the verkehrsstörungen in the city .
a city of the future is a city that &apos;s not a ausschließt from this great community that are cities .
the best answer is to try to reconstruct a darwinian entstehungsgeschichte , that &apos;s of our artistic and aesthetic preferences .
so the trick of evolution is , you know , make it beautiful , so that you &apos;re going to be ausstrahlen a kind of attraction so that it &apos;s going to take you joy , just to look at it .
and some are in every case to use them for the battles .
our strong reaction to images , to the expression of emotion , in art , to beauty of music from music , and our offspring will be as long as the human species exists .
well , it &apos;s a fairly complicated system , but let me try to explain it , and maybe i &apos;ll simplify it .
so , you can see here , you can see the computer &apos;s environment , and because you can &apos;t see the vibration , we actually statten the driver with red leds so that he really can see what &apos;s going on .
let &apos;s see if mark can avoid them .
or for blind people , in everyday devices in the household , in education , in the office .
a subtle konditionierungsprozess had started . the implikation that normal people don &apos;t hear voices , and i heard they were listening to me that something couldn &apos;t vote with me .
my mental gesundheitszustand was a katalysator for diskriminierungen , beschimpfungen and physical and sexual übergriffe , and i was told by my psychiatrist , &quot; eleanor , with cancer , you might be better for cure than schizophrenia . &quot;
to paraphrasieren chavez : when social change begins , it can &apos;t be more aufgehalten .
and that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing right now .
so what i &apos;m suggesting is that where we should look for life , more than mars , although mars is also a very much more exciting place , and more interesting place .
and the usual astronomers were in contempt about it .
because it &apos;s bedeuete the way that life can live out there , it has tremendous benefits compared to the living on a planet .
there was another thing , this hoch of möbelstück and wasserspeiern and naked -- pretty much more gruselige things for a small child .
the first projects were modest , but they took technology and they might turn into things that people use in a new way and perhaps find a new kind of new .
the other thing , the humanistisch , the humanistisch , is that we decided to wegzulassen all the technical gadgets , all of this nerdzeug , and trying to make it as beautiful as possible .
so we called it y water , so this is another example that happens in a room , the three-dimensional design , the ideas , the development of the brand , it &apos;s all interconnected with each other .
this is my neffe anthony , in switzerland , he had the laptop for a afternoon , i had to take it back with the zurücknehmen . that was hard .
yves rossy about the design of objects that are telling stories .
thank you .
my aunt , an incredible wortgewandte and a brilliant woman , was a witwe .
she was the entschlossenste fürsprecherin for women &apos;s women i &apos;ve ever heard .
look at these young girls who go back to school , after the säure , in their faces , they were geschüttet .
the world that had been given layma bowie was a world in war .
then the position will be .
you have to negotiate .
it &apos;s the people from my generation who grow up in a world where everything is papierlos , and in some of our best conversations have taken on a screen .
and finally , it could mean that they could print their own medicine .
and if you &apos;re wundert , why it &apos;s even interesting , you have to look at the rest of saudi arabia because it &apos;s a country that &apos;s geteilt the streng .
maybe some of the things are bad traditions and they need to change .
let me give you an example : turkey , where i &apos;m from , which is a very über-sekuläre republic , we had something to be a little bit of what i call säkularismuspolizei , which should protect the universities , against verhüllte students .
now , if i would be the only person who thinks that , we would have a problem .
in the 19th century , as muslims europe , as muslims , they were independent , selbstsicherer .
so the european process , the efforts of turkey , join the european union , has been supported by turkey to the muslims in the while some nichtreligiöse nations .
there &apos;s a very large nose that doesn &apos;t seem to be able to be , as if she &apos;s connected to something .
if scientists today , a century later , a century will make neurons visible , then they can light up the inside , rather than verdunkeln them .
carl schoonover : insights into the inner of our brain system inside our brain brain
that trend is actually less clear .
but for many parts of africa , it &apos;s a colleague of mine , &quot; the waffenstillstand of the evening were just given to the right time to get the genocide on the mittwochmorgen . &quot;
and instead of taking this possibility , local and international leaders were going to be zurückgezogen and they were going to have a ablenken and ablenken the events of the war events , september 2001 and the war in iraq and iraq .
institutionelles design requires a strong focus on the problemfragen , innovatives thinking and anpassungsfähige and kapitalkräftige .
the stromatoliten are the hero of my story .
in flat ocean , life is already early ; it turned into more complex shapes .
flamingos moved across continents . the big migration began .
and some of the mammals we went into the water .
every man should have the chance to have a luxury .
but there was nothing for this purpose , so we married schnurrbartwachsen with prostate cancer , and then we created our motto , which is , &quot; the face of man &apos;s health . &quot;
mo bros from canada , from the united states , and from england england and calling us and said , &quot; hey , there &apos;s nothing for prostate cancer .
and i said , &quot; last year we had the fortune to have 450 promi-botschafter . &quot;
this kind of entertainment , men , to get involved in every age is so critical and important , and i think that much more important than the money we collect .
he could see what was happening in the forest , his environment , because his grandfather took him under his fittiche , when he was two years old , and he began to teach him about the forest and the way to the life of his people .
when i thought about it , i wonder what our grandchildren and our urenkel would answer when they ask the same question .
we need new models to be a leader and human being .
she &apos;s working with people like murali krishna .
a life long , through everything , about the cultural revolution and everything that came out of that , he collected that he was about eight million parts of his museum , documenting contemporary chinese history .
it just happens .
&quot; my world is subjective . &quot;
or maybe he was just a yogi sitting on a rock and anstarrte the heavens , and the sun and the moon .
and if you live an extraordinary life , you will get into the elysium , or what the french call it , &quot; champs-élysées &quot; -- -- the heavens of the heroen .
and so this is a great rituals , where big bildnisse of the muttergottheiten are built and angebetet for 10 days .
you see , what is business as a result of the behavior of the market and the behavior of a organization ?
look , this is india today . the grundauffassung of reality is based on a zyklischen view .
you know , he &apos;s built the biggest kaufhauskette , it &apos;s called &quot; big bazaar . &quot;
&quot; why i &apos;ve chosen this path , why don &apos;t i get the action interest , i just don &apos;t get me to get me . &quot;
devdutt pattanaik opens us the eyes of a new view of the myths of india and the west -- and shows why these grundverschiedenen systems of the gottesglaubens , the umgangs of death and the jenseitsvorstellung , help us konsequent ourselves .
but you know what ? it &apos;s almost 2012 , and the world is saying , &quot; i &apos;m completely and absolutely , i &apos;m totally , &quot; by the time to vernichten .
your interest is compared to what ?
your friends and family will be versammeln at the friedhof and there , on your grave , a grabstein grabstein , which says , &quot; here &apos;s an excellent engineer who invented the little bit . &quot;
they &apos;re happy . this is the conversation that mothers and dads want to hear , because their child is good at math and they know what &apos;s next .
that &apos;s because they &apos;re -- you know what they &apos;re .
i didn &apos;t have patents , and i never received money from a medical school service , and i don &apos;t have a werbe to choose me .
so how do you know if your breast is high density ?
ultrasound has more biopsien to the verhältnis of other technologies that are necessary , and it &apos;s not very common .
if you find a tumor , as long as it &apos;s large as an inch , the überlebensrate is about 90 percent , but it falls to a massive amount of money .
the picture of mbi shows this tumor much more , as much as a second tumor that can actually affect the surgical possibilities of patient .
it costs a radiologen to be a radiologen , to get an expert in the darin of a normal anatomisches detail .
some women who get breast cancer , many years later , die of it . and fortunately , most of them survive .
dum da da da da da da da da da da da da da there &apos;s there .
we gather these physicists in los alamos , to see what they &apos;re building .
mill .
they &apos;ve slept in this schulstunde .
this is a umwerfende vision .
it &apos;s a question of consequences .
so let &apos;s get to the point .
what did i do ? i &apos;ve heard my stomach ?
that &apos;s interesting . this is a different way .
the homunculus is basically a visual of a human being , where every body is proportional to the surface that it takes in the brain .
this is white noise .
and the db is probably going to be in your direction .
i just did that for money .
thank you .
and he told me after a long silence , &quot; i wonder , mathieu , if the people here don &apos;t find your bänke fascinating than my videos . &quot;
that &apos;s why i edward with david edward , a scientist from harvard , an object that could absorb the toxic elements with these plants .
no , not potatoes , but tomato , kräuter and so on .
the tragedy of other people can take easier to take as your own , and i want to do the beschwingten spirit of this conference .
according to malcolm malcolm , &#91; the kokain-derivat &#93; crack was the gehaltvollere version of tomatensuppe für .
he was a really interesting sight .
he went back to the second floor , and he said , &quot; hey guys .
so , like mcdonald &apos;s , it &apos;s like mcdonald .
let &apos;s think about the other people , for comparison , where you can expect a very high risk .
the second reason was that the gang was brilliant at marketing and cheating .
economists talk about the game theory -- that every game for two people has a nash-gleichgewicht .
skysurfing is skydiving with a board on the feet .
so , extremsport at such as high as it is possible , if you step step for step , when you &apos;re really physical and mentally working on yourself .
ue : no . that &apos;s just smoke .
and i occasionally meet scientists .
and so i had hope that by einfügte some natural elements , a little bit of fog i could make the space .
verhandelbar means that it makes a difference if you do something or not .
the big mountains in the far move less .
how do we create an idea that is both and to be a tolerant and kollektivität to kollektivität , without the two in two different directions ?
i spoke about new species of ozeanerforschung , one that &apos;s anzieht animals , rather than verscheuchen them .
but incredible was the material that took the triton-u-boot .
they take the dead and take them off .
at that time he taught the classic to the trinity college in dublin .
natalie merchant : old poems of life
fremdartiger as a dolphin is barely .
as an adult , when i was watching the amazing insights of the penny and i was , you know , sue &apos;s savage-rumbaugh , irene pepperberg and alex , the papagei , i &apos;m excited about that .
vint cerf : ng : how it &apos;s there .
we are at national aquarium , we put us in our excellent tierpflege for research and to preserve .
we realized quite quickly that we built a system that connects people to each other .
today . this is the first time you &apos;re talking about this topic .
this is a picture of me and my daughter on the one we were on a israeli flag .
&quot; because it works , make a poster with me . &quot;
they came , and it was so many . one day i remember michal talking about a journalist and asked him , &quot; who will see this ? &quot; and he said , &quot; everybody . &quot;
it &apos;s not the israel-liebt-iran-seite . it &apos;s not my site .
and sometimes war is unumgänglich . but sometimes , with a little bit of effort , we can avoid it .
and what we want to do with &quot; yes is more more than we want to try to see the architectural avantgarde is almost always being defined negative . it &apos;s against who or what we are .
and we saw this guy , haibao .
and slowly , you start thinking that sustainable lives are less fun than normal lives .
so , let &apos;s go to the expo to the danish pavilion . if you get a dänisches wheel , and you keep driving on the other .
it was interesting because they discussed the morning of nine to 11 about the rettungsplan , how many billion you should invest in the rescue of the economy .
this is a standardprodukt from switzerland . in switzerland , there &apos;s a national need for diagonalen aufzügen .
we often make small movies .
what i &apos;d like to talk about is the biggest problems in the world .
but it &apos;s natural , of course , when you ask people to focus on problems .
so what i &apos;m doing is really , really , to say that we have a very long time , a situation where we had a number of choice .
and then you ask , why economists ?
but it &apos;s saying that what we can do about it is very little , too high .
the malaria malaria , the malaria of malaria , is belaufen to a couple million infected a year .
what &apos;s happening here is we think about our priorities .
it &apos;s a good movie about what i &apos;m sure i &apos;m sure , and it &apos;s true , but don &apos;t expect to casten the emmerich in his next film brad pitt to gräbt the wie in tanzania or something like that .
they had all the same material , but they could leave significantly the frame of the discussion , and they made sure they were going to be aufzukommen with their own bullet points .
his power to create wealth and greater freedom , is unübertroffen . &quot;
and the second thing has china has managed to lower the ungleiche income income , without changing the political framework .
but freedom house found that even though 50 percent of all countries today are democratic , 70 percent of them are repressiv , in terms of people who don &apos;t have rede- or reisefreiheit .
because finally , the question that we &apos;re going to do is to think about seven billion other people on this planet , how can we create wealth ?
the serife is not so right at your place .
we &apos;re going to become what really cares us .
it was published six months ago , and he &apos;s getting incredible attention in germany .
you have to make one for the growth of the optimal temperature .
i think it looks slightly for human skin , which i &apos;m fascinated .
but i think it could be a fairly smarte and sustainable , to the rarer of resources , to the rarer of resources .
chinese workers are not gedrängt in factories because of our unersättlichen demand for making .
just because one person has spent their time to make a piece of something that doesn &apos;t mean that she &apos;s going to get to a piece of something .
and my sister &apos;s sister turned to him and said , &quot; some understand that . you don &apos;t understand anything . &quot;
this is the coach-portemonnaie , which is in my family , on my family &apos;s home , on my family .
the taliban are doing their own schools .
when any child gets caught , they &apos;re going to get hard to break it hard .
when i look at the suicide bombers that are younger than me , or at my age , i feel so inspired by their anschlägen .
and this is going to be there , just there , on enceladus , for raumschiffen , which hopefully , hopefully , in the near future , are equipped to be able to get this question .
is the internet actually a place to visit ?
and the landscape is changing . three years ago , when i started to deal with this , there was only a cable along the african west coast , here in this map , by steve song as a thin black line .
and that doesn &apos;t seem to me .
this data will send a layer of time on the machine , starting with the base of the product , and puts the material layer on layer by the new materialschicht in a additiven process to aufgegossen the old layer .
it was made by ablagerung layers of about four mikrometern layers .
a abstoßung will be less likely .
you can just make it right in front of the place .
this is going to create the product .
without any doubt , i think that this technology is creating a revolution in production and the produktionslandschaften as we can see them .
he was worried that when he called her in this name , especially outside , the public , in the public , you might think he would be a ladens of jihad .
they use his rhethorik .
the good news is that it doesn &apos;t have to be that .
but many of these factors that played a role is even more powerful . half of the work is done .
i was with my girlfriend , susan meiselas , the fotografin , in the valley valley of slums .
she said , &quot; you know , the poverty wasn &apos;t the bad thing . it was the erniedrigung and the peinlichkeit of all the thing . &quot;
do you think i &apos;m going to miss the violence or the drugs ? the lack of privacy ?
one , instead of months , the end of the time , and forgotten , the time was very much more .
but it &apos;s less likely that they remain .
and during my first year , i led my company to continue .
it &apos;s actually going to say that more energy is needed to produce a solar cell , and they &apos;re going to be involved in their whole funktionszeit .
solar cells harvest the light for four and a half hours .
and also , you &apos;re under a big pressure , and therefore is dangerous .
this is a wärmekraftmaschine .
it &apos;s just a little cylinder that &apos;s the generator , and all the kabelage in it , and this is the hot kappe , the hot cylinder at the top end -- this part gets hot , and it &apos;s cold , and it comes out electricity .
you don &apos;t have to use the hot water , it can also cool down .
so here we have a map of the united states .
and we don &apos;t have a geburtsrecht of using this energy as fast as we do it at the moment .
we bubbles it and look at the parts .
it &apos;s a flying laboratory that we did the measurements of the brain of this molecule .
but i still wrote bad poems , and he never gejagt the air , but he &apos;s gone to cuba .
so , from unverständnis , they can emerge -- -- i then , i &apos;m going to paint a picture that will end up in my work .
i work for the new yorker , and i &apos;m doing titelseiten , and then 9 / 11 came , and that was , um , a völliges end of the world as we knew it .
and then , the u.n. &quot; fasse &quot; deutlich , &quot; she &apos;s ungebärdig with the tongue , but so we understand it . &quot;
&quot; and he decided that his topleute had to be extinct . &quot;
this man is angry because someone everywhere on his staircase &apos;s zwiebeln and basically took -- you know , zwiebeln seem to be a subject .
and she &apos;s ausgegangen out of george gershwin , so i don &apos;t think it &apos;s .
and so , since my youngest childhood , and after that , many different qualities were to give me a lot of different qualities , and when i was young , it was always that my journey was already vorgezeichnet .
this is beautiful , but we should remember that a similar process is going to happen in the inner level .
sm : so , you &apos;ve worked incredibly hard , even for my invitation , let alone , from everything else , what you did , and i &apos;ve been pretty resistant to that , and i was very nervous during this whole week .
in these two examples , we &apos;ve seen machines that have learned in the simulation , and others who have learned it .
when i say , &quot; we , &quot; i mean the advice for aussenbeziehungen .
but no one believes it will be very effective if there &apos;s a real outbreak .
the biggest part of the spending in the administration of the bush is actually more likely to connect with the anthrax and the threat of biowaffen .
we know that the virus will be mutieren . it will be another virus .
but in the scientific community , there &apos;s a debate debate about what percentage of the grippeübertragung between people &apos;s geschieht and husten and how much happens over the hands .
some of the poorer countries that most of the experience of h5n1 have had h5n1 , are camps of drugs that are already gone .
and i think even our leaders would say that we have a lot to do .
i &apos;m really excited to answer your questions .
our centers for krankheitskontrolle have developed one of them developed testing -- as fast diagnostikum .
and in the very few times , in humans , the similar bacterial infections were not a problem .
not just watch how much fun you have , but also how the gewonnene completely changed the way to interact with a city like san francisco .
please put a schweigeminute .
i was befreunde myself with a young , a truppe , and he willigt to sell three clubs .
i &apos;ve been playing with seilen and climbing , so , the case , i &apos;m going to do that , so i &apos;m 16 ; i &apos;m going to be a drahtseilkünstler .
manhattan doesn &apos;t go into an infinite .
so i &apos;m not supposed to be here , right ?
i &apos;m going to stay in the middle .
she was one , i was pushing me to the triumph .
because of the überhängenden leaves and the branches , it &apos;s very dark and very quiet .
i and my colleagues , i think , are interested in the dynamics of the baumkronen-pflanzen that live in the forest .
we &apos;re beraten with the media over baumkronen-fragen ; we have a baumkronen-newsletter ; we have mailinglisten .
and then the students have come in our aufnahmestudio , and they took their own little rapsongs with their own beats .
and our new project is that the inmates and we learn to grow the frog of rana pretiosa , who is a hochgradig hochgradig in washington endangered species in washington state and oregon .
he said , &quot; look what you &apos;re hiding in front of you . &quot;
that &apos;s why we &apos;re looking at a rising demand for informationszugang , and that &apos;s why that &apos;s why we &apos;re looking for informationszugang .
they &apos;re not a magician . they &apos;re not our parents .
you have to believe i already . trust me . &quot;
that day i learned two really important things .
the deeper we go underwater , the higher the pressure is .
so i started this about 15 years ago .
and you know , the air goes into the air industry , when it comes to breathe , it comes out of the air .
each of these computers can run the entire system , so if two of them are out , there are still protected .
but this is what it looks like , and this is a habitat that goes on and on , many miles .
so sharks are not quite dangerous , as most people are .
when we found it , we didn &apos;t even know what family he was saying , so we called it dr.-seuss-fisch &#91; after &#93; the kinderbuchautor , because it looked like he came out of his books .
the oxygen &apos;s oxygen caused a krampf , and it &apos;s ertrank .
this means every one of you here at least knows a child who &apos;s suffering from a entwicklungsstörung .
and his communication and social interaction is so markant that he could visit a normal school and even a karate-superstar .
it &apos;s sort of like life : if you &apos;re in it , you can &apos;t get out of it .
i know you &apos;ve never heard of him . but remember that day , one day , you &apos;ll hear about him , because he &apos;s an amazing man . &quot;
nk : no , he &apos;s died before 25 years ago .
he had a lot of love , he loved everyone .
we all , we all , are what happens when a ursuppe of hydrogen and helium so long so that they begin to ask their origins .
these extremophilen evidence that life can exist in many other environments .
so you have to have the diversity , and the incredible scale of life on this planet at the first step , to learn to be deeply in touch with life elsewhere in all of you .
and it &apos;s going to be important to silicon as aluminum , and we &apos;re going to expand it into the future by expanding it to 350 antennae so it &apos;s sensitive to the moore &apos;s moore &apos;s law to the erhöhten of the increase power .
and then we &apos;d like to try to figure out the automatisierte search for human health care .
many people say it &apos;s the best place in the world to study the development of climate change .
so , all cylinder is a parfait of the time .
while you hantieren the ice , you put a extra pair of gloves in an oven so you can attract a new pair , if your arbeitshandschuhe gefrieren and make your fingers steif .
i think that there &apos;s a little bit of a wirtschaftsgeschichte that i think .
and our soldiers are not really excited to push the pipelines to pipelines the police , if they were actually reported to service to beschuetzen american buerger .
you can still push it , and the efficiency almost verdreifachen with some more funktionstechnischen improvements and the gewinnspanne of the big spediteure .
we could build more sophisticated cars , which would be contributing to security , but easy to be .
but instead , they sell it to china and japan because we have schutz our maisbauern and the other ones .
and that is , by doing the step of the schritt , the step of this kind of materials , or in this case , to make ultraleichten stahlsorten , as good stuetztechnologie ; the militaer can do that as well as it did the internet for the internet .
it &apos;s not just a huge sexistische conspiracy .
there were two kinds of negative feedback that we received .
hope that it really goes stable .
i mean , i &apos;m wrong .
at the end , he found a kunsthändler , a dutch kunsthändler named han van meegeren , who sold a wonderful vermeer , who sold him for about 10 million dollars .
according to his biographen , he looked like he was first discovered that there are bad in the world .
&quot; it &apos;s coming on it . what is it ? &quot; is a good answer .
but how attractive you find her how much you move to her or romantic , depends on what you think who you &apos;re looking at .
but each of these three objects has value a value beyond what it takes , because of his story .
but i don &apos;t want a copy , even though i can &apos;t see the difference .
so he took joshua bell to take his millionen-dollar-geige to a subway station in washington d.c. to put up in a corner and see how much money he will take .
the second shock hurts less because you &apos;re used to a little bit of it .
and if you &apos;re weiterlesen , you can see that there might be a kind of political wertigkeit .
they prahlt that she &apos;s a zertifiziertes , professionelles member of the american verbandes of ernährungsberatern , which sounds very glamorous and exciting .
and what you find is , of course , people who eat vegetables and olive oil , they have less hautfalten .
the placeboeffekt is one of the most amazing things in the entire world of medicine .
it &apos;s a vorgefasster conclusion , if you were given a drug in a very high dose that there will be more side effects and that your new drug will look better .
the big trials are closer to the true answer .
this is a problem , for which there &apos;s no solution .
and very soon they would have begun , this coal abzutransportieren , zugwagon around tonne , bootsladung around zugwagon , back to china and everywhere in the world .
can you imagine how you would feel if you were in my place ?
it &apos;s all about oil ; you know that , everybody knows that .
there &apos;s this thing , the militarisierung of the world , and that &apos;s from the middle of the united states .
and what do you see ? you &apos;re christians .
man , the americans , are sort of like , &quot; ah , kreuzzug .
these christians are bekloppt .
she &apos;s verallgemeinern . that &apos;s wrong .
and the soldiers are chinese , and all the other are chinese .
now , you can imagine that one of you may be gebeugt by your child and umarmt and said , &quot; honey , i &apos;m back after that .
everything has changed .
and all this has had tremendous implications on the world .
i think thomas jefferson really put it very well into words .
for the hollywood-menschen in the audience , you can actually explain why action-filme have a major budget than a komödien , and that &apos;s because it &apos;s easier to translate into other languages and cultures , so the market for these films is larger .
but it will happen in this century .
this is not the u.s. &apos; s pro-kopf-bip , which is going to be about a million , but the gdp of the world per capita -- 200,000 dollars .
also , as everyone here knows -- it &apos;s about energy , not oil .
my choice is the pinnacle of a single life that &apos;s a commitment to grow up in the golfküste alabamas of the florida-halbinsel .
a lot of our actions on this planet relate to our living environment , are just by faith and by us .
one is for thousands or millions of years .
we need to calm down before we ruin the planet .
e. wilson wilson that saving life &apos;s life on earth
another more schlüsselart is the famous european auerochse .
the genome genome contains 1.3 billion pairs of the pigeon .
the reverse of the extinction falls into this category .
the real falcon of lightly frisierten .
there &apos;s a program to be a öko-tourismus , which is just brilliant .
this is an emotional subject . some people have got up .
my grandmother was a hausfrau .
i also did my own comics , which was another way to tell stories , through words and through images .
and we sat down there , in silence , and he said to me , &quot; you &apos;re really talented . &quot;
use your own style . draw not how you tell you .
&quot; rather , i think , jarrett , i &apos;ve got your postkarte .
i &apos;m also going to publish a book book called &quot; platypus police squad : the frog who croaked . &quot;
sound affects us all the time , psychologically , cognitively and verhaltensbezogen .
this is a 32 million pounds of care , very important universitätsgebaude , which was recently built in england , designed by a british stararchitekten .
but it &apos;s not just children who are affected .
people who say , let &apos;s not sit next to this team , because the noise like the noise and the other ones need to quiet .
&quot; upwake &quot; tells a story about zero , a contemporary business man who has his life in the suitcase with itself , and the between dream and reality , and not able to be able to enträtseln both .
344 frames and four and a half years later , what became a solo-show , a gemeinschaftsarbeit of neunzehn talented actors .
i know theater connects us .
now , the time we can use the diversity of our talents to create a smart , important and extraordinary work .
if you look around the bathroom , you &apos;ll see some products more like shampoo , spülung , anti-falten-creme , körpercreme , but also in the same way .
injizierbares collagen -- or since the &apos; 70s , the collagen of pigs -- it &apos;s used to inject it in fold .
all i found in a total of 185 products .
and i said , &quot; my love , i &apos;m afraid you have a long and a beschwerliches year before you . &quot;
i told you , you should be hinsagen , &quot; i &apos;m a person .
they gave me a sense of being someone , in a time where i felt like a nobody .
they &apos;re just working on the ninth of the day , so they started in the same way and now they &apos;ve done the letter p .
hundreds of verbs can be so behave .
you can see this as the language of thought , or &quot; mentalese . &quot;
so the mystery is , why is that , you know , the bestechungen , the höfliche requests , ersuche and drohungen so often ?
you can try to imagine what if language could be used literally .
and the other puzzle is that i don &apos;t have a problem with this .
here &apos;s my argument . is it haltbar ? is it good ?
this is what makes it gegnerisch . it &apos;s polarisierend .
what insight is that you won , to convince me ?
all these different roles , can you imagine an argument that you &apos;re involved , but also in the audience sitting in the audience and watch yourself in the debate ?
or -- and this is the most part of the thing for me , we want you to hinausführen us into the world of nature . we bring a design-herausforderung and we find the masters of the adaptation that we might inspire .
that changed everything . from there , these engineers were not going to be able to get the boat .
and here &apos;s the opposite -- here &apos;s how we make things .
this is the national national laboratory .
this would be hochinteressant for brennstoffzellen if you could get around without a platin .
it &apos;s not easy because life uses only one of the elements in the periodensystem .
feeling and react : feedback is very important .
what you don &apos;t see , you can &apos;t count .
my first business was a schneiderei , i started under the taliban .
in south and indonesia , almost a half a million companies are in the women .
because , as the weltwirschaftsforum noticed , smaller geschlechterkluften in direct context to verbesserter economic wettbewerbsfähigkeit .
and the one in the world are not exceptions .
people are jubelten out to this entzückung and this kind of thing .
i have a klecks bio-joghurt of fröhlichen , selbst cows on my arbeitsfläche , and i &apos;d like to use paper paper to make it .
first we started it .
what does that mean ?
when i started to deal with them , i realized they were incredibly adapted .
but the researchers had a problem .
and finally , they finally made their degree and verließen the campus -- and surely happy to come there -- some time came back and realized that the crows still remember them .
we found that they &apos;re really smart and that they can teach each other .
for example , a squirrel would come back to the erdnuss and go back and go again .
but there were three problems , three puzzles that i couldn &apos;t solve , and i want to talk about that , but even more importantly , i found a lösungsvorschlag .
who would ever hire me ? &quot;
and imagine what could happen , because every region has something .
so let me make the connection .
you know that there &apos;s the massenpublikum of the future . you have to understand that .
that &apos;s a lot to be too .
oh , i &apos;m going to be johnny appleseed of the sounds .
each about 10 million phagen .
and over here , we see the words of the radiologists israel meisner , &quot; how the hand ergreift the penis in a way that &apos;s remembered . &quot;
and she said , &quot; yeah , but i &apos;d rather be to get to the end of the end if you don &apos;t have anything about it . &quot;
i said , &quot; you should do an experiment .
he had a line in his book that was angeblich out of the habsburg-monarchie , and there was a kaiserin mary who had trouble with conception .
so now you have an evolutionary excuse .
she said -- i have to read them what she said , because i find it so beautiful .
i think that &apos;s a very unfortunate thing , not because i would have to use it . i wanted to see him .
and this is actually the beginning of our story .
now i would have thought to this moment , that at age 50 , one of the skills i really had to understand was to bind my shoes .
first of all , i have to tell you that i &apos;m not here .
yeah . the artist doesn &apos;t seem to know that it &apos;s to hinmalen the different colors .
but i can see in her faces that you &apos;re still a little bit skeptical .
it &apos;s called &quot; unbenannt , &quot; and i think that &apos;s appropriate .
after a while i decided to have a little bit fun , and before i left the room in the morning , i was going to go to a couple of things in the room .
and now they &apos;re all in here .
my father was one , so my youth was very interesting .
that &apos;s a mere fact .
i &apos;m , &quot; wait , yeah , i &apos;m going to be good , i &apos;m going to put the wheels off . &quot; from my reinem protest , i bought the auffälligen wheels , and i built them , and i &apos;m going to see my sonderbeleuchtung .
it just sounds like , but i think we generally in our society and culture with the absichtlichkeit has a riesenproblem .
he had designed the sonden himself , and he was really proud of it .
human , i love this thing .
the consequences of a planet that has been living on seven billion people .
and very proud , he was on the bequemen seat , the real bequemen seat he gave his triumphwagen to his triumphwagen , and the beautiful stofffransen around the seat .
intent -- a life of purpose -- consciously , living , that original etwas is a little bit better .
i saw the healthy mass of a left deltamuskels , and i trauerte that she was lost , trauerte all of the things i haven &apos;t done yet , but no longer was possible .
then i started , as many times before , to ask how my life would have been different , if that guy didn &apos;t hurt me , if my gene had a different kind of portion of experience .
i was , but i was despite a gehbehinderung myself , and i , so i guess , i was now made myself .
i &apos;d been hoping to have a much simpler way to share this türkische dessert against four words and make me again .
he spent six months in prison , lost his lkw-führerschein for a decade .
yes , contrast .
we &apos;re working with the machine perception laboratory at the university of california , san diego .
one , the perception of people . and second , a natural interface , a natural form of control , that interaction will be more intuitive with the robot .
and yet , i made this idea .
after i recognized this economic threat , i thought we need to find a solution to this problem .
some of them actually have a referenzen to talk about nathan myhrvolds &apos;s way , or the one of tim who are at the time that they might be seen as a very hard .
i don &apos;t know a tedtalk that &apos;s going to happen .
this time i paid 25 cents , because i found that the task was a little harder .
and yet , there was one thing that all of the secure were : the expansion had to slow down .
keep the mystery of dark energy in the back of mind , because i &apos;m going to call you three schlüsselfakten of string theory .
the kandidatenliste went up to about 10 to 500 .
and he was working decades for explaining this number , but he didn &apos;t succeed , and we know why .
each of these universes has extra dimensions .
because the astronomers are now to turn out of powerful telescopes to the heavens , a handful of hochinformativer photons -- a kind of kosmisches telegramm , billions of years along .
now , i want to be honest with you and tell you that most of it is just a trick , but a trick that actually works .
remember , it &apos;s the first time you meet it . we want to really excited and even more curious .
he said , &quot; go , milo . zertritt . &quot;
pm : this is a dimitri &apos;s right now to get in .
we don &apos;t know anybody here .
the next moment , the phone doesn &apos;t work anymore , the television goes out , bewaffnete men are in the street .
it was a very düsteres meeting of the reporter who worked in war , the employees of ngos , and of course of the brave , people who are brave people from sarajevo .
if i &apos;m asked why i keep going to keep doing a kriegsberichterstattung , why i &apos;m going to stay here , that &apos;s the reason .
but it &apos;s my career this statement , and this is the krux , the core of the thing that we find for us .
even before a goal , with the joystick cursor cursor soll. , versucht the aurora to try and figure out the goal , no matter where it is .
and basically , we trainierten the animals so they learned to control these avatare and exploring objects in the virtual world .
in an experiment we did a few years ago , we went to the limit .
so we started in china .
so , they did the unterstufe review done .
raise your hand .
the last reason has to do with that women are part of the solution , not the problem .
in the niger , one of seven women &apos;s born is born with a child .
they became part of the solution , not the problem .
larry summers , when he fungierte the world bank , once , once said , &quot; it can be good that investment in education in the developing world are the highest rentabilität . &quot;
this is bill easterly &apos;s book .
and this was the feather of a vogels .
this whole wirbel around a single one of our wesensmerkmale tells us that there &apos;s a klärungsbedarf .
and even this picture , the suspect of the verdächtigen impression of being zurechtgebastelt -- like something from the barnum &amp; amp ; bailey .
one of these possibility was that we could have been able to get away in small familiengruppen .
they put their pfeilspitzen and say , &quot; i want to trade these pfeilspitzen to the end line , and we share 50 to 50 . &quot;
there are places in that island where you can meet all three or four miles a new language .
if 27 individuals from that 27 , they put together to a table , sprächen their 23 languages , then they &apos;ll just tell you that they need an army of 253 übersetzern to be prepared for all the most paarweisen possibilities .
but it doesn &apos;t tell us that they have language .
and what i &apos;m most interested in is the invisible space between a text and the zugehörigen image , and how the image is changed through the text , and the text through the picture .
these are transatlantische unterwasser-kommunikationskabel , which are running across the ocean &apos;s the ocean , and connect north america to europe .
you turn the negative .
but through the impression of phantombildern , polaroids , fahndungsfotos and gegenüberstellungen can change the zeugenaussagen .
larry youngblood : eight years of a ½ sentence , in arizona , for the entführung and wiederholten mißbrauch on a 10jährigen boy .
before that people are left to themselves .
and they brought them to texas to us here .
and now they &apos;re going to drive the food station , where they &apos;re in that moment .
it &apos;s just the full of space that it makes it look like it &apos;s not a matter of what happens .
so something called a little bit about a feeling : the pursuit of happiness and human design .
part of the legacy is the legacy of freuds , the pessimisten , who is struggling for happiness for happiness , it &apos;s going to be driven by infantilen aspects of the individual and can &apos;t be found in the reality .
a hauptpunkt at the science of happiness is that happiness and unglück are not a endpunkte in a closed continuum .
it starts in the ventralen tegentum .
here &apos;s a three weeks old baby .
in the animal kingdom , there &apos;s only one possibility to increase status , which is dominance .
i want to close with some of the zitaten .
why would you choose rats ?
once the rat got it , we make a little bit more difficult .
you can actually cure for t.b. , even in humans who are hiv positive .
and knowing that one patient who has the microscopic unentdeckt are going to be infected by 15 people -- a year -- a year , can be safe that we &apos;ve already saved a lot of lives .
here we see neurons .
so this is important for imitation and emulation .
now , the question is , if i just look at how another person gets touched , why am i not confused confused and i literally watching this berührungsgefühl of the naked watching someone ?
thank you . i have two of these things here today .
i &apos;m not really about the pflanzenvermehrung , but to the pollen itself .
all these images were taken by a rasterelektronenmikroskop by the way in the lab of kew laboratories .
even every single one of us has a personal story to tell us the pollenfingerabdruck .
we have to be as good as the breast cancer campaign to tackle this crisis .
right at the time , in the 1980s , when we saw women and death through heart disease , they were going on to rise to the new england journal of medicine and called the yentl-syndrom .
our colleagues in washington , d.c.
we decided , &quot; let &apos;s look at this . &quot;
in contrast to computertomographie , röntgen , for women whose busen are disabled to the heart of the heart , every time we organize something that includes a small amount of radiation , we ask , &quot; is this test really necessary ? &quot;
okay , here we started .
they did what they said they were gehalten and they &apos;re going to have joined .
the cells have a little bit like heimweh ; in the dish , they don &apos;t feel that .
what does that mean for us ?
in the course of three years , we took eight to 10 hours a day , and we raised about a viertelmillion hours of mehrspuriges ton- and bildmaterial .
this is one of the first fazits that came out a little bit more than a year ago that really surprised us .
and finally , my son will be in a gehhilfe .
three of the most important people in this project philip decamp , rony kubat and brandon roy here .
and there &apos;s a fascinating dynamic in the game .
this is the first time our son did more than two steps , suddenly , captured in the movie .
and this is an important question to be more important , because the better we understand how the brain creates meaning , the better we can communicate . i think , the better we can think and work together .
it &apos;s a kind of center where you see a picture and you think , &quot; oh , i have a strong or emotional reaction to the subject . &quot;
what we &apos;re doing is our teams , anzuweisen , drawing the whole wall on a large wall .
this is the first house i built .
it &apos;s not just about sanitation , but also , to give you a sense of relaxation .
so it doesn &apos;t build it .
if you translate that into the building industry if you have a fensterwand and a window is broken , we &apos;ll say , &quot; oh no , that &apos;s broken , it has to be fixed .
that &apos;s the difference .
so we went on .
are we just stupid ?
you can actually walk it in two years when you read eight hours a day .
so you can be in september , and say , &quot; i &apos;m important today .
why don &apos;t you do that , and why don &apos;t you do that ? &quot;
and the police are waiting for the eintreffen of the department department to cut the car into pieces , to take the body of the driver .
and that &apos;s enough to the present with the dollarschein in the united states , where one eye of göttlichen fügung .
all this leads us to -- computersucht , just to name the time , what we do most is using digital devices .
that &apos;s the consequence of the destruction of more than a third of the brain on the right side through the stroke .
this is a very , very low level to be released from the healthcare system .
he then thought my jaw was in the right position while he kieferorthopädisch my teeth .
alfred man is a brilliant physicist and an innovator , who is fascinated with lücken in the mind , whether he &apos;s a hearing hearing or a blind , or a paralyzed movement .
now , i had to follow the dark years that followed me , what was i stayed when everything that was going on today .
and it works . it works .
lp : so if you have the opportunity , you spend time with simon .
and these were the developing world : they had big families and a relatively short life .
and these are on this page . a large überlappung of africa and the africa .
and then deng xiaoping came out and brought money to china and brought the land back to a middle way .
a search search that we can copy and publish the data into a durchsuchbares format , and we can publish the world , and what do we hear when we &apos;re looking around ?
but this is what makes hypotheses .
you know , darwin explains life after it came out , what was the essence of life ?
and there i learned francis crick .
but there was what was in the literature .
we were not the best chemists in the room .
i was a little bit unhappy ; my girl didn &apos;t get me .
you can compare the dna of your dna and krebsbefallener segmente .
and so i close by saying that i &apos;m going to tell you that we &apos;ve looked at 20 people with schizophrenia .
in the average , the defense in such a case costs two million dollars and it takes 18 months to win .
first , they &apos;re not fighting the patent against the patent , but against the verstoß .
my solution : give me this patent , and i will leave you with trollbeschwerden .
&quot; why not ? &quot; they said the girls .
the fathers were in a place where they were able to move their daughters to play their chairs and reach their hand out to dance .
this is a great technology .
it &apos;s not very much left in the world .
it can &apos;t survive for a long time .
you can &apos;t see the enemy of the most of the time , and we had a different way to eradicate polio than we had done it with smallpox .
it helped to monitor the pandemic grippen , for example .
the reality of polio today is something that &apos;s completely different .
and yet , the impossible is happening .
bill gates : now bruce , where are out of your view , the most difficult places ?
bruce aylward : how we can make polio endgültig for a standstill .
dj : we found this individualismus now in all sorts of animals , especially with the big cats .
and to our surprise , it became a kultfilm .
for us , this elephant in many ways , in many ways , a symbol of inspiration has become a symbol of the hope that we &apos;ve been carrying with our work .
it was incredibly amazing , as she did it in safety , to protect it from the hyena .
and of course , if i look at these löwentatze , that &apos;s been erinnert , it reminds me of a unheimliche way , and that &apos;s ironic because your destiny is in our hands .
we need it . we respect and celebrate each other as a man and woman , as a community and as part of this planet , and we need to continue on doing that .
but it seems to be obvious that the earth is large and bewegungslos , the sun is small and beweglich , but it &apos;s worth remembering what wittgenstein is going to do .
and that &apos;s because there is always there in middle of the world .
the nature of this model depends on what kind of animal we are .
because there are so many of them , and because between you don &apos;t have any consensus in terms of your favorite bewegungsrichtung , verharrt of the marmor , as we see it in middle world , unbeweglich and solid .
people like being able to treat as a machines , and they might be very scientific and philosophisch , but it &apos;s a hinderliche time when you want to guess what the next person is going to do next .
i became a stummen tetraplegiker at the same age of 40 years old .
and i &apos;m going to control over a mauszeiger that i &apos;m going to control with my head , i allow these video to send video videos from the robot to send commands by putting the buttons in a web-browser .
and with the help of people like you , we can make this dream .
so , in the ozeanographie , there &apos;s a regelrechtes lexicon of the delphinsprache , basically , which is basically the radarstrahlen that are aussenden dolphins .
i think together , together we can make a global community .
this is a hot trending topic .
now there are some -- there are some lessons that you can learn from .
but normally we don &apos;t .
i think we tend to look at this : the infrastructure of globalization .
this is down to 12 percent of the 15 percent .
this is a problem we have to solve .
i also suppose most of you don &apos;t speak chinese -- what really sad , if you think that this is the most common language on the internet .
what &apos;s going to look at ? maybe we should do that .
if you look at this picture , you might think , &quot; why should i be interested in that at all ? &quot;
but there are all these different techniques that allow you to go out and look at the world and find its place in it .
they would bring wealth and safety , überwinden religious violence and make sure that states never unterschlupf terrorists .
and part of this activity is honesty .
what is this ?
i love this dish .
and the war that &apos;s been , the 20 million people have taken life -- until today the tödlichste civil war in the world .
lem sen , who &apos;s this guy , &quot; i &apos;ve also made all this money , but i spent all of this time looking for the american man stolen my prescription .
chinese restaurants did the same thing , i would argue with the menü and the dekor -- even the restaurant -- but without a zentralisierten .
in contrast , we have general tso chicken that began in new york city in the early 1970s , when i was just starting at the university of university in new york city in the early 1970s , so ...
so what we see in the 17th 18th century is the fortgeführte search for medicine , and for medicine , the same thing that creates the same .
so people would have a really big anfall .
when the überweisungen started to become less , i was clearly eindeutig , and i was clearly depressiver , until i thought , my god , i can &apos;t work anymore .
do you remember to have to walk in every line ?
at 18 and 19 , i fell through the night .
i &apos;m going to get a little depressed and a little bit of obsessiv .
so many of us realize that there are much more to do a lot of the world &apos;s building in the world &apos;s building a better world .
he goes around , &quot; how does it feel to be free ? &quot;
you know . where did the world work for the treatment of the familiar problems that have been led to the potential of earthquake and climate change ?
if you make the impossible , you can do it .
but we &apos;ve reached a agreement to climate change .
and it was crying .
the seideraupe power is a remarkable thing : they use two ingredients , proteins and water that are in their spinndrüse to create a material that is a schutz hard to be a schutz , comparable to technical fibers like a kevlar .
or you &apos;re looking at beautiful things like this , if the camera can capture it .
and you see here , you &apos;re using it from the tissue .
with my new project , marilyn monrobot , i want to use art for creating technology .
there &apos;s a microphone that &apos;s going to be a microphone that goes out and applause and the applause -- hopefully not -- to help him make some of his closest decisions .
what do i do ? &quot;
in this case , this unprecedented demonstration has shown some unprecedented demonstration to show a roboter-bühnenkomiker , which can be far more than einzeiler herunterzuleiern -- he &apos;s collecting the feedback of his audience and gleicht to the answer of the amount of these . works this thing ?
stanley milgram , inventor of the known known of separation , vermutete , in the 60-er and 70-ern , that there would be a connection between two of any people , about five to seven steps .
how does our view change about relations with a very verstreuten groups ?
but there was a vorkommnis , though , i &apos;m going to tell you , and where he might have been able to put these floh into the ear .
um ... my dad , a geheimagent ?
it was his father , who decided they needed false papers .
this feeling of responsibility for others , he had been the age of other people who had been 17 years old , and also his fault , to be a überlebender , because he was from a camp while his friends were staying , he kept his entire life .
and while my halbschwester and my halbbruder were given up , i had , sort of , waisen my father false papers .
i asked him , the face of the victim he had brought , he &apos;d ever bereut it .
we &apos;re growing by a few million people on the seven billion people that we &apos;re in today .
the arctic , a beautiful system , a regulierendes biom at planetarischem level , which is a klimawandelschlag , which is the seemingly einsteckt , it seems to be a good state .
if you abholzt the forests that überschreitet the border at the landnutzung , you can untergräbt the ability to remain stable .
with the insight of tourbetreibern , the fishermen , the great great barrier reef authority and scientists , that the great barrier of the reef is verdammt under the current state of state .
but the drama is , of course , that clearly shows that there is no option that it &apos;s not an option .
that leads me to another reason why i &apos;m here today , because i really like the media of all kinds .
this is a überrest of a race from a very developed unterhaltern .
first he uses an ancient kind of manufacturing , the relief and verband this with a three-dimensional perspective , which was a very new technology at that time .
and by the bearbeitung of sugar in the black paper , i made portraits of them .
and it became very large images , and i took them with a very big camera on a 8x10 camera .
i think of interest in schauspielerei , especially in bad schauspielerei , very far .
and you can go back in the back , a sequence that happens in the chimps .
we can ask : is there any general differences between africans and nichtafrikanern ?
and then you can compare it to the genome of today .
we can then ask the same question for the same time , as neanderthal , did you have a lot of people who are mixed with people today ?
there are many people who designed their own vision , for example , that vision of the beginning of the 20th century .
and i think , by my belief , the plane of the future has its own consciousness .
imagine kohlenstoff-nanoröhren growing in 3d printer , and they &apos;re embedded in a kunststoffmatrix , and they follow the forces that occur in their components .
they didn &apos;t talk . but most importantly , they were extraordinary isolated from the world around them , from their environment and from the people .
they would be zurückweichen . they would call the police .
now we know that it &apos;s about one of a hundred .
you can see a video of a video .
you have the feeling that the research you &apos;ve been doing , really , can really have a effect on reality , that they can actually prevent these experiences that i started with my way in this area .
you pick up .
zuallerst you put you in a starren body -- kinn on the brustbein , poor ausgestreckt on your reservefallschirm .
they did everything exactly the way we were taught them .
and after the battle of the battle they take this mobile and make what you call &quot; nachbesprechung &quot; to teach you what you &apos;re wrong .
the people have changed .
i said , &quot; where is it now ? &quot;
this is not a kinderspiel .
and she showed up to the left work , to tell me how problematic this picture was , it was the idea of the idea that it was black .
it &apos;s really in this sense of enteckung that i have a new set of questions that i &apos;m going to ask .
now , it &apos;s a obvious statement that up there is .
and the kids said , &quot; how are we supposed to do that . &quot;
i think you &apos;re trying to multiply numbers .
so i said , &quot; how long did you deal with it before you decided you didn &apos;t understand anything ? &quot;
their punktezahl is increased by 50 , which is new schools in new schools &apos; s with a ausgebildteten biotechnology .
if i was 76 percent , it &apos;s a test , two months later , the result was 76 percent .
after eight ted talks , he was going to be there &apos;s a vinci .
these are 10-jährige .
suddenly , i looked out of the darkness from the gegenüberliegenden side of the space , a glitzern of mirrors that were kept on the moon .
if i have to reduce the whole story to a picture , what would it be ?
i &apos;m going to show you some of the clips from my other big project in this year , &quot; the tempest &quot; -- the storm of the storm .
and our little lives ends up in a sleep .
bono : they &apos;re mythologien .
i know you understand that .
so blue , blue , everything was blue .
i want to tell you two stories . both of them play in africa .
it &apos;s another one that &apos;s acting on the interface of health and business .
let &apos;s use the markets as the empfindlichste spürgerät that we have , and figure out what price people would pay for it , so they would have the dignity of choice .
thank you .
the faustregel was this : if my mother couldn &apos;t understand it , we couldn &apos;t use it in the video .
we destroyed two klaviere and 10 tv .
the little neigte of the little neigte to remove their tracks , and that was a problem .
this is very good . it &apos;s going to slow .
i &apos;d like to show you a video of a few of the kind of models i work with .
creating tissue from berechenbarer density and behavior is the second part , and that will actually be the key to use these models for wirkstoffforschung .
thank you .
and i just try to fly you just to shoot a arrow of the end of the gefederten end . it was hard work , and boy , i &apos;ve learned a lot of respect for nature .
now , let &apos;s look at the other side .
we &apos;re working on projects -- even flügelschlagenden developments , like schwärmer -- with darpa , the california institute of technology and university in los angeles .
be careful , just behave like wood or so on .
now i didn &apos;t try to be besserwisserisch .
they keep going on forever .
these are over two billion .
it requires it for the estimate of the estimate , about three years of sonntagen .
don &apos;t forget that one abzuziehen .
but for me , it &apos;s great because it &apos;s a metaphor for the time we live in human mind and machines together .
i have a very clear mass . where did it come from ?
it &apos;s too much that the way in the wild has could be extinct in the wild for 30 years .
all evidence of evidence are deuteten that this cancer is transmitted by a virus .
i took the opportunity and i got some samples from jonas &apos; tumor and some samples from other parts .
she brought him to the person and this discovered something ekelhaftes .
and ultimately , cancer is a unvermeidbare consequence of our cells to share and adapt to their environment .
and i &apos;m not alone .
and this is a global phenomenon .
they would be draufzahlen to wait for it .
and this is the third reason why a low expectation doesn &apos;t make us happy .
but they didn &apos;t feel the numbers on them .
first i &apos;m going to show you the durchschnittswerte for the optimism bias .
but the good news is that our illusion is not broken when we &apos;re aware of that hangs .
but then what we &apos;re going to see in the 21st century is asia , which is gradually coming back to the hälfte of the world &apos;s population and to afford about half of the global economy .
you could look at this as the privatisierung of the kriegs .
after the soviets of the soviets of sputnik , they were saying , &quot; this is the end of america . &quot;
if you live in japan or new delhi , or your view of china &apos;s going to be something different than if you &apos;re in beijing .
and if we have strategies in which we will bring this into larger historical context , we will be able to do this process .
how do we define our national interests , so that it &apos;s not just a nullsumme ergibt. , but the positive sum of it .
that &apos;s the conventional approach that we have the conventional approach .
that has typically the responsibility of the responsibility to entsenden to guarantee a stable sicherheitslage .
they &apos;re dependent on other long-term .
jobs for whom ? especially for young men .
and once the legal system collapsed , you can &apos;t even get a lot of them .
the supply would be about its own , after conflict , government .
this is the silhouette of my hometown of new orleans .
the military has figured out . they call climate change , the security and stability , as governments to discuss the world , like that .
it allows you to make more productive , so you can afford the insurance to be able to do the insurance .
these are also inspiring examples of the solutions that we &apos;re able to feel when we &apos;re able to plan for a world &apos;s own .
listen like chinese students practice english by shouting it .
teacher : perfect ! students : perfect .
and this includes things like the concrete world with klassifikationen auszukleiden , to try to make the same thing that we try to make sense of logical , and we &apos;re also taking the hypothetical seriously , so we &apos;re more likely to ask ourselves what might be like what &apos;s going to be .
and in fact , in the luria of the world , they were eintraten , before they were in the scientific age , and he found that these people were resistant to a klassifizierung of the concrete world .
and there said , &quot; the north pole is always snow .
they chose albany instead of new york .
it wasn &apos;t just the distribution of cognitively hard professions .
would you have been to be killed ? &quot;
you could say , a halbkreis .
it feels like i &apos;ve landed in a colony of the engeln . &quot;
and they flehten me to make a degree in anything .
he &apos;s still in the red figures , but chris made it with personal victims , that film , that film .
i &apos;m one of her lehrergesten .
there &apos;s a prime minister , aussenminister , verteidigungsminister and a finanzchef , or president of the rechnungshofes .
boy : &quot; the weltfrieden-spiel is serious .
we all were mad to you , &quot; why do you do that ?
that &apos;s going to be a lot of real , if you read it . &quot;
we &apos;ve always played this game for weeks for weeks , about seven weeks , and we &apos;ve basically been gemeistert all of the 50 ineinander crises .
and we have 600 billion dollars .
many people were paying good for the jobs and schlossen the nationalbewegung .
it &apos;s like his own little connection .
if i put all three legs from that , in the three peaks of the triangle , i would get a tetraeder .
so all you do is -- it &apos;s a very provokante proposition -- this old fahrradschlauch and this old plastic , and this füllventil is very easy to go into an old fahrradschlauch .
this is possible if you have a whole piece of paper , din a4 paper -- you can be in a kommunalen school or in a government school -- a sheet , a ruler and a pen , no glue , no scissors .
what we do is a very simple elektromotor .
this is a small strohhalm , which is the two corners here , it &apos;s going to be abzuzwicken , it &apos;s going to be like a babykrokodilmaul .
here are two magnets .
it was a lot of passengers on the ship , and they got bored , so the captain invited them to be in his deck .
at the ink conference , arvind gupta gupta , and yet amazing plans to transform waste into really unterhaltende , gut , konstruierte , which are able to build kids themselves -- while they learn basic principles of science and design .
it was a big challenge , and it was actually examples of biology that gave a lot of clues .
and there are a couple of examples of projects that are really conscious of trying to mimic ecosystems .
and with a little bit of planning , we can be dominated a space of traffic , which is a verwandeln , open space for people who connect people with food and turning waste into opportunities in the opportunities .
this is a photograph that was made by the day of the end of the day , and only a year later , it looked like this .
if you verdampft the seawater , the first thing that &apos;s auskristallisiert is calcium carbonate .
no , you have to take people &apos;s souls entflammen away with visions of visions . &quot;
i was looking for someone who &apos;s jewish , because i &apos;m jewish , because i &apos;m very important .
but the real reinfall was that there were a lot of men who wanted to date out of me .
very few of us have the ability to be completely honest with themselves .
he likes to travel unless it &apos;s not on a kreuzfahrtschiff .
i tried to be a way of being smileygirl1978 .
because they remember my punktesystem : you have to reach a mindestpunktezahl of 700 points , and nobody did that .
most of them . gamer are the average of 33 years old , not eight years , and if we look at the hochgerechnete of the computerspielens , the gamer of the morning older adults .
imagine that their vision is very , very good .
these gamer have many other benefits in respect to attention , and a aspect of attention that is also improved , our ability to track objects in our environment .
i want you to ask you to realize this outcome , and to put it into the context of a different group of technologienutzern , a group that actually looked at in our society , which is made of people who are doing the multimedia-tasking .
so let me tell you this step with a task called mental mental .
it &apos;s the idea of computation .
let &apos;s just make all kinds of programs in the particular case we &apos;re looking at .
so it was a big , very complex project , which i didn &apos;t even know , was it that it works .
so , wolfram alpha knows about many , many things .
on one hand we have mathematica , with its kind of a precise , formaler language and a large network of sorgfälltig developed , able to do a lot of the lines .
so , with physical materialuntersuchungen , we &apos;re actually used to the world to go and realize that certain materials are useful for certain technology , and so on .
a few years ago , i was quite excited by finding that there are candidate universes that are erfolgreich with incredibly simple rules that reproduzieren the special theory of relativity , and also general relativity and gravity and at least clues to quantum mechanics .
sw : i think .
and while that time i actually lost more relatives , and teachers who are ausbildeten me , hiv / aids .
you jump up . you &apos;re wearing red clothing .
and my mother was a woman , she didn &apos;t have a right on property and automatically , and it was all my family owned , and my father , so he had the right .
and the day before the actual ceremony we were dancing , we were excited , and had not slept all night .
he wore a little bit of the sneakers , and this was a village that didn &apos;t even have gepflasterte roads . it worked very attractive .
i promised him to be a braves girl , i would come back and do everything that she would ask me to ask .
when it was pregnant before the marriage , the mother was responsible for that and bestraft .
as we speak here , 125 girls will never be verstümmelt .
consumers who represent 72 percent of the american gdp , actually , just like banks and companies are zurückzuzahlen zurückzuzahlen , their fremdkapital , in their daily lives , to set themselves from commitment and taking risks that face us , when we move forward .
and what you &apos;re finally here is , the whole phenomenon is the whole phenomenon of the fact that we actually vortreten and basically future education , the future children of our households .
sterilisationen are up to have 48 percent , which is a cornell institute .
we also observe a trend to something more bescheidenerem , right ?
one of them is the erstarken of community and neighborhood , and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more vulnerable to the neighbor &apos;s neighbor .
we also observe a big heimwerker-bewegung .
the trend for the handwerken is immense .
then we &apos;re going to take the phenomenon of kogi .
and then i asked me , i am the only one that &apos;s doing this thing ?
you could exploit them .
this is what i do in my life -- stories , i can tell , read about novels , and today i want to share with you a couple stories about the art of storytelling and also some of the creatures that are dschinns .
our vorstellungkraft could be schrumpfen . our hearts could be verkümmern , and our menschlichkeiten could be verdorren if we were in a long time of the cultural cultural cultural cultural system .
and i came across the first time i call it , &quot; repräsentativen . &quot;
i &apos;m not a immigrantin , no refugee or a exilantin . i &apos;m going to ask why i do that , but the pendeln between languages enabled me to reinvent myself .
he wanted to see a manifestation of my identity .
my tiny story became a huge amount of matter because i was being verfolgt .
literature has to lead us to the other side .
i could schreiben. a novel about a muslim woman , and maybe that will become happy story , and i &apos;ll write about a gutaussehenden professor in norway , and i &apos;ll write about a gutaussehenden professor in norway .
so you &apos;re going to do . you &apos;re already taking existing songs , cut them into little bits , and it forms up these bits , and they get a new song , but this new song is clearly made of old songs .
instead , these laws and laws are more likely to compare the unbeholfenen of the property .
it &apos;s a 28-seitiges software-patent , but i &apos;m going to summarize what it &apos;s called abdeckt : the entriegeln of the telephone by putting a symbol of your finger .
our creativity comes from outside , not from inside .
and then they say , &quot; okay , but how do you know what your address ? &quot;
in fact , it &apos;s not my fault ; it &apos;s from the newspaper &quot; guardian . &quot;
and what &apos;s beautiful , you can probably see this limb there , a kind of undeutlicher rauchfahne that &apos;s coming out of the limb .
our exploration of the solar system has taught us that the solar system is beautiful .
now , this led to an understanding of the atomaren structure , because it will be so erkärt that atoms have a single core , with elektonen that orbit it .
this picture shows a galaxy , a allerweltsgalaxie , with , you know , 100 billion stars like our sun .
i think it can also be the tiefstgreifenden ideas for us , about our place in the universe and really , the value of our planet .
this is here . this is home . that &apos;s us .
and with each click and every touch of the screen , we can let &apos;s brotkrumen brotkrumen information from our personal information in our way through the digital forests .
when our daughter sat down to the frühstückstisch , i asked her , &quot; will put a lot of value on your school a lot of value on musical competence ? &quot;
we can &apos;t do this with a untätig .
now , i want to take you on this journey .
and because i was so much and talked about my own my own birthday birthday , i couldn &apos;t talk a day -- a day .
and they don &apos;t talk ... ?
and i explained with help of a friend who understood my sign that i was john francis , that i was walking through my life , i didn &apos;t talk , and that this would be the last time that someone would translate my sign sign .
well , i schulterte my rucksack again .
i started talking again because i studied umweltwissenschaften .
but the unterscheid was that i was thinking about every birthday i was thinking about my silence , but never about my decision to use my feet .
born and grew up in north korea .
sometimes i found small jobs for essen .
i was constantly worried that i would be gefasst and back again .
i felt so ohnmächtig because i had so much to eat in america , but my father died of starvation .
but i &apos;m sure that your gesture of love and the care of the life can save a different joseph and can change thousands of other people who still have hope .
it &apos;s very complicated to test new materials for buildings , but this was much stronger than i expected to make , and easy to make it , and also to make an industrial werkstoff .
but then i was very disappointed with my career as an architect , because we don &apos;t help , we &apos;re not working for society , but for privileged people , the government , the government , the government .
and then the following year , 1995 , it was a big earthquake in the u.k. in japan .
so i ask myself , what is a permanentes and what a temporäres building ?
but this is really necessary .
so we &apos;re learning some of the most important things in our lives before we are born , in the womb .
so fetuses are actually learning the certain language that spoken in the world they &apos;re born in .
it creates a mixture of the kind of influences that are so individually and curious about how the woman itself .
why should malnutrition be in the womb to become späterer illness ?
you can see ptsd , but also , you can see .
this trust in the fiktive is essential for every kind of theatralik .
the audience are going to hingeleitet on mutmaßungen , which are all logical , but not with what happens to their eyes . &quot;
and if it &apos;s a good story , it might even bring us to smile .
you may remember the aol-time warner-fusion , okay . at the time , the greatest deal of all time .
if you &apos;re a high animal in the unesco and someone says , &quot; what do you really do for the global hunger in the world ? &quot;
they said , &quot; can we start an ad campaign ?
this is actually a strategy , and i don &apos;t argue that strategy is a role .
for me , all the music was .
now , if i use my software , the camera is the camera , and it &apos;s registriert the position of the kamerapixel in relation to the projektorpixeln , and already you have a whiteboard .
i remember the poor had to have a little bit of materielles -- food , clothing , shelter -- what they didn &apos;t have .
i even felt a anflug of shame .
now , i heard him talk , i was excited for various reasons .
i didn &apos;t even have a donation to give me a donation , which is my way in my way .
it &apos;s about the wiedererzählen of the story of the poor , and it &apos;s about giving something to be able to get engaged what their dignity would confirm , a partnership doesn &apos;t give one that is based on a traditional type of donation , it can happen to happen .
it &apos;s a very bedeutungsvollere combination , a very strong combination .
now , at the moment , it &apos;s very ganz at the beginning , and it &apos;s very clear to me , very clear , that it &apos;s just a vehicle , only one tool .
what does the future of humanity look like ?
now i turn to second big question : are we alone or are there other lives in the universe ?
the answers to these big questions show that we have done remarkable progress in the last hundred years .
you can see this .
here are photos of me .
the rate has doubled all of the 18 months and every eingetragene member of the digerati , that &apos;s the mooresche law .
but what about them ? what will it do with them ?
they sail over the heavens and occasionally they took people for experiments that their parents don &apos;t agree .
so we &apos;re interested in such things .
and back and older generations couldn &apos;t do these experiments at all .
and i found that the first technology came in the form of 2,6 million years ago .
we can learn a lot of that .
and i look at sorgenvoll and try to protect my child , because with that one child , you don &apos;t let anyone alone .
and second , she tells us that she had a aufrechten gang , but a few anpassungen of trees had .
so , until now our knowledge came across our ancestors as adults , because the fossils , the baby-fossilien , missing .
paläoanthropologe zeresenay alemseged studies the origins of humanity in the vast ethiopia of the world . he talks about how he found the oldest skeleton of a child child , and what we can learn from our human being .
and if all of the rules should have , of course , you need to have an effective system for überprüfung and rechtsdurchsetzung. , because we &apos;ve also been able to trust in any of the other .
it &apos;s considered a high seas , because the continent has been the continent from territorialen ansprüchen .
we need to work local , but also the seebecken seebecken .
we have to create a new paradigm of legal and respect .
and carol coletta says , &quot; i would pay to do what i do . &quot;
that was probably a pretty good idea .
so to say it , i &apos;m a journalist , no technologe , so i want to design a sketch , like the present and the future .
and finally , i think we all need to think about whether we want our reality -- and if we think it &apos;s for our idea of life , and for everything that &apos;s coming .
it looks like oil .
the symptoms of the complex is that you have the strong and unveränderliche belief , the right thing to have , doesn &apos;t matter how hard the problem is .
and i tried to write a paper on the new york times and explaining how it works .
of course we can .
and make a lot of money .
it &apos;s more than the ausfallquote of americans .
we &apos;re going to try that . probably all goes wrong .
brich instantly . &quot;
taniyama , it was trying to try and again , but he could never prove the idea .
i want to argue that our approach is not sustainable .
china &apos;s going to have done that in 20 years .
we don &apos;t even slow down .
the future is naturally ungewiss .
yes , it will become ugly , and yes , it happens soon -- with safety in our lifetime -- but we are more than able to overcome everything that &apos;s coming to us .
and here they come in .
and what we need to think about is this : if you go to the fire , what &apos;s next ?
and we believed we can make this debt to our children , but it turns out to be in front of you .
everything else is verplant .
that &apos;s the financial crisis .
students wanted to know what kind of development is the cell .
this should be something amazing to be ?
all we have is roomba .
you will be able to focus your listening , maybe the amount of your empfindlichkeit or erniedrigen can be a number of things we can &apos;t do .
that &apos;s not a thousand years in the distance .
we should give these cheap , simple heilmöglichkeit , and no one for their children . &quot;
and here we can see this .
we can &apos;t risk to lose the trust of the clients .
he only got 500 , and could have gotten to 1,000 . &quot;
and he had a huge amount of placebo-pillen that they got , and he said , &quot; come back in a week when you &apos;re still sick . &quot;
the internet , as we know it , the kind of web -- the things that we all talk about -- is a little less than 5,000 days old .
of course , the internet has been over 5,000 days -- the web is only 5,000 days .
so if we say , the machine that we &apos;re doing now is a hb , a human brain , if we look at the rate of this , we &apos;re six billion hbs in 30 years .
now it &apos;s not -- if you do a table and things at work , you &apos;re not going to document a word , you &apos;re not part of the web , but you will be it . you &apos;re going to be part of the machine .
i say , &quot; people will become the erweiterten senses of the machine . &quot; in a sense , meaning .
it will be at the level of parts and ideas or words if you want to be aufgelöst .
the last point i wanted to talk about is the idea that we &apos;re going to be co-abhängig .
third , it will be more ubiquitous in our environment , and we &apos;re in the middle .
and within a week i was convinced that the second wiederaufstehung of jesus christ was that it was sun myung moon , and that i was vorbereitet by god and prepared to be a jüngerin .
these are the dead of jonestown .
and it allows everything . it makes it all logical .
i &apos;m going to start with some simple ideas about how we can get things .
this is a project that we just completed in the penang for a huge amount of stadtprojekt that came right out of this process , it &apos;s a result of a variety of forces that are developing .
and this led directly into another project .
it &apos;s actually a false attitude , because the hybrid is probably more interesting .
i &apos;m interested in how these ideas are contributing to the education of the education of the education of the education ?
and finally , of one of the most interesting projects -- a gerichtsgebäude .
each of you are going to be able to your neighbor .
that &apos;s how we need to pay for a number .
so we have a big brain , a big advantage , because we can change our environment .
my story is the two brains , and it may surprise you , our gut has a brain system .
this muskelkontrolle is very , very important , there can be reflexe .
we learned to talk about the big brain , taste and reward , as you know .
he said , &quot; you know , at some point , we all were like animals and then no longer . &quot;
these are men and women who even name a 250 stars to the night sky today .
of course , the tibetischen monks were told us .
the intiwatana , the pfosten that &apos;s on the sun , is actually a obelisk that reflects on the light , which is on the holy apu of machu picchu , the zuckerhutberg , called huayna picchu .
if you pray for the dead , you make the hands of these gestures , which you &apos;re going to make your thoughts up the heavens .
here &apos;s the place where the great mother has gesandt the spindel into the world , which are aufgetürmt the mountains , creating the home of the world , which they call the heart of the world .
it &apos;s unique human imagination that human imagination .
this material you all know about is styropur , but i &apos;m holding it to the giftiges of white stuff .
i put it in there , you fit in there , because in a hundred years , my body can return to the earth without any aufbereitung .
it &apos;s a abfallprodukt .
you want to apply it anywhere in the world , and not to take care of reisspreu or baumwollschalen because you have many alternatives .
first , they begin atoms in a particular bottle .
i started a competition four years ago called &quot; dance your ph.d. . &quot;
my country is 15 trillion dollars in charge .
and this is -- -- this is a lot more herausfordernder than all the speakers speakers in front of me and all those who are going to come to me .
and she thought about my work to mathematical models that should promote an understanding of evolution and modern genetics .
the other half of the audience don &apos;t like kopf-zahl-zahl -- from a tiefgehenden , cultural reasons , they think about boring -- and find another pattern much more interesting -- in fact .
you can think about two ways .
if you toss a coin , you get a sequence of head and number .
back to the more secular , you &apos;re going to be dealing with uncertainty .
and only one percent of them .
he postulierte , &quot; i suppose that after a sudden death , death in a family remains the likelihood for another . &quot;
not as unlikely as one in 73 million , but still quite unlikely .
the whole quality of control that has tremendous effects on the industrial processing is going to be getragen by statistics .
the rauchmelder might have saved hundreds of thousands of lives , the world .
an intelligent force prevent injuries because the power is always from , until an intelligent anschlussstecker is recognized . &quot;
but , on the other hand , china is a sick-land . a term for facebooks börsengang .
you have facebook , we have renren .
and yet , the chinanet can create a very strong force , which never has ever been in history of china .
so , the chinese people look at this kind of mikrobloggen as real medium , not just as mere headlines .
like a big ted , isn &apos;t it ?
so , in the last three years , the last three years , through mikrobloggen lokalregierungen , they really changed more and more transparent because they have access to data .
more and more chinese , free speech and human rights are as their geburtsrecht , instead than a aus privilege .
many of you know that the symphony &apos;s seventh symphony was .
i don &apos;t say they can &apos;t live wonderful lives .
girl : well , my sister can be pretty nerves .
the acoustics of music is much more complicated than the language .
this is a violin .
and it seems like his schläfenbeine were removed to try and tell the cause of what &apos;s going on , which was the sound of the sound of the schädel and ausbuchtungen his skull on the pages .
cl : joseph is phenomenal . he &apos;s brilliant .
if i umsehe , in this tedxamsterdam audience , i see a special audience .
in many countries , this is another thing .
this is a critical point in the dutch story , my father was the bank of the waal river near nijmegen .
the rate of civil wars and oppression has been down since the end of the cold war .
my soldiers use their tools as tools of peace .
peter van uhm : why i took a gun on a gun
this program gets a form and then spuckt 250 .
this is a spannungsaufstieg in tuolumne meadows , in the middle of the yosemite .
you can &apos;t be locker . &quot;
i &apos;m very interested in the two .
and i &apos;ll give you a little example of that , but there &apos;s actually a theoretical argument for why technology evolved in a exponenzieller way .
now , the evolution of our species took hundreds of thousands of years , and because of this interaction , evolution actually used the technology of erschaffende species to create the next stage , which was the first step in technological evolution .
we live in a three-dimensional world , so we can use a third dimension to the third dimension .
over the last 50 years , we had 28 percent of zusammengefasstes growth in the informations-technologie .
another big revolution is the kommunikations-revolution .
to be in our exponential growth of computing : 1,000 dollars of computing power to the brain of a insect or a mouse .
and in the year , we will reach the full of these trends , and they have to be able to see how often the schraube of technology has been shot by technology -- faster and faster , when we get to that point .
you can get blessing and tücken .
they &apos;re harder to be harder .
they were removed from the genpool .
because there &apos;s nothing in there . well , it &apos;s not supposed to be here .
dopamine is the stuff that &apos;s associated with musterverwaltung .
and we call that schizophrenia .
and he was so friendly to post and give us the resolution .
i mentioned in our little thought , they &apos;re a hominid in the african flachland .
the 11th of september has a verschwörungstheorie . it &apos;s a conspiracy .
and we have our own lippenbalsam , and we have a führendes product .
i wasn &apos;t as good as he did , but we managed to do it , youssou , tracy , tracy chapman , bruce springsteen to a welttournee for amnesty , and that was a great experience .
they always said , &quot; and again , &quot; tell us the truth , and we hit ourselves .
musician and activist peter gabriel shares his personal motivation with the überwachungsgruppe witness.org of human rights and shares stories from active bürgerjournalisten .
we &apos;ve been asking , what do you know ?
he recognizes the problem and knows how to deal with it . the dance is his übergangsverhalten , which allows him to be orientieren .
the beetle climbing a lot of less than a pill when they &apos;re using stiefel , when they don &apos;t carry .
here &apos;s our durchtriebener versuchsleiter .
we play a 550-hertz-frequenz and watch what happens .
that &apos;s the universe of stephen hawking .
thank you .
mallorys argument that it &apos;s fun to fall into these great adventure , is not true with my experience .
or , &quot; beautiful . you know , my grandmother will be a kreuzfahrt in antarctica next year .
so the whole purpose of the presentation to convince the world &apos;s who is that you &apos;re the entrepreneurs in you and make a lot of money .
and next to the experience of creating a business or to lead something -- that doesn &apos;t have to be any business .
there are no financially independent , where there were no problems .
from the way they take them -- on a solid , good path , right from the beginning to the end .
if i happen to know someone who &apos;s made a machine .
no , they &apos;re not .
and then you give me a quick geschäfts-überblick .
even if the competition works for the old pattern .
it &apos;s hopefully positive , positive , positive , positive .
if you follow my own , you will have a spärliche , very zen-artige presentation . that &apos;s great to vemitteln who you are and to bring it to emotionally .
i didn &apos;t know that , that &apos;s pretty cool .
statistically statistically , one of them is a beetle .
if you mimic something , you might have an impact on it .
and then if you have enough , you can click another link .
we &apos;re at the end of the table , on the last place , the last place , as the culture , the innovation doesn &apos;t value .
and so how we think and behave , our verhaltenssystem .
we have a durchlaufendes meme to be serious .
but excuse me , the problems today are not the problems of the industrial revolution .
and you know what ?
and who are the largest neoteniesten ?
it &apos;s very trostlos .
our thinking is backwards .
through a change change , change , like transparency , change , like selbststeuerung , for example , to promote collaboration , and not autokratie , these things are focused on results .
because only the challenge is the only way that things are always done , the only way for us to get rid of the old trott , and find new creative solutions to the problems today .
because we can &apos;t do it alone . we should do it together , and if we do that , and we can share the ideas of play , we can turn bulgaria to a better turn .
so , for a magazine , i think , &quot; innovation . &quot;
my master took me to the ofenbauen , because the ofenbau was the back of the time .
after i had a handbewegung hand , she was very , very -- i was accepted , and i was working for about six months .
i had a fire in a nine days ago .
you already know -- all the stuff .
my children , davey and henry .
we were abonnierten , we were abonnierten , we did our homework , but where we were looking , we were surrounded by images like this .
this picture was literally created in seconds after the baby was laid down , and i got it over .
rg : oh oh .
av : taboo number three : you don &apos;t talk about his fehlgeburt , but i &apos;m going to talk about my talk today .
the general opinion is that every aspect of my life has become better for unlängen , since i &apos;ve been teilhabe to the wonder of birth and family .
but you realize that you &apos;re going to be abfindet to lose control in a wonderful way , what we think is , our lives , very much meaning , and what &apos;s extremely satisfying .
rg rg + av : thank you .
i &apos;m going to begin with glenn gould .
i started with the experience .
there &apos;s a episode of &quot; star trek &quot; there .
we all seen this star star star with the holodeck-folgen .
imagine that big , already verstorbene klaverspieler today , you would hear about yourself . john q. &apos;s walker shows how video footage can be analyzed on the exact anschläge and pedalbewegungen to abzuspielen them on top of computergesteuerten wings .
well , since then we &apos;ve seen a time of extraordinary economic aufschwungs , the longest aufschwung in the history of this country .
but now a few months later , as well politicians , as well , politicians are always going to be in the sauren apple without verziehen the mine without ausdrückte , &quot; as you put , you cannot hide your uncertainty .
now , i didn &apos;t really understand that until i met this guy , a damals , leicht man who was ernährte by tomatensuppe and bügeln for völlig überbewertet .
but interestingly , this also also , a future , where society is abschaut a few kniffe from capitalism , which is how to put the dna unaufhörlich innovation into society , try to try and then the ones that work , ausbaut and normiert .
i want to show you a fascinating new hypothesis and some surprising new insights that i &apos;ve been working on , about the relationship between the structure of the language that they talk about , and their tendency to save .
and if i want to talk right , it forces me to make me think about it all over time .
well , this is a phantasievolle theory .
so you can push this device out of this device , so you can actually measure your dominanten hand so i can measure your greifkraft .
it &apos;s the present pleasure in the tausch of future pain .
i don &apos;t have to tell you how important the skill is to communicate across generations .
we english english teachers constantly off .
but i &apos;m against it , as a hürde .
but they didn &apos;t get the results they wanted .
at the same time i was in the field of wettermodifikation , even though i was a doktortitel in aeronautik .
people and bisamratten and the giraffen and birds and everything , the red line here are up , these are humans , livestock and pets .
we focused more on serious energieprobleme of the future and produced products for the company .
let &apos;s take a look at the next video .
it flew last night at the party , and -- you can see how it just herumfliegt , and you can get any ausspionieren you want to do .
and he was a unzufrieden about how people praktizierten the buddhist religion in india .
and he comes back to the village as a gebrochener man .
and he &apos;s got to close his eyes , it &apos;s so disgusting , the gestank and everything .
the animals are in one of their lives . people are people .
we &apos;re going to make us . we take the sense of memory , a mother and a long wide of all of this in the meditation in this meditation .
and you think about how lieblich are things that are when you &apos;re happy if you &apos;re happy .
and of course , they are cruel and skrupellos to others .
though the change in your attitude is made something for other beings , and you feel that new quality of you , and it helps you and serve them as a role model .
so the coffee cup , or the cup of the handle , is using a society of the society for the public health .
interestingly , the complexity is very high .
we &apos;ve heard about bill gates .
so it &apos;s very , very simple , if you know how to read it .
well , let me close with four generellen , one example and two .
and i don &apos;t want to stop it with detail , but in the lower right corner , you can see an example of what we have for this .
do you have started to do that ?
and this is what &apos;s happening to the things that jimmy talked about , what the new way of organization is , or better , how do we organize ourselves without organizations ?
the inventor of things will always be able to be able to be able to be in the use of zusammenarbeit , working with the anwendern .
so , for example , we have astronomy , which is what yochai mentioned .
it &apos;s going to be ausgiebige , professional arguments .
so there &apos;s not going to be an argument of two camps , but between these camps , there are all sorts of interesting positions that are taking out of people .
that costs about 100 dollars .
and then people started to spend their brote , and actually a team then managed to do it between new zealand and spain .
and the first thing i thought was to thank him for it .
but the truth is , that life is taking place right here .
so people call up and they have the news like this .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m like batman , to real my anonymity . &quot;
and the one that didn &apos;t have any of the data , so it turned out that she was just moved into a different town and accepted a new job .
and in the last 35 years , i studied human behavior based on everything , of genes , starting from genes , dopamine and ähnlichem , to the zielanalyse .
some of you have it . and it &apos;s dependent on gender .
this was one of these cases , because she had no violence under their ancestor , but in my father .
they &apos;re like one another way that they can be .
by the way , i received an email that i &apos;ve got an email that i have today is that we have the last part of atlas .
and these guys are the weak force , which may be known .
so if you want to know why the sky is blue , or why it &apos;s the atomkerne of the heart , you should be able to do it with a computer computer -- why dna has the shape that you once have .
the comparison is that people in this room are the higgs particles .
but it &apos;s really , that with this theory of the physical theory , the physical physics can seem to be able to unite the big bang at the moment , a perfectly wonderful prediction . the model is not made by the goal that this happens , but it seems to be doing it .
they created this civilization , this beautiful image , turning the darkness into light and allow it to see the civilization of all of the space .
another great insight came from a study of the wayne state university in 2010 , the baseball cards of the major player player from the fünfziger .
in a similar study in germany , researchers are using fmri bildgebungs-technologie to measure gerhirnaktivität , and after they had gespritzt botox on the face to stop smiling .
&quot; because the colors that they ordered , not the european standard , &quot; he said .
&quot; safe ? why ? have a more police officers in the world ? &quot;
we built the bright empfangshalle , people who were people , people , of course , to think that they were going to abroad , when they were eintraten to make their cause .
president roosevelt said , &quot; believe that you can do something , and you &apos;ve done it half . &quot;
all across the ground , entrepreneurs came together and offered for mobile phone stations for mobile phones .
a visualization for the most powerful power of technology is going to find in kibera .
by 2015 , there will be three billion of the smartphone in the world .
in the shops of the environment , they were taschenlampen , batteries and bread .
and this flow of the time is embedded in everything : in the erosion of a sandkorns , in the knospe , who erblüht the rose .
you read an interview with a writer ?
and also , as i look at the great bear , i remember as a child , i remember , i don &apos;t get to get his shoulders on his shoulders , and i feel like this child .
we &apos;ve always seen how creative technology can be and in our lives and our do we can choose those solutions , innovations and moments , which doesn &apos;t zersplittern the flow of the period , but making it again .
my mother was a engländerin .
in every single refugee refugee , they had to be soldiers who had to take the older brother mark , who was nine , take a child child .
and i should do it alone .
take something you want to have , out of the suitcase .
and i ended up in einzelhaft because i don &apos;t feel my feelings .
thank you .
almost everything life on earth is about five thousand miles .
svante paabo has the answer .
why should it play a role ?
so , in theory , we can grow any organ from any cell .
here &apos;s the increase in less than 10 years .
here &apos;s the conclusion .
if the rotoren turn around the same speed , the robot will turn .
and you can see how robust is the control .
and he does that while he hindernissen obstacles .
you &apos;re taking your neighbor .
this shows that we double the roboterkraft , verdreifachen , vervierfachen , where we can get them to create teams , as you can see here .
but the robot can also figure out where he wants to go .
i can feel that . but there &apos;s so much so much , and i want to expand here to the horizon opening the mind and change your vision of honeybees .
this has been a huge problem since many years since the late &apos; 80s , with the appear of the varroamilbe that many different viruses , bacteria and pilzkrankheiten with themselves .
they don &apos;t experience this .
the local &apos;s food for their dishes , and the honey -- there are live-veranstaltungen -- they use the honey to their bars .
the bee dies . honeybees are dying when they stick , so they didn &apos;t want to do it .
okay , now , it &apos;s really the question : why is this ?
of course , we have it , especially in the last decade , to the world with a dense chain of supermärkten , with a chain of global trade .
and never before , so many people were not aware of that fact .
in fact , many of you don &apos;t know that our bread , of course , is not a european invention .
and especially the fleischkonsum in südost-asien and china drives the getreide-preis .
agrarwissenschaft has been for most people , and here &apos;s not many farmers among them to be a reputation , bad to make the environment , to be in great scale , to destroy the environment .
everything is on .
and so while i finished my bread , and i &apos;ve got it gebacken , and i try to burn my hands .
and also , it has to be able to make a long time to make available tools to repair materials and kenntnissen .
you take someone like me , a scientist , analyzed and testing and developed a new technology , and i &apos;m sure you &apos;re going to be the quantitative leistungssteigerung .
because i hope you &apos;re going to take this from here today , a new connection with nature .
this was a couple of days ago .
and what do we do ? what is our answer ?
this is from last year .
but poolan devi was one of them . and shekhar shekhar , she turned a film about her , bandit queen , who should see them .
but i think the most important thing is that we can do it .
but it &apos;s actually grubenottern .
this is a repräsentativer patient who was in the old age of 73 -- he needed to take a place , but he decided to take this .
i like this slide because you can talk about what people really motivated to change , and what &apos;s not .
if you eat a fettreiche meal , how do you feel ?
it &apos;s a halbwahrheit , even more fat , even more fat because even more simple , so the percentage is lower , but the actual number of the size is that the goal is to reduce both .
one of the atkins-zentrum gesponserten studies found that 70 percent of the people were verstopft , 65 percent of people had bad breath , 54 percent had headaches -- that &apos;s not a healthy diet .
on the other side , everything is a intimacy of intimacy , heilkräftig .
i hope he doesn &apos;t stay on that .
the film is based on a kurzgeschichte of f. scott fitzgerald .
two filmstudios were involved in the project : warner brothers and paramount .
and we had enough passion to make the arbeitsverfahren and technology .
so we &apos;re so verabschiedeten that we &apos;re moving from motion .
the number seemed to be infinity .
and this is the data we get it , and then it &apos;s used for the model .
and so the finished picture was used in the movie .
this was a very , very , very early rehearsal .
and we found this , in the middle of the state .
and it has a telefonzelle .
people are going to overcome these grausame , barbarische past that they lived in their lives for their lives .
we were too viert -- two beduinen as a driver -- and imagine that this is a ocean from sand , 40 degrees c , a water bottle .
i think that camel is the most designte animal in the world . &quot;
and they use them as much as we see our zweiäugiges .
we weigh our animals .
so i &apos;m going to show you another movie .
i don &apos;t schwitze until my body temperature überschreitet 40 degrees c -- enough to be a ei .
ricky , thank you for inviting me .
they start a meeting with a poem . that would be an idea .
but how would it like you , if you never knew how you &apos;re living the world , your shoulders in the clouds , or if you sit down there , sitting down the outside of the tapete , surrounded by your little plastikgesicht ?
who could sleep in this night ?
but you know that judy garland in her old 150,000 dollars a film would get that jeanne d d d the french army for victory , and he had blaise pascal to aufgeräumt his room -- no , i mean he invented the calculator ?
at the end , they sat in a tree and a streckt hand out of the other .
and the human moralgefühl is more than that , but you would remove those two columns , probably probably a lot of left .
and we also have the problem with elephants the problem , that you can &apos;t build construction that would be hard for one elephant .
one component is understanding . this is a standard-definition : &quot; the ability to understand the feelings of others and share . &quot;
so now we &apos;re looking for more complex expressions . here &apos;s a relief .
the test is not good for you .
there &apos;s a very simple task that you have to do .
a philosopher , even though , was that it was impossible that the monkeys had a sense of fairness , because the fairness was invented in the french revolution .
now , it &apos;s not a einsamer crazy , it &apos;s not two mad , three is a lot and a lot of power .
i spent the last decade i spent pain and my own , hopefully for a good thing , the selbstvervollkommnung .
and i have to say , god is thank .
so i stopped , in a way , it was a success .
over the years , the serious kreislaufbeschwerden can cause the serious .
a.j. jacobs : how the healthy life of life , i &apos;m almost a umbrachte of life .
and i think that many wissenschaftlerinnen share this view .
one really cool thing .
now these studies are scientifically and they were reproduziert , but they &apos;re not all the story .
ask about the part of the story that doesn &apos;t tell you .
... a priest ?
last one , the last group , which believes that the indus people are now seien the ancestors of people today .
right to the left , like many ? okay .
it can be useful in the entzifferung to produce more data , which is then analysierbar .
this sign is the most common one of the indus script , and only in this text is doppelt .
it turns out that it &apos;s been in india for a long time , on the basis of sternbildern sternbildern at the moment of birth .
space , we all know what it looks like .
this wire übertrug the telefonsignale that would make the name of bell .
and the other thing , the historical discovery had made the historical discovery that the same way of things can be able to make it as lichtwellen as well .
actually all the young people in the city .
someone who &apos;s sitting next to you -- that &apos;s okay , you know , you know , you &apos;re going to sit in a veranstaltungssaal , but you would be so close to you next to you , you would be austicken .
the dalai lama always always says -- he says , if you can get the idea of the mitfühlens , it &apos;s because you realize that you and your pain and your pleasure end up a small playground for your own intelligence .
but you can take this wonderful thing that chiho showed us , and she &apos;s afraid of a lava-mann .
a man in front of a tank became a painting that became a symbol of the resistance .
but what would you have not been able to do anything if you had modern communications to make a sense that against the wrong that was going on , instantly had to be done something about it ?
combine the power of a global ethic with power of our ability to communicate on global space and organizing global challenges , which are now bevorstehen and the most global nature .
in the museum of the children in rwanda , there &apos;s a picture of a zehnjährigen boy -- and the museum of the children of the children who were left , as in the course of the child of rwanda , a million people died .
here &apos;s the task : help me build a dynamisches , parameterisiertes kontaktmodell in 3d .
they can go on very different untergründen -- they can vary in the kontaktwahrscheinlichkeit , the movement of the surface and the gegebenen .
this is the treibende algae .
boy : stachelig .
slow down to see the spines in action .
mark cutkosky at stanford , one of my partner , is an extraordinary engineer who developed a technique called shape deposition , where he could einbetten claws into an artificial foot .
they &apos;re almost like aliens , and the secret to what they stick is their haarigen toes .
here we move the band-aid .
these filigranen structures allow the spines , polstern and the hafthärchen , to capture very herausfordernden , hard surfaces .
so , bartenwale long beautiful songs , as a paarungsrufe , and males also can enable each other to find each other and to vote a mate .
so if dolphins are less than 20 meters apart , they have to have less than half of the time that they are doing .
if we think about marine marine animals , as dolphins , we need to be the consequences of our interventions that we thought we were right .
and after the mauerfall , the marine marine the marine marine have made these systems available to these systems to experience what the scientists could hear .
they only hear the low frequencies .
if males and females use this signal to find a partner and they &apos;re scattered , imagine what the implications of the species of species have species had .
and how ships can be made geräuscharmer , they found that with a better durchdachten propellerentwurf of that noise , it can reduce 90 percent .
they &apos;re verringerten the speed at 50 percent .
we &apos;re looking at foreign worlds , we see alien sonnensysteme , 300 people , and it &apos;s going to be more and more and they &apos;re not like us .
you have all the possibilities available .
we &apos;re watching a continuous increase in the men .
and obviously , there &apos;s one that &apos;s a hundred .
with initiatives like this $ 100 laptop , it kräuselt me to think that we can introduce a whole new generation of people in the old maus-windows-klick computer .
thank you .
i think nothing about this is the problem .
our daily lives is , but , gelinde , in a extraordinary condition , we say in a ausnahmezustand .
normally it &apos;s one or two a year .
and there are them .
but we &apos;re much more .
part of the challenge was to try and verstehen. rhythm and space , not just my hands -- juggling is a lot of handorientiert -- but the rhythm of my body and the feet , and the balls with my feet .
and then they &apos;re mad .
ok , because you don &apos;t understand what a fünf-ball-muster is , i &apos;ll give you a little bit of a clue .
now , and -- finger , finger , finger , finger , finger , finger , finger . open .
they have someone who &apos;s up here , which is the operative principle of all of this whole life , ok ?
puff -- and then it gets to quiet . just a little number over time .
in space and straight in the room , in the room .
and then niveaus .
this year -- if you could show the slides -- in this year , we &apos;re wearing the treo with us , a project that we helped have in the design for the design .
we can call this on a touchscreen-monitor , which is possible to put more information on the kleidungsstücke , while you &apos;re going to be these anprobiert .
but scott adams : i noticed i &apos;m going to be the leading expert in the arbeitsplatzdesign .
and we also spend a new product tonight tonight . it &apos;s the first time it &apos;s shown in the public .
now , the farmers can only harvest in the season , and not in the nebensaison harvest .
electrons are disappearing in a kind of wuselei , and then there &apos;s still energy , and energy can &apos;t see .
that &apos;s what he thought he was for .
potatoes , potatoes have 48 chromosomes . did they know ?
well , atoms , you can &apos;t see them .
and someone said to him , &quot; well , what is the point of this , heinrich ?
we &apos;ve been going to have been gegrübelt for about four years .
when google is digitized a book , it put it into a very nice form .
i &apos;ll give you an example .
suddenly , in the middle of the 40s , everyone was excited .
but imagine that no one will be interested in .
but also a lot of the right right now that seems to have been from propaganda .
if you meet the zeh , it means &quot; argh &quot; with a a.
if i make this pink sound for a few minutes , you would literally stop hearing it .
a lot of people are going to run through , but these are all these , public spaces like this , shared klanglandschaften , into millions of tiny personal klangblasen .
you can also do this in a beautiful place , like a lake .
and finally , an akronym .
and i said , &quot; that &apos;s my job . &quot;
thank you for you here . we &apos;re all so grateful . &quot;
and they went away .
because they weren &apos;t on the front of the gehweg and couldn &apos;t see the exchange between me and my crowd , an exchange that we would tell us , but alien them .
now , i &apos;ll say , in the weltveränderungsgeschäft , there was a lot of competition for the last year , because the arab spring is still going out , the eurozone is kollabiert ... what ?
this photo was actually aufgeklebt in a police station , and on the floor , you see the personalausweise of the people being verfolgt by the police .
the kids just took pictures in a class , the teacher gets them , they &apos;re plakatieren them on the schulmauern .
in the talk today , it &apos;s about the brain , and , in the way , it &apos;s a gehirnfan .
this is something that we can work in our lifetime , i believed i could make a difference , and i was trying to figure out out of the computergeschäft that i was coming into the gehirngeschäft .
but sometimes science has some other characteristics that really really interesting them .
what do we bring more data ?
there &apos;s something we think we think is obvious , but wrong .
it &apos;s that intelligence is defined by prediction .
but we don &apos;t think of the animal as a very intelligent , not in a human way .
in humans , we &apos;ve developed the frontalen part of the neocortexes with the name of the neocortex part of the neocortex , and nature has done this little trick .
it &apos;s not that you &apos;re looking at it and say , &quot; what &apos;s i see ?
not like a computerspeicher . not in the least like a computerspeicher .
these are the things that are coming first .
we need a little bit , we need a military , but only to defense .
you can see it on your gewandt . &quot;
she traveled , because they were the zeit of the elections outside the country .
this is rigoberta menchu .
and then when she closed the door , she said , &quot; no , no , no , no .
you wash this : by hand .
this group is consumed three , everybody .
it &apos;s real .
she has managed to learn english and learn this as a foreign language .
the computer already , and it &apos;s in one of three participants .
if you think , you think differently than the u.s. health workers , actually , was part of our experimentes , because exactly that &apos;s what we did .
we went through the experiment with the same groups , but we would put a delay between the enlightenment about how we deal with the data , and the actual beginning of the fragebogens .
the price of this is the kind of vertreibung of paradise .
and they moved and they were going to go to each other and they were opening their arms up and abwandern .
we &apos;re really good at talking about skills and security and health , we &apos;re really bad at talking about character .
then you ask a personal coach , the cialis like pfefferminz for bad breath in hineinstopfen .
i don &apos;t really feel the feeling about emotions .
the first gift , or talent , is gedankeneinsicht -- the ability to look at the head of other people and figure out what they offer .
they have epistemologische humility .
that &apos;s what the unconscious sehnt for .
we found it between bahngleisen , raped by many , many men , i don &apos;t know how many .
where does your journey begin ?
and it &apos;s not normal to live in a home .
what was my challenge ?
you need your empathy .
ag : the process of dictionaries .
now , first of all , i blame the queen , because it &apos;s funny .
online dictionaries must be different .
the bad words -- look at a place , and then it doesn &apos;t find it on the map , then he thinks , &quot; this card sucks ! &quot;
you think , &quot; ok , if we think that words are tools that we use to give our thoughts , how should you know that the schraubenzieher are better than hammer ?
the oed has 33 verschiedene different nummerierte definitions for the set .
and then there &apos;s this mike oates . mike oates lives in britain .
i have the dictionary of the whole time , &quot; the dictionary , the dictionary , the dictionary , the dictionary &quot; was said .
so , i &apos;m going to get a chair .
and to make a long story short , i &apos;ve landed here .
and so , play for play , during this three days , you start to understand , why do i hear all this stuff like this ?
you may be from a ted speaker , and so we can take the conversation on the year , and come back next year , after the same intellectual and emotional journey .
the manufacturers of the trägerphasentechnik have not put the trägerphasentechnik in their cheap gps-chips , because they &apos;re not sure what the public would start with a kind of präzisen ortung , which could even fold the fold on the palm .
and you were , you know , if it was already belästigung , and it wasn &apos;t actually a able to find the channel .
instead of stören the gps-signale , you can &apos;t help them .
and , &quot; you can trust . &quot;
we call ourselves pors &amp; amp ; rao and we live in india .
this is a video of the prototype .
this is a karikatur of a umgedrehten person .
we &apos;re talking about the case , &quot; what the world needs now , is nuclear , right ? &quot; right ?
and so far , there are only three hauptquellen of this -- coal and gas , water , which is almost all over the place -- and nuclear power .
we &apos;ve been going to have the russian nuclear bomb off by turning into electricity .
co2e emissions are the equivalent emissions of all greenhouse gases and particles that cause warming and turned into co2 .
now , if you look at the fact that the nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear power is , for example , that india and pakistan developed nuclear weapons through urananreicherung in atomenergieanlagen .
for wind , the area is much larger , but the standfläche is smaller .
the reality is that 21 states have nuclear , right ?
and in the senate of the united states , we need to help both parties -- just one or two voices are necessary to be in the senate , and this room can help .
we &apos;re not going to get enough energy from renewables .
i used to make it a factor of the 10 years old .
thank you .
this was -- my motivation was being apollo .
for the first time , we have enough wealth in the hands of some people , and the available technology that will allow us to allow us to exploration space .
26 groups out of seven countries took the competition , each one was in between one and 25 million dollars .
orbitalflüge -- we can take them to the space station .
and the advantage for the donors is the sum of the social and social security .
would you be surprised to us ?
that means that surfaces can cut themselves . they can be incredibly small .
and a challenge was , how we could express these new algorithmische order to put it into a column .
what i didn &apos;t know at the time was because we just saw the outside , the surfaces was moving on , within the column , and that was quite surprising discovery .
inspired by the process of zellteilung , michael hansmeyer algorithms , which produce incredible , amazing forms of millions of surfaces , no human could design them by hand , but you can build them , and they could revolutionize our understanding of architecture .
so , let &apos;s see this picture here -- a lot of forms dance here for them .
it &apos;s a very rare condition .
this is a drug that has been developed for cancer .
you can see , the chip actually ahmt the atembewegung .
it &apos;s a very young nation that led by young people .
and i think many people here in the room , many of them are in the same position as i .
so i think women are going to become leaders in our society because they realize that it &apos;s really important for their future generations , is very important to sustain our cultural identities .
we &apos;ve realized that recently , more people , as a result , use more people like youtube and social networks to give their stories , and to show their photos and tell their own stories with their own voices .
we also invite them to be able to get it to explore and explore our part of the world .
i was not seen less or less than nothing .
so i thought , &quot; maybe if i do these ants a few apartments , they &apos;re going to move there . &quot;
this was called &quot; huf . &quot;
so i thought , &quot; how can i do that ? &quot;
and when i finished it , i came back to the next day .
and it was ...
my work , roughly estimated , sometimes five , six or seven weeks ; you can &apos;t always see that .
and i bog it around , and i think of it , and i think of it .
so i broke up the needle .
it &apos;s a very mühsame work , but the best things come in small paketen .
they expect their employees to do what they asked for , if they did the task , they can do more .
there is this absolute concentration of being , that absolute awareness of consciousness , consciousness , an absolute central center of compassion and love the primary properties of the divine .
my gebeutelter body flew into one direction , my geschundenes wheel in the other .
i put myself all the spaziergänge that i probably wouldn &apos;t do with you , the kunstprojekte i wouldn &apos;t have to take away , the friends i don &apos;t look at , the brautgänge i don &apos;t want to go with them .
because you don &apos;t need the sich-kennenlernen-sitzung .
and if you turn you from the back , against the wind , you can just over the umkippen , and it &apos;s going to make it plums . &quot;
20 years ago , the physicians had cut my leg and hoped , and there was a 15 of the prozentiege of survival .
i was more unmenschlich by more and more and more than i was in my life , and i was probably 14 pounds of lighter than i &apos;m now .
and no one verkörpert these modern mannhaftigkeit in my view than david black .
walking upright , you &apos;re going to say , is the threshold of what makes us human .
he &apos;s the president of international union for gliederrettung , which is the least euphemistische name i &apos;ve ever heard .
he was born for a three months and he was born , and it was really a fantastic überlebenskampf of him .
so once i tried to get the piano to the piano , i was kräftig kräftig .
and at the end , you were so fast that things like &quot; flight &quot; were no problem , right ?
do you want to hear me ?
dp : &quot; tiger rag . &quot;
i don &apos;t kapiere that .
they &apos;re fighting their own lifestyle in this forest in a world that &apos;s still clean , a world that &apos;s not yet yet , in a world that &apos;s not verschmutzt .
so we know that they are capable of doing performance that the research has absolutely impossible to have thought .
the long loving connection for mother who developed during this long childhood , and also , for the siblings , can keep life long , and that can be to 60 years .
it &apos;s not sustainable , and also the huge lager of the forest in the forest are now going to have meat , and so the pygmäen that are in the kongobecken , and there &apos;s been verdorben in their wonderful lives so many years .
yesterday , that guy said .
we &apos;re now in every state , and the problems in florida are different than the ones in new york .
do you come and zerren me down here ?
there &apos;s the politicians out there ?
what we want to do in the lab is pretty much the same , but with a few dozen of different kinds of molecules -- such a drastische reduction in complexity , but yet , trying to create something more lebensechtes .
it &apos;s actually very lebenslos . once you &apos;re forming , it doesn &apos;t really do something .
now , now , now , where you are all the experts on protocells , we &apos;re playing with these protocells .
and we &apos;re seeing the selbst-anordnung of these bodies of öltröpfchen that we &apos;ve seen before , and the black dots of it represent this black mud -- these facettenreichen , very complex , organic black mud .
in his lab , martin hanzcyz , experimentelle , kleckse kleckse of chemicals that behave like living cells , and his work shows how life might be first done first , and perhaps elsewhere .
this is a kaulquappen-gehwagen kaulquappen-gehwagen to take your tadpole out for the night .
what is this -- where did you know ? you &apos;ve taken it .
but if we were doing this at each one every time , every fire we could , we could redefine the case .
now , the dreck that otherwise , in her beautiful pink lungs , is going to be brought to it .
the birds could jump from one to the other .
you can tell you the news of it . you can talk to him .
but to keep this herd is going to ask a huge toll on our planet .
we &apos;re going to be isolieren the skin cells and multiply it in a zellkulturträger .
we &apos;ve been working for thousands of years of zellstrukturen , starting with products like wine , beer and joghurt .
it &apos;s true that when we &apos;re doing the world &apos;s ueberall around the world , we see that there is almost a universal pursuit of people to own a car .
so let me talk about the first hydrogen .
this is a huge amount of energy , creating mobile energy .
if we can see this moegliche future , it can also be the other .
you had to survive .
and we certainly made our school district to be able to get funding and support support .
because why should our students go away from their lives ?
it became a book , then a performance .
there was an incredible idea , a crazy idea .
this is the west coast , zerstört their forest .
but in this picture , you see how we started building the ausbildungszentrum that was going to be a big umweltzentrum of brazil .
when i was , i think , when i started my hauptstudium , i studied the new enstandene subject of the landschaftsökologie .
if you look down in the south of manhattans , you can see the expansion of new york city , as it was once , at the end of the american revolution .
the white surfaces on this map are the most remote protected place .
or the moorschildkröte , the feuchte , wiesen , benötigt insects and sonnige places .
maybe a wald-klapperschlange was there .
there &apos;s so much force in between science and visualization to combine that kind of images , it &apos;s like both sides of the spiegels .
and we have a really dramatic level of a really dramatic level of that in our society .
so i don &apos;t have to go into it .
you can make it the unberührt , which is to remain .
this is a biomorphes building .
one example we all know is that the cell phones .
and it turns all around this question , of course , in a very artistic and indirekte way .
but it &apos;s happening everywhere , and these tools are parts of those helping us to make it .
seriously , clap , you &apos;re quiet -- that &apos;s really great .
alex steffen : a sustainable future of the future
you could think that this could be a big problem for a law , but congress doesn &apos;t seem to be very stören .
but if you &apos;re building a lot of qualitativ and selling them , it &apos;s not okay .
some of the things we share is we made things we &apos;ve found , and every single option is the entsetzen of the entsetzen in this industry .
that &apos;s the simple thing .
i had a very elitäre , versnobte , expensive education in india , and it &apos;s almost broken me .
and i thought i &apos;d start a barefoot college -- college just for the poor .
one is a professional one is a combination of authority , confidence and belief .
when i said that , they said , &quot; show us what &apos;s possible . what do you do ?
the whole electricity comes from the sun .
democracy , bürgerrecht , how to miss the land , what you should do if you &apos;re arrested what you should do if you &apos;re sick in the case of an animal .
and there &apos;s a tension in the middle , and the presence in the schools , it comes between teachers and parents , so the puppets can call the teacher and parents call the village and say , &quot; give hands .
you use sign sign .
i said , &quot; i can &apos;t , mr. president .
a erfolgsstory .
and our ingenieurskollegen create one of the largest , dynamically , dynamically computer computer in the world for this kind of informations-erkundung .
you can see the elektronenfluss along the stromlinien , which we have created as an artist for scientists .
thank you very much .
interestingly , there &apos;s data from these two groups of people , data about how happy they are .
&quot; i &apos;m going to be on my physical , financially , emotional , mentally , and in almost every other way , so much , &quot; i don &apos;t have a minute .
he didn &apos;t tell him the money , and of course , ray croc , six months later , had the same idea .
in this case , because they &apos;re going to be used by the experiment that i have been told you about to be a report , drucke from monets images .
we raised our materials , went out of the room and waiting half an hour .
i &apos;ll show you why .
they made two pictures , and now two beautiful 8x10 , &quot; glänzende abzüge , for them for the big things , and we said , &quot; what would you be ? &quot;
we take a completely new group of naiven harvard-studenten and say , &quot; you know , we give a fotokurs , and we can do it in two different ways .
nachtaufnahmen , the big car and the milchstrasse durchfliegen are beautiful .
voices : it flies in the air . oh shit .
&quot; ma , don &apos;t get it ! &quot;
don &apos;t forget that this tradition is not from the nebeln of avalon , but it goes back to a time before we zeichneten stories on papyrus ritzten or piktogramme on feuchte höhlenwände .
the kind of food , yeah .
the ones with the gewellten roof , you know .
and so we had my father left his mittagsschlaf , because i knew he would kill me if i left them alone , so we get into the car .
&quot; and had this guy , about a blue uniform and a entsetzten expression in the face ? &quot;
i really want to get in there ? because if i don &apos;t have a ariadnes string to ankern me -- enough metaphor for your taste ? — it might be that i never come out again .
you see ? we &apos;re a secret nuclear club to a secret händedruck .
she says , &quot; ma , you have to look ! &quot;
&quot; i agree for little , old lady , damn it . &quot;
she &apos;s up from the car . &quot;
i really fear the big fear .
so what is the social result ?
where can i go today and who are with whom ?
and if we have it , we will decide how many kilometers we drive in what kind of reisemodus where we live and work .
so smart terminals communicate at the station , and they &apos;re looking at where your bus is just going on , and when it comes , and you can buy their tickets in real time .
i want us to launch the wireless verflochtene interstate-system , and i urge that network to be open with open standards for everyone .
and they came in the late 60s .
and for all of you who had a mental illness , you know , you know what a challenge that can be .
i said i wanted to tell the fantastisch-geschichte , i wanted to share with you three a , and i wanted to leave you with a abschlussgedanken .
because they all were three years old .
so what i love about this story is that , in fact , that is a genuine person is just an authentic person , and that &apos;s why authenticity is about authenticity .
i ate oliven with torte . &quot;
you can sleep in clean laken .
j it &apos;s so many that the problem has gotten a problem .
and i found it weird to be about this , as if it was a competition , about a kind of fresh wound .
it &apos;s a commodity that is largely a white , rich unternehmergruppe , which was not a repräsentativ for the city .
it looks pretty simple , but it was a halbe-million-dollar-projekt .
people are staunten over two things -- they were amazed about the destruction , but there was also a sense of the unglaubens about the heldenmut of the new yorker that i found very emotional .
because if you look at the four platforms along the grundstücks -- where you had the improved version of a familienplattform -- we knew that it had to be beweglich to respond to a ändernde definition of ground zero .
we have the possibility of überdenken our thinking about cities .
dr : i was a privilege .
and i know children suffer from the year .
if -- god forbid -- someone from us here and a concussion erlitte , most of us would be completely genesen by a couple of hours to a couple of hours to a couple of weeks .
you have to be familiar with the problems that we &apos;re talking about today .
and it turns out , tom saw that a helmet for 20 dollars was a good way to preserve a 100,000 dollar-studium .
it &apos;s not true , but it &apos;s tony blair in 2005 in 2005 , when his doodles , of course , &quot; have been described , &quot; and he was described .
in other words , they have a common and growing complexity of visual language that happens in vorhersehbarer sequence .
he was told that there was no cure .
today , all countries are willing to offer patents to drugs that have been at least 20 years .
it depends on the bereitwilligkeit of the world &apos;s companies to go out and make their patents available for others .
in the orlando , the same kind of stage , a open-air-stadium , and people sat in the sun , and the afternoon in high school , and they didn &apos;t feel like that .
you can adapt everything to make it feel for your well-being .
he offers all these services , überweisungen , tickets and so little things that you do right online , but for people who are connecting to the digital world .
the question was , &quot; how do you make this teacher out of this teacher ?
let &apos;s see what he &apos;s doing here .
and the husband of daughter , he was also sick by the erschöpfung of his wife .
but the visual complexity is still very large .
now , schlagzeilentexter had a heidenspass on our studies .
well , if we feel emotion , we show them .
and you could get the impression that the unhappy people can occupy a different structural position within the network .
that &apos;s my sozialerfahrung . &quot;
they &apos;re both of carbon , and yet one of both kohlenstoff-atome in the left , on the left , and they get graphit , which is soft and dark .
to make this happen , let me take a moment of something .
older , eventually , is not easy .
under the same circumstances , older people are richten their cognitive resources , like aufmersamkeit and memory , more positive information than negative information .
we cost the life .
and they &apos;d let me wish , &quot; tonight i &apos;m going to perform this moonwalk for this girl in this bar . &quot;
kid david : it &apos;s so that i , frankly , i don &apos;t really know that the most important , what happens when i dance .
they called me brother and uncle and i &apos;ve been invited me over a period of five years .
1868 : the second treaty of fort treaty is clear to make the u.n. of the great sioux nation and the besitzrechte of the lakota across the holy black hills .
the treaty of fort laramie was called at least three quarter of the stamms sign to be abzutreten .
they were tired of the contracts .
the lehrerfluktuation is eight times higher than the u.s. average .
so what is it ?
and today , child mortality have dropped to the last year that &apos;s been 6,5 percent since 1960 .
you either get it as a pill or a syringe . you have to take it every day to regulate the blutzuckerspiegel .
if we have to do it , like this , with people .
but it basically makes a lot of meaning .
it &apos;s called , are you smarter than a fünftklässler ? &quot;
bmw is a very secure car .
the problem for bmw is , that car looks safe .
now you &apos;re going to think , &quot; if my life depends on it , of course i would use it every day . &quot;
we need to connect this with a scientific method .
this is something else that &apos;s actually a effective ad campaign .
what &apos;s nothing new .
the lights will be dark .
we are doing them for our clients .
we have the sun in the sun .
now , logic , logical , is what &apos;s considered to be , now , from that position to get into the here -- without moving the wrist .
i &apos;m going to intervene now . if every time you have a different person -- not always could respond .
so , if you &apos;re interested in this , i &apos;m going to present some of the untergrund-techniken .
here , i have to look at the beginning of my cards during the mischvorgangs -- oh , we should have started together -- no problem , no problem .
yeah ?
i think ...
lg : pardon ?
what card is i use ? the lady , or the five ?
lg : but you can see the hand .
wait right now , wait a card .
another color : lg : diamonds , perfect .
compassion .
karo-ass , yes ? zoe : yeah .
here -- all the cards are verdeckt -- here -- all the cards are covered -- is that you right ?
and finally , the king -- in exactly ... five seconds .
some of them seem to know this child .
after i was back , i made my whole company to a ein-pobacken-firma . &quot;
if you don &apos;t have a musical music , you might not turn off a gänge car .
let &apos;s see what really happens .
i always say my students , &quot; if you have a trugschluss , you always have a augenbraue , it &apos;s going to recognize everyone . &quot;
imagine the person , and you follow the whole journey from b to e , and they will hear everything that would have to say .
i had an amazing experience . i was 45 , for 20 years , i had a realization .
she came to auschwitz when she was 15 years old , her brother was eight , her parents lost her .
so , ladies and gentlemen , from the jury , look at this .
if you &apos;re the fastest of all today , you get 20 dollars . &quot;
but for tasks of the 21st century , this mechanistische , belohnung-und-strafe-ansatz doesn &apos;t work -- often doesn &apos;t work and often often richtet damage .
think about your own work .
the standard of living is lower .
these are the building blocks of a completely new betriebssystems for our business .
this one day of intense autonomy has led to a whole range of software-fehlerbehebungen that might never have been .
do it because you like to make it .
the aluminium is used by its very easy .
in a series of 55 spheres , you &apos;re going to proportion , in proportion , every sphere and your distances to scale , to the little earth .
and the blue side , the gegenseite , shows the other direction .
this is developed in many durchlläufen years .
the standardbild on the object would probably be a highly aufgelößtes image of the earth .
but it &apos;s always going to let me go back to the 10 percent or more that most benachteiligt or erfolglos .
232.000 dollars and a verein verein dollar .
the nonprofit organizations have to be able to have zurückhalten , courageous , big , to try to try and try to try and be afraid that they &apos;re going to be ruf by the schmutz .
so what should you do ?
the overhead got to .
dan pallotta : our thinking about charity is grundverkehrt
then there was the klatschenden audience , yes , that had been the part of the music .
people who have done these stradivaris , the amatis , all these beautiful instruments .
he says , &quot; i &apos;m responsible .
it &apos;s just about the ausführung of music as it is written , not to take it . &quot;
that &apos;s great . and what about the eyes ?
that &apos;s what he does .
you know , the authority is available to the authority , if it &apos;s needed , it &apos;s very important .
so , kleiber is about the process .
as a kulturgemeinschaft , we tell ourselves a lot of stories about the future and about what steps we could do from here .
there are 98 ölfördernde nations in the world .
and given the climate change , it &apos;s not really durchführbar .
and it &apos;s a process that really makes it joy .
they &apos;re thinking about whether it &apos;s going to push it down .
and the ratspräsident said , &quot; if we don &apos;t have the transition to stroud , we need to invent all of the kommunale infrastructure for the first time . &quot;
but there &apos;s a problem .
the budgets are not really balanced , and to a certain degree , the games that they play to keep that , to keep this , so that you can &apos;t see what the most obvious challenges are .
in fact , there are five states that are worse , and really only four states that are not facing this huge challenge .
and even if you &apos;re in the way , you could get money there .
it should be more like private accounting .
but i had a hintergedanken , when i visited gottfried schlaug , and i was in a scheideweg in my life , and i tried to decide between music and medicine .
if you laugh , you know .
a lot of years after the solar system , a young lady i knew , that sex might be so good for the five senses .
in the same part of the day , in good sex , all five senses are at an extreme level .
of course , the five senses is not the only thing that makes life interesting .
we are all born as artists .
if you have a conversation , the child must come up with the next answer to verantworten what it started .
but their parents tell them , &quot; it &apos;s going to be weggespült by the waves . &quot;
but kids normally do art for fun . it &apos;s playing .
but you rarely find a teacher .
in karaoke-bars , there &apos;s always people who sing &quot; she &apos;s gone &quot; or &quot; hotel &quot; in &quot; hotel &quot; while they mimic gitarren-riffs .
in this minute , we can switch off the television . and they turn out from the internet , stand up and start to do something .
the students dropped into a kind of trance .
he said it was his profile . &quot; and what are they ? &quot; i asked . &quot; actor , &quot; he said .
let &apos;s start with the point i came .
it will give stronger storms and greater überflutungen .
if you &apos;re , there will be warming in future .
but the delay is just like to have the expectations .
the economic consequences are almost .
a big part of the species will be threatened by extinction .
now , if you &apos;re in a car accident , it &apos;s critical that we &apos;re not only to make the stunt , but the crew .
for this thing , it used to be used for a little bit more used , once it was all that you had .
but today we use a stickstoff-druckkanone .
more is it , a hüpfburg hüpfburg .
in 1960 , joseph kittenger has done something extremely incredible by the united states air force .
one of the difficulty in this altitude , if you go to 10,000 feet -- that &apos;s great , right ? if you go to 10,000 metter , you can actually use oxygen .
they made a puppet for him , right in the same way .
we expect to expect , and we expect to say that maybe the faa or the caa will say , &quot; you need to put somebody in a suit that &apos;s not aufgeblasen , who &apos;s connected to the plane . &quot;
there were three leitmotive -- not true ? -- they moved through the conference , which is important for what i want to talk about .
and the girl replied , &quot; you know it . &quot;
the problem is an artist to be growing up while you &apos;re growing up , and i &apos;m now convinced that we &apos;re not growing into creativity in the creativity , but we &apos;re going to be heraus-unterrichtet .
all over the world .
the whole system was invented -- all over the world , there were no public education system in the 19th century .
the brain is not unterteilt in areas .
they did ballet , they made stepptanz and jazz , they danced modern dance and contemporary dancing .
the festival is going to work very well . with a postitiven press that you would die .
let &apos;s say value for money .
it &apos;s a dubai for me as a hand that wants to get a support of things .
before i go into the middle east , i &apos;d like to leave you as a anregung with a quote from one of the greatest sheiks .
it &apos;s also the krankhaftigkeit .
well , you &apos;re a bit of the behavior , and you &apos;re disorders of the mind .
we don &apos;t have all the facts . we don &apos;t even know what tools that are going to be or what we need to look for in the case for the very position to get there before the other behavior shows .
how are you going to grow it ? &quot;
the three are all the same , although you &apos;re all in the same in different context , one is magical , the other two are the same as i do as i &apos;m doing these books because they have something very special about themselves .
the children taught them .
they were very friendly .
we also believe that the content is important .
i was changed by my children .
howard does this experiment , and when he gets the data , he draws a curve , and suddenly he recognizes that it &apos;s not a beautiful glockenkurve .
this was his meerrettich . he was obsessed with this .
howard doesn &apos;t believe that there are all .
people always say , &quot; well , if you ask them , how you want their coffee . &quot;
mustard with more elegance and culture and meaning .
that &apos;s it . and why did we love this ?
he was eingetauscht a couple of times , and he spent most of his career in the lower ligen , and ended up in management , and he became the general manager of the &quot; oakland a . &quot;
we all know what happened as a million women , over decades of the symptoms of the wechseljahre , had received the symptoms of the wechseljahre , until we found a huge study of national research .
thank you .
but dad &apos;s unheimlich , and he didn &apos;t want us to do that .
but there &apos;s also a middle area between .
these are four really different ways of seeing the world . i named them .
what &apos;s interesting , as you &apos;re ausdruckt -- and -- by the way , this is from 1450 -- all the artifacts of modern comics : rechteckiges feldarrangement einfache einfache strichzeichnungen and a lesesequenz from left to the right .
and this was what i proposed : we might make comics on an infinite canvas : on the x- and the y-axis and in treppenform .
this is from daniel merlin &apos;s goodbrey in the u.k.
maybe all of you have been that long , but for me , so often i met the same thing that difficult i did , i had never seen this verständigung challenge that i never seen before .
this is honest and truly , and the reason that it &apos;s a sustainable impression , that &apos;s what a sustainable impression .
if you think your baby is gay or a lesbisch , you should be allowed to get it to the adoption .
perrys political solution , the citizens of texas , aufzufordern to pray for the rain .
this is called &quot; farther than the sun . &quot;
i want to start a little bit differently tonight about that , because i want you to leave the land and jump into the open ocean .
they were going to come soon after the verschwinden of the dinosaurs , 65 million years ago , when whales had had legs , and they were entstammen of a splittergruppe rebellischer kugelfische that allow me to make these poetische .
and how do you do that ?
the kalifornische seelöwe , when you get into the bay , reißt the fins , turn it into a kind of frisbee , and then you toss it .
i &apos;ll show you the last data .
and i was most exciting that all of their love and their interest in the oceans are in the oceans .
as you can see here , this is a 11-zoll-durchmesser platine .
that &apos;s something you don &apos;t hear every day .
ah- hah .
in australia , it &apos;s mostly the local people sitting in prison .
she told him and he beauftragte the first entersuchung about what we call the aussteuer-tanz .
because no one can get a rücklage .
so why don &apos;t we have something to deal with this problem in everyday ?
auf mahatma gandhi .
could i get my last tonspur ?
never , that &apos;s impossible ! no , no , no , no ! that &apos;s not possible . &quot;
you could deal with the addition .
von neumann , a logiker and a mathematician from the army , they brought everything together . then they needed a space to build them .
and the one thing that was the same thing , and it was actually a fernschreiberband basis .
&quot; huh ! &quot; finally , they found that it was a programmierungsproblem .
i know if i have to be beaten . &quot;
he would let the machine walk all night . if anyone of stephen wolfram reminded that he was invented .
now we &apos;re sitting here 50 years later -- it &apos;s a kind of außer animation .
and sadly , in the next 18 minutes i &apos;m talking about , four americans who are alive now , die of their diet .
that &apos;s a global problem .
traumhafte city .
and he &apos;s got the schnauze full of it . he &apos;s tired of his friends , his family and his community .
they want ... they want to control themselves .
you know that for long , long time , it has remained at that very close understanding .
we don &apos;t teach our children .
and most children get them .
well , supermarkets .
if you can cook , time doesn &apos;t matter .
in america , many wonderful things go before we just look back .
misha glenny : anonymous , ladies and gentlemen -- a clever group of politically motivierter hacker that &apos;s enstanden in the 2011 .
the network is connecting everything and will communicate a lot of human activity .
interestingly , anonymous uses his gehackten information but not for financial profit .
he explained to me , he was in 2003 and 2004 , he went to tour in new york , and 10,000 dollars from the cash cash cash , 30,000 dollars from the cash machines to use using use cards .
he was born in süddeutschland in a stable and respektiere family , his obsession with playing as a teenager led him to the hacking .
and most of the exception from the script and the cha0 , they don &apos;t reveal real social skills in the outside world -- just in the net .
i think there are several reasons . i &apos;m not going to go into the details , but some mention .
but they &apos;re all wired by the market , and what &apos;s the market is driving , number one is the big demographic demographic .
we also found a lot of examples of the dead big boxes that have been transformed to all sorts of social institutions , many schools , many churches , and many libraries , like this .
and i finally expect the streets to be ausgebaut through the neuentwicklung of the mall .
it &apos;s very successful . and it helped to make a help that eight of 13 regional malls in denver plans have umgenutzt to be umgenutzt .
it was überdeckt by the parking lot .
their citizens are different as typical vorstädtisch , but they are less divers than cities .
&quot; his vagina , &quot; she said , &quot; is a whole tageswerk . &quot;
but actually , it didn &apos;t really started there , it started with a conversation with a woman .
it &apos;s a gender , which is a basic resource of the planet , which is women .
it &apos;s a körperwelt , and the way really exists , and i think there &apos;s a real meaning in our bodies -- that this separation has created a division that often makes the cause of the entschluss .
i want to tell this little story about my own beginnings , because that &apos;s a strong thing with happiness , and with agnes .
maybe it &apos;s in my geburtsstaat south carolina , which is not much smaller than today &apos;s ungarn , and once of a future , as a country &apos;s country , dreamed of a country .
well , he was too gutgläubig , because he stayed where he was , long after the following anschluss , through the nazis , and even after the festnahmen and deportationen started in budapest .
and he got the same answer : &quot; bring me the best workers that you can find and if you &apos;re good enough , i &apos;ll ask you . &quot;
and so clearly , it says , &quot; it &apos;s okay . it was all so beautiful .
&quot; huh ! &quot; dr. robicsek said , &quot; i went to the film alone . &quot;
as i said , he &apos;s fluchte too much .
and you can imagine it right .
you know what you &apos;re looking for .
but we take care of the most difficult cases and order the other for the next day .
so we came to these two rules .
so i went to russia , and my mother went with the time of the soviet union .
and if you think it &apos;s not going to go , you &apos;re going to ask it for so long , until you go .
what i want to try to do with this -- i hope to make this point .
and what i &apos;d later to point out in the presentation later is 50 percent of the u.s. in the ocean .
it &apos;s rabenschwarz there because photons can &apos;t reach the average depth of the ocean , which is a 3,66 mile , and the average grabenbruch is at 2,74 miles .
and so we drove along the gebirgszugs into a area next to the galapagosriff , and we found the missing heat .
so i started developing a new videokommunikationstechnologie , with a robotersystem that replaced me , and i don &apos;t have to go into my car .
we find the status of the konservierung .
and i looked at them yesterday , it &apos;s up in seattle . ok .
but i would leave a child without license control control of my tax system .
in some parts of the world , like in south africa , education is just hard to make it .
when we saw the impact of the angebots , andrew and i , we had to expand it to offer the best of people as possible to offer the best possible education .
what was the special thing about these classes ?
the video will be cut all the few minutes and the students will ask a question .
so we wanted to convince some of our colleagues of the sciences that there &apos;s no bad thing that we have to do .
and in terms of certain courses , you can ask what the most common missverständnisse are , and how to help the students to fix them .
we actually see the beginning from either through a personalisierten studienplan or personalisiertes feedback that we showed them .
i thought about my place in the universe , and it was what my first thought was , what infinity means when i was a child .
and in our society , of course , it &apos;s mostly about making the reality of others .
i have my doubt about the value of the newtons science . like , for example , it &apos;s expected to be rational in a wortgefecht .
so you can understand my surprise when i was reading the new yorker , that alan greenspan , vorsitzender of the federal , said , ayn rand was his intelektueller mentor .
i think you can make these fun , they have , and not about the ones that don &apos;t have , and that &apos;s why i don &apos;t have jokes about kenneth lay and his charmante fau .
i &apos;m going to have this old times of the telemarketings , which i &apos;ll tell you .
he said , i had to give him more respect because it can take up to 18 years to become a really good pantomime .
well ? yes ? what ? i &apos;m not able to hear them . &quot;
and i fear that active one doesn &apos;t like us .
i &apos;ve been thinking about moshe safdies thought about beauty that you were talking about yesterday , because he &apos;s going to be in his book , that it can make that happen can make beauty .
george bush : what the defense of security costs , and what the defense of our freedom costs , we need to pay the price . &quot;
ten years ago , no astronomer at the world came out of the world -- well , or very few astronomers , that there are planets outside of our solar system .
many other ecosystems on earth are truly in danger .
he &apos;s constantly schwafelte about that an experiment with a particle can go and do a kettenreaktion that will destroyed the world .
we need to take the same vorsicht with biotechnology that &apos;s in the same way .
and we don &apos;t want to see that .
so what can we do about this ?
and now the worst thing is .
we spend a lot of money on making sure that we don &apos;t die in a flugzeugabsturz , but we don &apos;t give it out of nothing . and yet it &apos;s completely preventable .
we don &apos;t want to get caught on the wrong foot again .
i hope that will .
this is very , very important because this is the system , the schmelztiegel , where life came on the planet , and it &apos;s time for us to understand it .
it &apos;s an amazing insight . and we &apos;ve been just known for the very recently .
and that &apos;s what the system is mitbringt , a number of standorten in the southern hemisphere , in the circles .
everybody who gets to get it out of the database , and it can abrufen the information that &apos;s needed for everything that &apos;s going on .
we &apos;re on the wave , to ride the wave , the technological possibilities .
in a earthquake , big amounts of these new microbes that we never saw before , the sea floor .
the ozeanograph john delaney creates a network of hochauflösenden cameras and sensors that power our oceans to global interactive lab -- and the datenexplosion datenexplosion über over the world of depth .
so i think optimism is going to move the architecture forward .
so even again , radical against conservative .
the unerklärliche against the verständliche , you know , too many , you want to understand everything .
our intellectual desires are complex .
you know it &apos;s true ; the kathedralen , as unexpected , will always be unexpected .
but i rather rather unknown something completely unknown , and even with mistakes , rather than repeat the same thing all the time , so that it &apos;s been ausgehöhlt by its bedeutungslosigkeit .
risks that were never going to be so schwindelerregend , how they should be in a big city .
there are the emotion of the victim .
daniel libeskind builds up on very big ideas . he &apos;s called 17 words that his vision of architecture is -- raw , gewagt , gefühlsbetont , radically -- and inspiration for any bold creative quest .
it also has the lowest luftwiderstandsbeiwert of all the car that size .
draw it really , or will there be a few hauptstrecken ?
em : it &apos;s just got to be . if not , we &apos;re in big trouble .
and this capital is buying and put it on the roof , and then it &apos;s got a monatliche leasing-rate , or geschäftsbesitzer a monatliche leasing-rate , which is lower than the electricity bill .
we &apos;re almost failed , but we &apos;ve come across it .
it &apos;s similar to a jet jet .
how about all the world could be a person in the world ?
look at that .
boy , if you &apos;re hütest our livestock , and a geparden that eating one of our goats , he &apos;s very nervous . then just go to him .
we were hungry .
our tradition looks like this : in every single , there &apos;s a holy fire .
so , we &apos;ve been able to help with support of the world wildlife fund in the way to raise the very small programs in programs of nationalem .
also , very important -- we invest in the education of aids and hiv .
taschenführer -- always a streitpunkt among a lot of the world of meereserhaltung -- are very useful , they &apos;re a wonderful tool .
and we &apos;re hiding that price behind the huge winning .
dan barber and alice waters are passionate about the most powerful revolution for food food .
schalentiere , muscheln , oysters , venusmuscheln , buntbarsch , saibling -- these were the known species .
this is like a kater of protein .
science looks the world through the mind , in which , in the way , to be able to be measured and described , but they give art a frame for knowledge and knowledge .
and from the plan of a couple of cameras , after three weeks , a plan came with 25 .
that &apos;s the natural cycle .
that would not normally do a anständiger photographer to get a picture , right ? but sometimes it needs to be to represent the dimensions .
here you see the glacier &apos;s going to be pulling out of the glacier .
these are a couple of cameras .
could india be the source of the world or a global center for innovation , just like a global center for backoffice-dienstleistungen and softwareentwicklung ?
if we asked people in conversation with people , what they were working on , they said , &quot; we &apos;re working on global products . &quot;
you can &apos;t be professor if you were not a student .
the best hospitals , in the doctors , for cancer cancer would go , and at geburten , hirnschlägen , heart disease , heart disease , for artificial hüftgelenke , at 4 a.m.
it works a little bit like -- this is a recently ausgeführte google-suchanfrage for four in the morning .
i said , i know a codierte message when i see one .
everybody in our society comes with cancer in touch -- if not personally , then through a beloved person , a family member , a friend , a friend .
in this raumfähre , the genetic material , the chromosomes , inside a nucleus .
we &apos;ve been using tumor treating fields in the lab with over 20 different types of cancer , and we see this effect on all of these .
he got the standardbehandlungen .
but what we can see is that in six months , the tumor was responding and it starts to wegzuschmelzen .
that &apos;s just the beginning .
this is a new arbeitsbereich , a new project .
in fact , they &apos;re 15 feet deep , and collect rainwater from the roof , there &apos;s a little pipe , and from their own .
so , water from 300 , 400 miles away , it &apos;s going to be like this .
somewhere , a stream , or a flüsschen , through this scene .
this is called &quot; kund . &quot; in english , we have oberflächenwasser and grundwasser .
and you have to get more .
these are the beautiful stairs that we just saw on one of the images .
and hiv-infektionsraten is 27 percent , 600,000 less people per year , hiv in sub-saharan africa .
10 percent of india .
they will get the jobs in the factory that get people from the landarmut and bring them to the direction of the industrialisierung and prosperity .
and the countries right , there &apos;s the pro-kopf-bip . it &apos;s basically , every country with a pro-kopf-bip of pro-kopf-bip , say less than 5,000 dollars , a korruptionsrang of say three .
in the first 20 years , in the &apos; 60s and &apos; 70s , india didn &apos;t really grow .
buy african products .
but i think a lot of a lot of the problem is that this logic -- that we should be abwerfen , and not bombs -- i mean , it would make a great title for thomas friedmans &apos;s new book .
so 500 people have been going to have and four of them have chosen to go to the besagte facility and to besichtigen them to be able to get on it .
so now , citizens of einzubeziehen in planning is not necessarily going to change anything , because it &apos;s still the dictators , which are controlling the agenda .
evgeny morozov : does the internet are most important to the world &apos;s worst expectations ?
&quot; like a man . &quot;
and he was hing with us younger guys .
because for me , in this time , the question was living in this time , the question was , &quot; you want to do it ? &quot; either sex or drugs -- and drugs we don &apos;t .
i was paralyzed , people .
as an indian , and now politicians and regierungsminister , i &apos;m pretty much about the rummel , who affects our country , worried about india as a new weltführer , even the new superpower .
in other words , all kinds of stories tell us all about countries , whether they want to come to the daylight or not .
but it was a fairly slow time , but it was quite slow to the place that was pretty slow down , it took about half an hour to this call .
you can &apos;t understand the conversation .
this can sometimes have some ungewollte consequences .
and those of you who have eingelöst your money , like you may be surprised to see how many schriftsysteme on the rupien-schein there are erläutern .
i went home and i was doing a little bit , and i found some shocking statistics .
ludwick marishane : a bathroom without water .
and now i feel like george bush .
now , this title , that expression , comes from a critic , a early critic , and this is a passage that i just love , and i &apos;d like to read you .
and this is a good thing , because if it would , if it would be , mother nature would have a problem : how to do anything in the world , we get chimpanzees to mate ?
this is the hardest part , which is not obvious , and therefore i &apos;ve got it for the end .
ok ? stop . now , that &apos;s going to go .
i don &apos;t know why there are pinke flamingos , but no matter they &apos;re in the garden .
thank you , thank you , thank you .
i actually guess that the most likely probably know a lot of reasons why we want to make new things very , very quickly .
it looks like this . you should see it .
bob , bob , has a different -- a different version of this exercise in a fairly famous experiment in the &apos; 60s .
and we &apos;ve learned that at the time : you can get a much better way , much more creative outcomes , if all of the rules are .
and suddenly , there was a productive conversation about design around a handfestes object .
you &apos;re sometimes a little bit of skeptical , i &apos;ll get back to it .
you know what it feels like , you know , all of those uncertainty , as long as you go back in the hallway , while doctors are taking care of a dringenderen case , and you wonder what &apos;s going on here .
and so we would all feel secure and have a good time because we agree on the rules and agree with it .
we do everything that leads to success , but then , if we are in there , we believe we &apos;ve done it . we &apos;re lehnen , and just hear about all of the things that we &apos;ve done .
i was faster , but also depressed .
i learned that success is not a street .
and the sopran-stimmgruppe is just full of hot girls . &quot;
i actually wrote , &quot; oh my god , &quot; -- hopefully , for always , the last time in public .
he made sure everything all fit together .
it took 900 people to it .
and the second thing is that people are obviously experiencing a real connection .
these are questions .
as you can see in modern liberal democracies , society , the state of state are not only to determine our self , to shape our own self , but it also requires it to be .
it means that we fulfill our fully potential as human beings .
so these are the layers , the kinds of questions i wanted to lead them to today -- the question : what are the intentions that are going to come to the application when they design it ?
so i said , and my colleague sebastian thrun , that there must be better ways .
and we were successful .
i &apos;ll give you a fall .
he schubst them in the right position , she stupst her nose and beat it .
we learned the first surprise .
there had to be any kind of sprungfedermechanismus to create the very specific amount of power and the rate we observe and the ausgangsgrößen of the system .
a load load , and this is actually a piezoelektrische load load with a crystal inside .
this is the fangarm -- here &apos;s the heel , and it &apos;s going to get herumschwingen and go on the load load .
one very , very bequeme solution to the particular problem .
and hawkes : it &apos;s not earth , dummkopf , it &apos;s ocean .
i think this is one of the most beautiful classical tauchgeräte that ever been built .
i don &apos;t know any other tauchfahrzeuge , not even ferngesteuerte that benefit from this is a dreidimensionaler space .
now you can see this -- he just let me stand .
the submarine that was out last year , this is this one .
gleichermassen is the understanding of architecture as a störer , zusammenhanglos , i &apos;m sorry , to apologize the obvious example -- is not the right approach to vote .
basically , new york was built on the back of the austernfischer , our streets over their shells .
in these eight seitlichen , little babyaustern are stuck in that handy .
so you were walking around london , and was overwhelmed by this gestank .
and finally , the snow was created a map of the outbreak .
and this happens every second week .
i made her porträt on the top of the jokhang .
and in this area of the amazon , in the amazon , it was discovered oil .
the other side of the area is tora bora , where it &apos;s actually supposed to be osama bin laden . this is stammes-gebiet .
this was one of the big motivationsfaktoren .
this is the ausgangsüberlegung . let me go now and show you the hubble of deep field .
but then you get to jupiter , and it &apos;s a 40 way . that &apos;s a problem .
this is going to be part of the beginning of the beginning of the universe .
we have only one million galaxies , we have a million galaxies .
so the stuff that &apos;s white is white , dark matter .
and when you saw this picture for the first time , you can &apos;t see a lot of it .
this simulation was going to do a month for a month for a month , just to make this visible .
with planck , we &apos;re going to have a resolution that fits to this picture of earth , where you can actually detect the complicated patterns of the earth .
and we &apos;re getting stressed out of the suite .
47 percent .
it &apos;s crazy . we &apos;re doing this all the time , even in the everyday life .
i got into a vicious cycle . this led to many more and problems with the gelenken , so i almost nothing to hold anything more .
so i asked myself , could you be more creative if you were looking for the constraints ?
this is not happening from the morning .
the ständige of dosimetern is an obligation , as a offizieller bewacher , and there &apos;s drakonische strahlungsregeln and andauerndes monitoring on the kontamination .
stalins aufgezwungene hungersnöte , the holodomor , töteten million ukrainer , and in the 1940s , she had been watching the nazis of the nazis , the metzelten , verbrannten , and many of the women were trafficked as a zwangsarbeiterinnen for germany .
that is what the grief is about . &quot;
and as a psychologin , i think the idea of the idea is that we had learned in the virtual world that we had learned about us , and we could use it to live a better life in the real world .
we used to get to a new way to be alone .
human relations are üppig , chaotic and fordernd .
it tröstete them .
because at the moment that people alone , even for a few seconds , they will be hibbelig , and they get angsterfüllt , they get panic , they &apos;re going to grab into an electronic device .
but we &apos;re in danger , because in truth , the opposite is true .
i &apos;m optimistic .
but apparently we didn &apos;t have the punkte-differenz who had been predicted by our graduate students , and quite often -- quite often i felt they were going to have a finanzielle verliehen for their predictions .
maybe because my father was always read to the night .
so i left them with it , but clean and clean , they had to be .
finally , i thought i &apos;d look at a pyramid , but i &apos;m missing the time to take a closer to that .
and you &apos;re not afraid to lose failure , if we &apos;ve given tapfer , because who can ask for a person to give them a more and to give it a little bit of what he &apos;s going to do .
if i should call it a name , i never know that an answer .
i have enough geschwafelt .
the second challenge would be cells .
today , in many clinical trials , different kinds of stem cells are used for heart disease .
and just last month , it &apos;s been able to have managed to share with this technology that we can use to show the creation of the human world .
we can map them and turn to a 360 degree and we can analyze the kidney in all its volumetrischen properties , and then we can just take this information and scan them through 3d printing .
i couldn &apos;t regularly to school . i was just dirty .
i was a kid , i said , &quot; yes , i want to . i want to do this operation . &quot;
you might notice that a new field is developed called swap-tauschhandel .
and then , with this mengen-manie , there were examples around the world -- from the choice of a president to a berühmt-berüchtigten wikipedia , and everything between them -- which showed what the power could achieve .
third , drängende , ungelöste environmental issues .
because what you need , this is the hole , not the drill .
i don &apos;t want a cd , i want the music that she plays .
i mean , i mean , joseph and i &apos;m a member of kenya .
we need to wegbringen our women and children , we need to run . &quot;
i try to improve the infrastructure .
late one night i was driving home with batteries and ice .
together : anybody post-its ?
co : i decided to stay in the country , to give up the master &apos;s master &apos;s master &apos;s master and working in a while to realize this .
this can be huge amount of spending , but if the city can win a number of x freiwilligen for y hours , the dollarwert of the aufgewendeten work for the city of the city .
they have hotlines , tables and data .
so , this is the 18 minutes that have been given to me to talk here , between two and dreitausend people who are going to be traveled into cities .
and he was in a großflächigeren wässrigen mud .
the buildings here have several stories .
these green things are a lot of a lot of mangos .
and if you &apos;re a legaler unter-stadtbezirk , you have political activity .
i couldn &apos;t know that i would be part of a technological revolution that would let this dream come true .
think about it . these men who didn &apos;t have the same bildungsmöglichkeiten as i did helped me to get their committed support , weiterführende qualifikationen for their own support .
and then , he used only to work with a schriftart , but by using a ladungsgekoppelten flachbettscanner and sprachgeneratoren , he could develop a machine that could read any schriftart .
but you know , i find it very lonely to read me from machines .
because it &apos;s not allowed to transport these books about the border , in the various englischsprachigen countries , different versions of the eingelesen are being developed : britain , united states , canada , australia , and new zealand had to have different lesungen of harry potter .
the durschschnittl , life expectancy has been doubled for more than doubled , and it &apos;s increasing by five hours a day .
another thing . wish you , you know , people like me ? okay ?
second , the new machine is so good , because the androiden are taking over , we don &apos;t need to do this anymore , and that &apos;s what we have to do with it and schufterei .
the social challenges for these inequality should be the first .
the economic rules are surprising , and surprisingly , very quickly , in the short view .
and my biggest concern is that we create a world with technology technologies , embedded in a slightly more integrated society and a business that is fördert inequality .
over the course of years , i began to feel more unwohler with this notion of god .
some of them have geschlussfolgert that we can only believe in a god that &apos;s shared our pain .
in the second second , the line comes out , &quot; wind and waves obey him . &quot;
so who is god , if not the big strippenzieher or stammesbewahrer ?
the liebende soul of the universe .
by seeking god inside the inner , by doing my own einwärtigkeit .
one of the first things i started to explore was the history of the begriffs technology .
we &apos;ve never found a neanderthalerfossilien that were older than 40 years , and the average age of this gathering and tribes of tribes is 20 to 30 .
our body has grown to this new diet .
so this equality of energy and matter , the einstein has shown , and also the modern science of quantencomputer shows that entropy and information and matter and energy all are connected to each other , so it &apos;s a long continuum .
this is a robot that wants to plug his own little into a plug , to get more power .
and what i mean by that is that we &apos;re looking for a new job .
a great development that started billions of years ago , moving through us and continues , and our choice is in the technology , in fact , is really in that , in fact , with this force that is much more powerful than we are .
and they said , &quot; well , we have five classes 30 to 40 students .
we cut down all of this , and we found beautiful holzböden , geweißte bars , and it had this look -- while we were in the renovierten , someone said , &quot; you know what , it looks like the ship &apos;s ship . &quot;
so we were waiting for us to sit around the tables and we were waiting for them .
there &apos;s a lot of symbioseeffekte . the only problem , especially for adults who work at work , that really didn &apos;t know about all of the things that they knew was that there was only a toilet .
the teachers who we work with -- everything is different for teachers -- they tell us what to do .
i have about 170 tutoren , and that &apos;s how it works so wonderful .
and right behind it -- there &apos;s a little chain -- right behind it was just how children were taught .
there &apos;s also this geheimtür -- it &apos;s a shelf that you don &apos;t see when you &apos;re in the beginning , but it opens up slowly .
he &apos;s evangelisch . he &apos;s bringing his cousin .
and she writes an email , he will ask you any question you can do .
i was this girl .
80 percent of refugees in the world are women and children .
there &apos;s a site that thinks that peace means the end of the struggle , and there &apos;s a side that thinks that peace means creating the creation of schools and jobs .
she sent her kids to school -- found a new home .
there is one that means manual to full idiots , did you know ?
on cape cape , there are idyllische roads , and we can all be here .
this is my baby . thank you .
and he basically said , &quot; i designed everything . &quot;
and in a certain sense , i &apos;ve always felt bad about that .
so i ended up with this kind of complications .
i found that there are a very good ausdrucksmaterial of these that .
and university is the hardest , so number one is a decade .
and all in a strange hotelhalle , about klarsichtfolie , which is really excited about a window , until the moment that the street in front of my house was black , and this white motte was sterbend there .
and i was reminded by the great presentation by karen armstrong that religion really didn &apos;t really understand anything with faith , but to do with behavior .
the nordpol-eisschicht has seen a geographically , the same size . it doesn &apos;t look like this , but it &apos;s exactly the same size as the united states , abzüglich of an area that is about equal to the state of arizona .
but it &apos;s not just the developed world .
we can &apos;t wait for the trockenheit that had australia to change our political culture .
this challenge is part of the structure of our whole civilization .
a new appreciation of the privilegs that we own with the assumption of this challenge .
before i show you a couple of images i want to show you , i want to point out to this beautiful detail of design and design .
so the rca is really an extraordinary school .
we have discussed this morning with keith shrubb that many scientists are not going to have to show something beautiful in their lectures , from fear of being viewed as a dumme blondinen .
here &apos;s what you can see in 3d , which is very interesting in 3d .
so this lets us think about what robots means for us .
no . so i had to think a little bit of a little bit of a little bit .
we did the same thing for iraq .
that was a challenge we had to ask as a physicist .
we can push it up . the forces are fragmentieren . there are more of them , but they &apos;re schwächer .
&quot; naturally seven &quot; beatboxt a whole band .
and there are some employees in foundations that call this mitgefühl-müdigkeit .
the idea of justice , which shows our lives and feel about what is right in life , which is what we need to do , social justice .
and like this , he &apos;s döste as the predikt .
so every week , the putzkraft would go . &quot; god , you &apos;ve heard me again . &quot;
they &apos;re a symptom for a tumor , an infection , an infection or a surgery .
the muscles were frozen , paralyzed -- dystonisch , like this .
we treat them with symptomverändernden drugs -- schmerzmitteln -- that , frankly , in this kind of pain , not really effective .
now , you get a sense of a sense of how much rock we &apos;re talking about here .
it was in a way . it &apos;s nothing . i can live .
i don &apos;t know if you can see it from the back of all of the scenes . these are just stars .
in 2005 , nasa started a probe called deep impact , which one -- the one part of the core of a comet .
these are smart guys -- men and women -- astronauts , as i said , engineers .
the difference between the dinosaurs and us is that we have a raumfahrtprogramm and vote , and we can change our future .
i &apos;ve led to this time , the only independent , to be precise , the only electronic medium in the country .
and i thought that b92 would survive and a great business would be if the milosevic would be gone , and what she was doing was right .
and at the end of the meeting , he says , &quot; look , it &apos;s not going to work , you &apos;ll never see your money again , but my foundation will put 50,000 dollars on the table so you can test the idea .
and we said that -- that &apos;s fine , we meet , you will bring your business plan to what they actually did .
you see , we started in ost- and mitteleuropa with our work and went to russia .
after a while we opened up a medienmanagement-zentrum .
and we evolved the idea to spend on a anleihen , to put on the free press .
and in this way , you get the funding so that there are no dunkelkammern , no blind , that &apos;s running around , to find yourself .
so why does it work ? that &apos;s the question .
now , some call this a theory of everything .
one is just one example of this : newton found the law of gravity , which works like one divided through the square of the abstandes between each other objects .
the more symmetry you have , the better you make the simplicity and elegance in the theory .
one thing that he thought was most of us today , but at his time , it wasn &apos;t .
it doesn &apos;t mean the importance of these fächer , they follow grundlegenderen laws and accidents .
but he read in every free moment he had , books .
he driven by this ambition , he went back to the staatsparlament .
but when he was just sitting his signature under the proklamation , his hand was deaf and zitterte , because he had a thousand hands in the morning of a neujahrsempfangs .
not very surprising -- it was just three women under the 16 stipendiaten in the white house .
but i have to say , the older i became , the more i understand what it was for an incredible privilege to have spent this aging lions from a man so many hours .
and as lincoln told the story , all after the war after the u.k.
i was asking my father , and i asked , &quot; what can we do ? &quot;
and what &apos;s the reason for that is that i always make grateful for this strange love of history , which allows me to look at life in the back of the past .
he had entweiht the temple , and he was geplündert .
this is the erlass , this object is proof that the jews after the exil of babylon , after all the years that they were sitting in babylon to the rivers , and she would think at the memory of jerusalem that those jews were allowed to go home .
all these are being respected by cyrus .
the babylonische cylinder is from the priestern of the great gotts of babylon , marduk .
you all know what happened .
to see this object in tehran , thousands of thousands of living jews were in iran .
some people know more about the living conditions of living , but they still think they &apos;re a notwendiges .
the new aufgenommenen babies are weinten in the early few hours , but their needs were not befriedigt , and eventually they learned to try to try and they were lustlos , they were lustlos , lethargisch and launch in the air , like everyone else .
one study shows that 10 percent of a heimunterbringung cost costs about 30 percent .
and this fascinated me , because i almost spent my whole life a camera .
you know quite quickly what you &apos;re doing to find an answer .
there were 114 people there -- most of them and family .
we heard every single one .
but of course he never came . the explanation never occurred .
and after many , many meetings i was excited that this man , ahmad fawzi , really one of my heroes and mentors , it was able to bring in the boat .
so he said , and we found ourselves in afghanistan .
they were the ones who believed in peace and they were at their possibilities , etc . , etc . and they made it really .
we &apos;re connecting with olympia -- i met seb coe , and i said , &quot; in london 2012 , it &apos;s about the waffenruhe .
it &apos;s about your wählerbezirke , to deal with your business .
the biggest brains of the world should be cognitively as well .
i durchforstete the literature after the origin of that number , but i couldn &apos;t find them .
it &apos;s just a big primatengehirn .
and amazingly , that fits exactly what our ancestors probably invented a million years ago when they discovered the cooking .
fairly simple ways for the hochtechnischen conversations that i led .
and i think i &apos;m just standing at the beginning .
but once the fight verschärften , the physical rehabilitation was exposed to the physical rehabilitation .
behind him was a child , his son , red in front of her , was struggling to move his father .
but mahmoud and his son were already there .
i was talking about my boss in the headquarters , and i told them -- i said -- i told them , &quot; look , we &apos;re starting with a few hours a day , just for some of the reparaturen . &quot;
two groups of the mudschaheddin started fighting .
so i asked him , &quot; what &apos;s the point ? &quot;
and , &quot; yes , we need to increase the production of feet .
he was a new man , even bigger .
physiotherapie , not just in the center center , but also in the homes of people .
and you should see me during a partie .
and this hospital could afford a taschenlampen .
why ? because the path i had been banned .
but i learned something more than that , which is the leaders -- the manager of the economy were ghanas -- incredibly bad decisions that were going to just bring our economies to collapse in front of the collapse .
because i knew that the state of african continent to my children and their children would be important .
i try and bring the experience that i had to have to bring to africa .
is my time ? ok .
we &apos;ve reached a moment where a great society can be able to rise to a generation .
you &apos;ll notice that he &apos;s very similar to the bildhaften yellow ball -- the sun we draw as children .
in fact , that &apos;s what half of you , more than half , is not familiar .
32 tabletten tabletten &apos;s forte .
leb . &quot;
and these are the messages they &apos;re giving to them ?
because , in the bottom , the donors love it , and so it &apos;s constantly bringing them on television .
a professional hellseherin , who talks to dead , they don &apos;t get me ?
what is homöopathie ?
we would like to give you some suggestions for people to join bundes- , landes- and kommunale government so they do something .
thank you .
that &apos;s why the entire hospital is often running over a generator .
there must be something better . &quot;
but this is how the user can control whether it &apos;s just electricity or not , because you can control the zufuhr on the ground , how much percentage oxygen you give your patient .
but we want to be sure that this is the most effective and the most reliable device we can give them to hospitals .
the different species of writing in africa , the first one was protoschreiben , like the schrift veranschaulicht , which is the schriftsystem of a secret society of the ejagham-volkes .
in 1998 , as a yale-professor named john coleman darnell in westägypten inschriften , who had been discovered in 1800 in the 1800 bc , jahrhunderte centuries ago .
almost a fifth of all greenhouse gases from the livestock -- it &apos;s more than traffic .
not bad .
i like animals , and the animal animals and animals are producing the vehicle like tools , is not just that okay .
feinkost was a pure issue .
a picture of fischstäbchen would be better , right ?
so it wasn &apos;t very bad .
i &apos;m going to ask you a question .
some of us would think that maybe that would not be so bad .
i asked a question about a year ago , &quot; why am i , though , i know what i know , no a vegetarier ? &quot;
the weekend , you have the choice .
you can do an image with an iphone and get all the names , even though it makes even mistakes .
she &apos;s abgelenkt . he finally win the race .
you can &apos;t see it because it &apos;s too big .
you would think it &apos;s been interested in finding out that the einsätze are so high , but it &apos;s a very vernachlässigtes area .
or an aesthetic experience -- a sonnenuntergang or a big artwork .
human nature had to change .
but part of the reason -- and that &apos;s why we have an ethical level in the verfolgung of how they have -- is that they &apos;re also valuable .
it could be more complicated in people , but maybe not very much .
jh : is it befreiend to play with these forces ?
and so i knew i need to take a little bit of remote control .
so there &apos;s a eranziehungskraft , there &apos;s fliehkraft , there &apos;s the dynamic behavior of the fluid .
and so i think that you can be vorhersagend .
this is a great assistent in the studio .
we take the pizza , our first pizza , and verschlingen the individual pieces , while the bote is standing in the hallway and anstarrt .
i was sure 20 before i was going to go to an art museum .
i thought , okay , you have a couple of criteria for you to choose the works .
it &apos;s not a photoshop work .
they were interested in creating a novel , alternative kunstraum , and they needed money for that , so they decided to do some interesting projects .
this project is called &quot; liebesnest . &quot;
and so we went to the grave , and we did this , it was a little bit of the way that we got .
and she describes how the zäpfchen -- all you say is like the verbotenen .
he &apos;s a australischer stammesältester of the aborigines , and he &apos;s also an artist .
it &apos;s related to origami . so , go .
humans are wandten mathematical principles to the art of the underlying gesetzmäßigkeiten .
or they &apos;re pushing it to the top , and they do 50 stars to a flag with 13 streifen .
how would you make a single flap ?
we found these rules out to be put together circles , you covered the kreismuster lines , the extra rules , and that makes the pattern pattern .
you can do a lot of things .
but if you want to make it bigger , you might need a origami .
and it doesn &apos;t matter whether you go into space or whether you go into a body .
i grew up in a blockhütte state in washington , with much more free time on the state of washington , with too much more free time .
we have only three minutes . but we &apos;re talking about it for hours .
and so i want to talk about it , because if we don &apos;t recognize it , this transformation will be very painful .
and in a moment i &apos;m going to show you a graph , and what you &apos;ll see in the graph -- it starts in 1973 , just before the women start to überfluten the market market , and it goes on to the day today .
you were giving instruction .
because i write about all this book , i &apos;m still doing it , and i don &apos;t have an answer .
and that was very , very entmutigend for them .
because we haven &apos;t really processed this information , they come back to us in the form of popular culture , in this kind of weird and übertriebenen way , where you can see that the stereotype changes .
there is no man or no woman who &apos;s in the middle and the cable is to kappen the cable .
whereas personal income on a scale that was constant , it &apos;s been constant to take inflation , to take inflation , that time has doubled , almost nearly nearly nearly tripled .
and to hear me and understand what i say , you need about 60 bits per second .
it &apos;s still happening , so in the last book i &apos;ve been doing &quot; good business , &quot; i interviewed a bunch of ceo that were very successful and very ethical at the same time , with great social verantwortungsgefühl .
control is also a safe thing , because you feel you &apos;re probably not very , not very much .
&quot; where are you born , grew up and went to school ? &quot;
because when my grandparents were born , they had their own meaning of what home is , and even for feindschaft , which was mitgegeben , they were mitgegeben , they didn &apos;t really have the possibility to go out .
more and more people are in the future or present , as in the past .
i went down into the room where i was going to sleep .
pico iyer : where is it home ?
there was a big gap between one billion in the developed countries and the two billion in the developing world .
but this is the world we have today . no gap .
and let me show you why i &apos;m going to zurückschalte the digital technology to the altmodischen .
the survival of children is the new green .
and again , they were better than we were , &quot; her briten and your mortality rate at heart disease is shocking . &quot;
but if you give people vitamin-d-ergänzungsmittel , you don &apos;t change the high number of heart disease .
and i started to work immediately with zellkulturen , let them grow , and then i worked with knockout-maus-modellen -- mice that couldn &apos;t make the gene .
one of the subjects was my mother , and of course i don &apos;t know how old she is .
if you could be the same as well as the equator in summer .
certainly many progress , many gerettete lives .
this is actually true photography , in the time , which shows that the limb is regeneriert in less days .
and you see here on the right , what six months later is that technically angepasste .
a blutgefäß consists of two different types of cell types .
we put it back to this ofenähnliche device that we &apos;re going to go back to this .
so much more complex organs , and then the most complex solid organs are the very large , and the most large versehenen organs , the liver and kidneys .
this is still in the experimentierstadium .
we prefer cells that are not abgestoßen and don &apos;t make tumors .
we need five seconds .
for every problem there , someone else would have an idea .
so i &apos;m actually going to panic that -- unlike all the koffein and sugar i had -- but this is really an entrepreneur for an entrepreneur .
that doesn &apos;t mean you have to visit a mba-programm .
i went to door to door to door and sell .
it &apos;s a recession . so there &apos;s a recession .
and you would make these chairs .
it &apos;s useless . &quot; you have to find a way to get faster to money .
i sold a huge amount of sonnenbrillen .
they don &apos;t get a regular income , but they have the ability to find other tasks and learn , the ability to verhandelns , and they also learn the ability to find more possibilities .
if you go into a restaurant and you &apos;re going to be bad , you &apos;ll show you how bad kundenservice .
these boys , grashüpfer .
the development of today &apos;s students is all the interests of the other than a über .
the erlenen of grundfähigkeiten or a minimun an entziehen is the most of our students .
the values of the past are also wiederbelebt . it makes a lot of society .
but it &apos;s a politics of principles , not the parteilichkeit .
they have a mind . and they have other people .
what we should deal with , if we think about conservatives -- except this case of the 1980s , the point of the 1980s -- what &apos;s going on is this : they go to church .
yeah , i know you don &apos;t really believe that .
and that doesn &apos;t just lead to a different outcome , it has the potential to change how we deal with each other .
completely different .
actually , it &apos;s not really right to the organisation , but clearly -- let me finish this -- creative commons , i have a very simple way to put your content with the freedoms that you want to leave you with .
john mccain .
and i ask myself how often happens this .
he told me that he hereinbrachte the versuchsperson and then he said , &quot; there &apos;s a snake in the next room , and we &apos;re going to get there now . &quot;
so , for today i had the idea that i &apos;m going to run through this process and show you what this journey looks like .
and the hospital and general electric were happy .
i survived , just so we really understand ourselves .
i &apos;m going to ask people all the time , &quot; is it really possible to use these microbial ecosystems to benefit our benefit ? &quot;
another possibility that microbes can spread through the human beings , and architects , architects , like to have similar typs spaces to work together to promote the zwischenmenschliche interaction or the exchange of ideas in places like labs and offices .
imagine a design that takes microbes , for example , on the plane or on a telephone .
and nobody knew about it .
my company , owl , built a system called guide for the apple macintosh .
in 1992 , his essay was rejected by the hypertextkonferenz .
and greenpeace wanted to be the unterbinden , and a way that you wanted to do was to have a ortungs-chip einzupflanzen .
in 78 percent of the voices , to give you an idea of the erdrutschartigen victory , rang 2 in two percent .
and the last message i want to share with you is : you can be pretty successful online .
i think i don &apos;t need to explain what a big privilege is to stand today .
this is the school that was built with the community .
something that we have in gando are tontöpfe .
just like that .
good morning . magic is an excellent way to be ahead of the realitätskurve to make this possible what makes science really become true .
there &apos;s red red and black color , you &apos;re standing for the constant change of day .
voice : why not ? this is a very good piece .
that &apos;s an illusion .
so this is china , a zivilisationsstaat , and not so much a nation-state .
but you can &apos;t lead a country like china , based on the ground , from one civilization , a system .
and the reason for that is , the state in china gets a very special -- very much special value as the repräsentant , the embodiment and the hüter of the chinese civilization , the zivilisationsstaats .
he was in 1972 , he was in 1972 , verband beijing .
we &apos;ve seen this in terms of the g20 -- the position of the g7 rasant -- or the g8 .
he goes on a road in the hallway , and the cars drive below .
red = blue = , bass the united states by a leads orange = = = mundstück , the brain tissue is made up .
and the first song was english , the second was in chinese .
she agreed to her song .
i made a graffiti , i wrote my name everywhere , used the city as a canvas .
i mean , these were the faces of my friends .
they all accepted that their image next to the other .
&quot; you mean , you &apos;re klebst a israelisches face -- that &apos;s a funny thing , right ? &quot;
most of the places i went to , i decided to go because i had heard about her in the media .
i took more photos and we launched the project .
are you an organization ? are you from the media ? &quot;
so the roofs were , witzelte a woman , &quot; now , god can see me . &quot;
because this is a big part of it . there are layers behind each picture .
but they &apos;ve basically taken a promise to me .
or , &quot; how can we help . &quot;
when i think about the vernetzung and about what it drives you to do is why it &apos;s happening now , i think there are some factors that i want to give you a hintergrundinformation .
they &apos;ve caused a trend .
zipcar started a decade ago , in 2000 .
it challenges for participation . cities have been welcome to participation in participation .
it &apos;s very cheap , and it &apos;s very , very kostengünstig .
the last 40 years were extraordinary times .
and also , of course .
this would have a erheblichen migrationszuwachs .
it &apos;s vital that the ted ideas , ideas , that we &apos;re thinking about , are focused on the front and make sure that this will be a very powerful century and not one of the umweltkatastrophe and ökokollaps .
my remaining family are boring academics who are engaging with our ambassador abziehbilder for our ambassador .
i said , &quot; i &apos;m here to meet the prime minister . &quot;
i thought he &apos;d be mad , but something really stuck with it .
i sat , like you here , in the audience .
this is another picture .
since my career has been a career , my career has been managt , i &apos;ve been brought it a lot of success .
i started exploring the dunkleren abszesse of human psyche .
this time i said , let &apos;s try something else .
so i said , &quot; okay . &quot;
sw : much better . einstein is very honored to be here at ted 2006 between all the today &apos;s einstein &apos;s computer science , actually , and she &apos;s really excited .
it would be very dangerous if you fall off .
sw : no , i don &apos;t have a problem . you &apos;ve got the problem , you remember ?
sw : big finish .
sw : what about a stinktier ?
my parents found this important for their inner quiet .
when i have a talent , it &apos;s to be able to take things apart from which i have unheimlichen schiß .
the body has higher density than the water , at least 95 percent of the body is taucht by itself .
and this will get them very far .
i asked him what this means .
and at this point , you can , if you want to get , you know , and you can get multiple languages , and they take them to take them to change each other .
and she looked up to me and i said , &quot; well , that &apos;s what &apos;s better . &quot;
i think you &apos;ll agree that they &apos;re very good .
and so , we &apos;ve done tests so far , and we &apos;ve done this , about 50,000 students , about a half a dozen schools , my readers , by the way .
we found out -- and we were wrong with lots of things , and then we got it , but we found that the young people loved it .
geoff mulgan : a little introduction in the studio-schule of the studio-schule
and finally , the only person , the hervortritt , a young shepherd , and he &apos;s going to saul and says , &quot; i &apos;m going to fight him . &quot;
there are the kavallerie , men on horses and with streitwagen .
goliath &apos;s easy prey . he &apos;s got no chance .
so goliath is about a greater greater than a seinesgleichen time , and normally there is an explanation for that if someone is so far outside the norm .
and i think there &apos;s a very important lesson for us all .
and it turns out that we &apos;re covered in a mikrobenwolke , and these microbes , we usually do it , rather than killing us .
they &apos;ve gone all the microbes , and they used to put the dünndarm into the receiver .
most pills , or the joghurts you can eat , contain one or two , maybe five species , and the human community has thousands of species .
we need a bestimmungsbuch for the microbes that live in and on people so that we can understand what they do to our lives .
very many people think about the internet , really , really , on the internet , but it &apos;s truly global . we have a lot of languages .
when you saw him a silly change on the side of me , you probably thought that all of that would be ausarten in quatsch .
it &apos;s a social model of cooperation , so we don &apos;t talk a lot about truth and objektivität .
and we have 40 irc-kanäle , 40 mailinglisten .
it &apos;s not a perfect rule , but it &apos;s enough for the beginning .
and i always like to say that you &apos;re the only person who actually knows all the rules of wikipedia , that &apos;s what &apos;s going on .
it seems to me , as being a lot of textbooks , the most textbooks that we &apos;re doing is to be used by nature from nature .
in the jungle of guatemala , in tikal , it &apos;s a temple .
a famous indian indian indians in süd-alaska told a missionar in the year , and here it is .
it &apos;s a lot of under your cognitive denkprozess .
we found activity in other gehirnregionen , in gehirnregionen , associated with computation and loss .
i have a friend that &apos;s just going to process a terrible liebesaffaire .
and i said , i don &apos;t know .
we turn to each other , and we keep our looking , &quot; and we &apos;re talking . &quot;
tools like sägen , knife , sicheln , or äxte that i &apos;d put in a handtuch .
i &apos;d been looking for long and wide , but i had never been looking for my nearby .
in some erdteilen , they &apos;re using tools , like a schwämme to the fischjagd .
so dolphins can , so they can use it from the distance .
look at how they synchronize with their partner and other zweiergruppe .
but we found out quickly that free dolphins don &apos;t just depend on a boat on a keyboard .
this dolphin called the dolphin called &quot; tuchdiebin , &quot; because she &apos;s abgehauen about 12 tüchern .
but while we dekodieren their natural sounds , we also plan that back to the computer system .
and the word is invented .
there is yves rossy .
and especially if you &apos;re in the tracking-position , you have the feeling of the feeling .
yr : i &apos;m just trying to be fit .
i &apos;ve been using this in the last 15 years , maybe 20 times -- never with this kind of wings , but at the beginning .
we don &apos;t tell you your own .
but it was up on top of it and full of kakteen .
you have wondered , a lot of , how do you think what you saw is to be using an unsichtbarer powers .
because this event was the scientific revolution since our knowledge of the physical world , and how we can adapt to them to change our needs , unerbittlich in the growing .
by the way , why do we do that ?
it &apos;s based on vermutungen ; our bible .
there &apos;s something like a fehlkonstruierte story .
and only when an explanation is good , it &apos;s also important that you can check it .
brillen are not very expensive . they &apos;re pretty much zahlreich .
it &apos;s currently using 30,000 to you .
what is the suburbs for a place ?
the new festival challenges the audience , a significant role of design for performance .
she &apos;d met with others to look at &quot; the &apos; &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot;
&quot; no rumpfataxie , that &apos;s good . &quot; first doctor , is you schwindlig ?
i thought my career was over .
this is a bear that i was sitting on for a while .
this is a piece of mehrjährigem ice , it &apos;s 12 years old .
i &apos;m going to show you today of belugawalen and grönlandwalen and polar bears and leopard bears and leopard seals , but this picture , i mean , is more than any other i &apos;ve ever done .
people said , &quot; we knew they were bösartig . we knew it . &quot;
and this seal took the penguin in the head and she schüttelte it .
she swam away , started a penguin .
she was trying to zwangszuernähren my camera , which is the dream of any photographer .
paul nicklen : stories from a vereisten wunderland
open your eyes now .
do you have a ring ?
you &apos;re going to focus on this task .
joe , we do that for so long , until they schnallen it .
funny , yes , we have a little man , a gewerkschafter , working up the whole day up there .
as i said , i think it forms their reality .
and we started to build ushahidi together , and we did it .
a call in the u.s. , in canada , or china costs five dollars , or 0.06 u.s. dollars .
it &apos;s built up , so you can also join a satellitenmodul and it &apos;s also access to remote places .
over time , the buildings were higher , and greater our technology , so that the mechanical systems were enormous . they need large amounts of energy .
imagine , two americans travel together by italy .
please raise your hand to be liberal .
the best definition i know about -- she explains so much -- comes from hirnforscher gary .
it lets us very , very old triebe .
but look at the other three lines .
is that not simply the foundation of fremdenfeindlichkeit and autoritarismus and puritanismus ?
she went to the steil and on and on .
and they say , &quot; hold your laws from my body . &quot;
and we have the characters of shiva to the right , shiva is the liberal god -- and both work together .
and so the answer , i think , is that passionate commitment to the truth and try to turn them into a better future for us .
but if you react , a lot of other people in the environment that are innocent , but also they could be hurt -- the military wouldn &apos;t want to talk about kollateralschäden .
we &apos;re looking at something different , and we didn &apos;t seem to realize that the situations were very comparable .
you know , there &apos;s a commandment like a year , as you think , how often it was introduced , how often the police police spray in queensland spray ?
there were only a couple of people who were shot in this incident .
she &apos;s 72 , and it looks like this is the most kind of angemessenste way to cope with her .
and if you &apos;re going to be threatened to use them , people will give you , but it &apos;s not going to cause any bleibenden damage . &quot;
we started to organize makers in our maker fair .
billy-bob , or little bit of little bit , or something like that .
and i &apos;ll tell you more about it , but just ...
but he also moved around to meet other people who did the same thing as he did .
this is &quot; makerbot . &quot;
and we need to bring this into schools , or in the communities , in many , many ways -- to make the ability to shape the world to shape us and new .
there is the glamour of physics .
and indeed , we see these glorifizierten photos of the star , the whole time -- they call them falschfarbenfotografien .
she doesn &apos;t look at a way , but you have to imagine your world .
treppen , which winden from a hinfort , are glamorous .
but it will always give you the illusion that if you buy this light , you will live in a world without wires .
the perfect liebesleben -- it &apos;s a perfect chain , with perfect diamantring .
because glamour can be very totalitär and trügerisch .
but i knew how hard they were working for all week long .
i did that before strangers .
i heard about women who were being belästigt in their homes , or ausgepeitscht in their burkas , as dead left on parking parking with acid in their own küchen .
then i got cancer -- or i found that i had cancer .
my girlfriend was making this big bowl , and i asked them , &quot; what is this ? &quot;
it was my friends for me , friends and a nurse sister .
because we all are so bad , we &apos;re going to introduce the inner experience of our human beings and their secret intentions . &quot;
children need a long time to master the system .
rs : oha . now joshua &apos;s going to take a drink to drink some of it .
rs : should ivan get trouble ?
and you &apos;re in the coffee of your girlfriend .
first , i &apos;ll prove you that it &apos;s a magentfeld machine .
please tell me that they don &apos;t rangehen , if you say , the pentagon is calling it .
but why do you feel something ?
and it was , you know , you know , a course for speed-yoga .
and second , is it possible , or even , to slow down ?
they want to go back to a slow rhythm .
and norway , sweden , denmark and finland are under the six wettbewerbsfähigsten nations in the world and working hours where the average american cry would cry .
but the new idea , the revolutionary idea of entschleunigungsbewegung , is that it &apos;s also something like &quot; good slow . &quot;
i &apos;m going to notice that the gutenachtgeschichten was a verabscheute task on my aufgabenliste , it grauste me to you because they were so slow , and i was going to get ready to get ready .
and so , all of his beginning , and they said , &quot; you can &apos;t build everything on an island ; some of it has to stay on the shore because we don &apos;t want to be a abwenden of the community . &quot;
i worked for a lot of the months , and i didn &apos;t get it because i felt that people who came from the historical museum , they were beladen with information , and if you still see a museum of information , you wouldn &apos;t be able to process it .
when i flew home , the grundsteinlegung was planned .
but you can see the einzigartigkeit of the environment .
moshe safdie over the building of the einzigartigkeit .
and if christian plays a note -- play , for example , an f.
so in jazz , the bandstand is absolutely amazing .
it &apos;s not about that my vision or something that &apos;s happening .
am i interested ? i am i exist for you ?
they had to get a lot of money to get here .
india , in summer , india , is extremely hot .
and the adult animal that comes out of that lives , one or two months .
i didn &apos;t know that at the time , but i know it today . these are hundreds of wanderlibellen .
i &apos;m a bit curious about this . i &apos;m going to hear you , because i want to ask you , and here &apos;s a lot of people who -- of course , of course -- people who spent their childhood here .
so next , i was hanging out with the phone .
october , november , december . that &apos;s not the time of the monsoon monsoon .
okay , they lay their eggs at the time of the saisonalen rains during the monsunregens .
it &apos;s last week , it has geregnet . the regengüsse have begun , and now it &apos;s raining there .
a pretty incredible kraftakt .
incredible . this is the most außerordenlichste wanderung of a raubvogels , and quite incredible .
this is what i did from my life .
and everybody thought i was good . but i was in the new terrain , and people said , &quot; oh , he &apos;s -- oh , what &apos;s happened with mullen ? &quot;
i looked at the night before i was watching them and i asked myself , &quot; how am i going to do that ? &quot;
next -- oh , i mean , these guys are the community .
so i was pretty successful . and if you &apos;ve done all this , what &apos;s it that &apos;s driving , and i &apos;ve been told by the knieoperation and other things , but what drives you ?
and my last tedtalk , about seven years ago , was about seven years ago .
but carl norden really has the code .
whenever the norden bombsight gets brought into a plane , it will be accompanied by a row of bewaffneter .
the chemical chemical erstreckte on the top of three square kilometers .
after the war was over , it was a überprüfung -- as the army that the army always does -- and they asked the question : how many scuds did we actually have destroyed ?
i &apos;ve described the opposite of a success story .
a walk in a city city or a journey shows this diversity of human species in an amazing way .
we ask the human ancestry .
but what data is the thesen ?
imagine that you would have to be abschreiben .
it was an african that &apos;s based on the global diversity of the world &apos;s population .
the sahara sahara was much bigger than today .
the people who were in killing the killing of animals that were in the savannen , they would go to north and followed about 45.000 years ago , the grasland in the middle east in a rare feuchteren period of the sahara .
the humangenomprojekt , rover-missionen on mars .
we know deep in our hearts that the universe is not moving from the ground to complexity .
so there &apos;s go there .
what you see here , the blue areas are roughly a tausendstel of a range of light than the red areas .
and the über of kleinere works as gravity , which explains why you and i are smaller than the stars and planets .
they &apos;re familiar with the double double of dna .
let me explain why .
in the last 200 years , something else happened .
now , you might ask yourself , &quot; what is talking about ? &quot;
we &apos;re not so good when it &apos;s going to be about insurance .
and then they have to decide how they invest in their 52 choices , and they &apos;ve never heard about a geldmarktfonds .
at least a wonderful study , it predicted .
but if you get a license , you would check that box if you don &apos;t want to donate the organs .
the other group gets two apples , one is going to be taken .
save more tomorrow makes it easy .
this is just one example .
it &apos;s a song about a so-called kolibrimotte , a creature that mimic a creature that &apos;s imitating a nature .
hi , who &apos;s there , please ?
thank you .
that &apos;s what you know is too much influence on the lebenserfahrung .
i &apos;m trying to get time to do .
so what did i do ?
we invent stories to explain our existence .
so what did they do ? they sent their walter to the walter girl to separate their own their own göttlichen .
you know , you know ?
elizabeth : scher out ! scher you out ! scher you out .
i went to a friend of mine , and he &apos;d let me wait in his appartment in malabar hill in the 20th floor , a really rich area in mumbai .
it &apos;s a contradiction .
we lived in less than a dollar a day -- about 15 years .
and you &apos;ve got to use the nuts of the rainforests to show that forests as forests are more than a grasflächen . &quot;
he said , &quot; you can &apos;t aufwecken a person to sleep . &quot;
but it &apos;s not just people ; it &apos;s about lebenswandel .
if you should be sustainable on a limited planet , all of the products should be sustainable , how can we achieve this ?
coke has to work with pepsi .
these are nine of them .
in the end , we , i think , had 60 percent of the global production at the table , and 25 percent of the bedarfs .
that &apos;s not unerheblich .
but they don &apos;t just buy the juice ; they also buy carbon in the trees , to cover the kohlenstoff-kosten of the fracht that are going to be able to send the product to europe .
so the communication is broken between brain and spinal cord ; this leads to a full of permanent and permanent paralysis of the beins .
and after a few years , we &apos;ve been able to develop a elektrochemische neuroprothese that versetzt the nervous system of the spinal cord of a wachen state .
we &apos;ve been working hard to do this goal .
after a few weeks of recovery , we set a robotic pump to inject a individual medikamentencocktail into the spinal cord .
and i was a child who was working .
he talked about the world , like she is , &quot; and the world , how it should be . &quot;
and by doing that , these women are going out of the way away .
in the white house , and the desk he sits in is called &quot; resolute desk . &quot;
the last day , the woman who took care of everything was in the last day , and we talked about each other , and suddenly she said to me , &quot; would you sing me ? &quot;
for this gesangsstück , it &apos;s a hymne of the voice , because it &apos;s mysterious -- as you can see -- it &apos;s completely spontaneous , and it &apos;s originally .
they didn &apos;t have anything .
so the internet requires adressierung and instructions .
one of the most popular websites of the world that &apos;s been done by the most powerful company in the world , and there was nothing that youtube or google could have .
and today wikipedia is so omnipräsent that you can actually find them in the cards of restaurants in china .
and that has understood wikipedia .
this is a blog that &apos;s widmet bedauerlichen portraitfotos .
why ? there &apos;s a mitfahrersuche of craigslist.com. .
the world doesn &apos;t end in the 90s .
and we see that the impact of the environment on the lernleistung in some countries is very , very strong .
all this costs money .
and it was done much to give students with migrationshintergrund or socially weak families to give the same chances .
how will schools and teachers are in the media ?
in the bürokratischen , the teacher will be gelassen alone and have a lot of unterrichtsvorgaben .
some people say that the change of the bildungsverwaltung is a little bit like a friedhofs .
but if you look at the question of this perspective , you can see what &apos;s happened in the last 60 years .
and i was about 15 miles across the entire morning to get to the apotheker .
so this was obviously a unverzichtbares device .
we could do that with phones .
so , a business is going to create .
&quot; government has to offer economically economic services . &quot;
it was once , long , long time , when i was 24 years old , i was studying at st. john &apos;s medical college in bangalore .
and you can see my map when i &apos;m hinbekomme you here .
i also , i want to take an invention .
now we &apos;re in the 1930s , and you can see that japan goes through a time of war , with lower life expectancy .
and they decided not only to invest in health and education , but also started to grow the economy .
washington , d.c. went out .
not the bubble , not my bubbles , but the financial bubble .
and then , the rich countries will actually accept the whole state of the world &apos;s completely changed , and the power transition from there , where you &apos;ve been back to 100 , 100 to 150 years ago , was back to asia ?
the rest of the diagram is a very mysterious substance called dark energy .
but that &apos;s not what the presence of the whole mass is not .
and let &apos;s pay attention to the fact that we live in a three-dimensional universe -- a three-dimensional space .
again , this is a kind of wahrheitsgetreues model of what &apos;s going on during the process of the process .
they move from each other , because the space will be bigger .
by looking at things like clusters -- their teilchendichte , how many of you there are function of time -- can we get in experience , in which way dark matter and dark energy are in charge to form structures .
big questions in physics .
you are the banjo banjo boys : virtuoser bluegrass from ... new jersey ?
so , recycling , and the recycling are hauptstreitpunkte .
marc koska : 1.3 million reasons to reinvent the plastikspritze
and in fact , there were these changes in gay men in the u.s. during the 1980s .
it &apos;s a disease that kills a lot of adults in africa , and also many children .
in uganda we see the spread .
that &apos;s what makes you close to the very similar end .
but openness and connection has a prize when we think about disease . that should not be a surprise .
coffee is ugandas hauptexportprodukt .
emily oster : even once the aids statistics in africa , from an economic perspective , and it comes to a surprising conclusion that all of us know about the spread of hiv on the continent is wrong .
but i was fascinated with this kind of feinem italian vorsatzpapier .
he was called &quot; bullet train , &quot; zug-geschoss , because he was the front of the front , but every time he ran into a tunnel , he built a druckwelle on the tunnel , and then there was a kind of schallknall .
these are the höcker , like a magnet , like a magnet .
then we ask ourselves why the membrane is verstopft and why it takes so much electricity .
for example , in the einbettung of nanopartikeln in a material .
in biomimicry guild , my beratungsgesellschaft , we work with the architektenbüro hok architects .
janine janine : biomimicry in the use of the use of the effort
&quot; yeah , but why ? &quot;
we were four , not one , and fortunately , not boys .
you can &apos;t do anything about it .
it &apos;s never going to happen in india , because it &apos;s been once again and never again .
they said , &quot; yes . &quot; i said , &quot; well , let &apos;s pray . &quot;
this was a meditationprogramm for over 1,000 inmates in this prison .
second , it &apos;s about the anti-korruptions movement in india .
now let me tell you about a project that we did a few years later , a kind of a captcha .
basically , you &apos;re doing it by starting with an old book .
the number of pages that are actually using the recaptcha is so much that the number of words that we &apos;re doing a day is very , very large .
some are more fun .
and at the time , the web is divided into several languages .
then my lieblingsteil is the question .
there &apos;s a way to beat two flies with a heart .
but what &apos;s more surprising is that the translation we &apos;re going to get from the site-nutzern , even if you &apos;re just a anfänger , the translation we &apos;re also just as the same as professional übersetzern , and that &apos;s very surprising .
because people used to draw value , they don &apos;t pay for money , they pay for their time .
the most connected side , the company , does what they really can do .
plattformern to active participation is everything else as normal .
and zipcar offers a very , very attractive , konsequente service that works the great .
for aristotle , happiness was the highest good , the goal to bring it all else .
maybe these people have right . his thoughts might not be good .
10 percent of the time is schweifen the thoughts ... ...
i was playing the violent african , the african terrorists .
well , from the first few years , no explicit in the world did not have a clear , so no one had ever reached the absolute majority -- so the election in a second round of weeks were continuing to continue .
now , here &apos;s an interesting comparison .
so i moved to la , i &apos;ve learned surfing .
people in the 17th century didn &apos;t really know how much the idea of how we were that this stuff is a bunch of different molecules , and that we took it from a specific reason and so .
and so charles , i &apos;m going to give you money to give you a building , and you can meet you there , but don &apos;t talk about religion .
reality is what you can see .
i thought everyone would be doing a little bit of a mind .
just to see what would happen if you mix them .
so i have something that &apos;s not personally .
if you want to be rich today , you will be entrepreneurs .
they say , if you measure the temperature of the atmosphere , it doesn &apos;t increase -- it doesn &apos;t increase in the way , and we &apos;re very carefully by measuring it for 20 years , and it &apos;s not going to increase .
biochemiker , biochemiker , a grundlage talks about the foundation of modern science : the experiment . he shares stories from the 17th century and from his own raketenbau-tagen in the garden and preist , inspiration and sorgfalt and care of all their forms .
i wanted to represent a very simple kind of living body that bewohnt these verfallenden , heruntergekommenen spaces .
&quot; naked city &quot; is a spitzname for new york and &quot; spleen , &quot; verkörpert the melancholie and ermüdung that create the sense of entfremdung in a urban environment .
i love traveling , and berlin has become one of my lieblingsstädte .
and all of the time i haven &apos;t seen a single rat at some of these places until recently , when i was traveling in the london channels .
the first question is , and maybe you &apos;ll write them on a piece of paper , physically , or on a virtual piece in your head , and for audience at the audience , you can try that .
and we &apos;ll stop with , &quot; we are the best of the world &apos;s best naturwissenschaftliche in the world , &quot; because of our british hybris .
except -- you &apos;re going to be -- well , in your ellipse , you thought , &quot; well , what &apos;s going on during night ? &quot;
and one of the most difficult problems is , if people have already a sense of how everything works , it &apos;s quite hard to change .
and as an expert for a anorganische chemistry , i have friends and colleagues that are different between the organic , living world and the anorganischen world .
and you can see it befruchtet , keimt , grows in a way .
we have some amazing life forms that we can manipulate .
and darwin himself , in a letter to a letter , a colleague of a colleague of a colleague , that life probably could be done in a warm little pond -- maybe not in scotland , maybe in africa , maybe somewhere else .
what is life ? what is this stuff of life ?
and we can connect them and literally create thousands and thousands of thousands of large molecules molecules , in the same size , like dna and proteins , but it &apos;s not carbon in view .
we want to put them in the environment , and we want them to get their energy from the sun .
and i think if we can make some anorganische biology and make matter to it , then we can define it in fact .
but there &apos;s another reason i like this entwicklungsziele : each one of them can measure .
and these are highly professional women &apos;s interviewer who sat down for an hour with a woman and ask them to ask her geburtshistorie questions .
i was really sitting on friday in the friday , and i could see how the mortality rate of this morning fell from 84 .
as you know , these economists love the money , they want to get more and more of them .
as you can see , it doesn &apos;t make sense to measure an average of improvement , which is not , and this very fast progress .
but you don &apos;t talk about it .
they were high with high school , or very high , child mortality , and the families were very big , six to eight .
this is also a katar .
whatever remains for money is value .
yeah , i went to barefoot until i was 12 .
and he said to them , &quot; well , the unstrittige is asking .
all of the time was a border .
and , after my view , the world will move forward , will make a difference , not just a few , but for everyone .
and the knee knee , yes , that would be hard .
the entwicklungszeit -- it took about 10 years and 700 million dollars .
he said , &quot; earth is enough to meet everyone needs , but not everyone &apos;s greed .
and säuglinge die .
i went to high school .
when i was at the council of science research research -- 40 labs -- if two labopartorien were not talking , i built teams .
they &apos;re actually , and now i have apps in the app .
it &apos;s about bringing something old to perfect and an old century .
it &apos;s still very hot , but it &apos;s not more radioaktiv .
but this reactor , but not a lot of pressure , and it &apos;s not so reaktiv , that means that the spaltprodukte is not going to leave the reactor .
i &apos;m convinced that the reactor i designed here , which can be an innovative source source , the great scientific projects , and i &apos;m really willing to do this .
we &apos;re moving towards a erlebniswirtschaft , where the experience is the actual product .
there &apos;s a maker of the funknetz , for the case they &apos;re in the woods .
at the end of a long , litanei of good advice that he gives his son , he says , &quot; especially , sei against you .
normally , you don &apos;t normally walk in los angeles , but there &apos;s a place where you can walk a lot out in this city .
then they &apos;re being wrong as a false schaumschläger -- using properties that they don &apos;t have .
when i was little , i was very , very , very ambitious and i &apos;d like to stay with myself alone .
and then it was just about to start at a point and then to build it up to the endpunkt .
so i built it out of concrete , because it doesn &apos;t matter .
this was this tool .
and for me , this is the most important thing , because since i was a child , i wanted to convey my passion and love .
25 days : the herzkammer entwickelt 32 days : arms and hands are developing 36 days : the primitive spine , the period of the fetus , are the period of time that the fetus evolves the fastest .
and so , the complexity of this is to build in one single system , again , beyond each grasp or any of any today that there is today .
because apparently , there &apos;s this instabile isotop lithium-6 not in the atmosphere of stars .
so what can you do with this kind of thing ?
recently , a colleague of berkeley , gibor basri , an email with a very interesting spectrum and asked , &quot; can you see this ? &quot;
there are two ways of being made about massereiche and massearme stars -- in the universe and regeneriert .
because can you imagine that everything is going to be siedet ?
now imagine an object , an incredible object , or something that we can &apos;t explain , and we just stand up and say , &quot; so , we &apos;re not going to work .
and when we see stickstoffdioxid , and oxygen , then i think we have the perfect e.t. of the perfect .
i just said , &quot; really ? &quot; and he goes , &quot; absolutely . &quot;
what i can tell you : it &apos;s universal ; we all have them .
i &apos;m slightly addicted to büroartikeln , but this is another talk .
this led to a small collapse -- -- that actually looked like this .
and i said , &quot; but the thing is : no familienzeugs , no kindheitsscheiße . &quot;
what are you feeling vulnerable ? &quot;
i &apos;m right , you don &apos;t have quite right . stop the heart .
we do as if we could do what we do , no impact on other people .
people are protokollierten their meals , the windeln of their children on the iphone .
so if we think about using our systematic improvements , we also think about how to be useful to our selbstverbesserung , for our selbstfindung and selbsterkenntnis .
and today i want to talk about one of the things we decided to do at the time , and we wanted to find a new access to healthcare .
so , steven &apos;s his story . but he &apos;s not alone .
here &apos;s why people pray .
i also love this cyberkinetische implant , also , these were the only patientendaten that were online and available .
and here we have a paper .
you don &apos;t have abschirmung , you don &apos;t have any data , that &apos;s not going to work for scientific methods .
this is the curve of the behandlungsabsicht .
but my brother , i didn &apos;t end up with him .
if we went from here to the b-15-eisberg , we would hit something that 300 meters up , 120 miles , 28 miles wide and weigh the two .
to change the state , you need only two volts of a millisekunden-impulses .
we said , &quot; can you build this ? &quot;
we can do that better .
but there &apos;s a fascinating solution that &apos;s what &apos;s called the sogenannten komplexitätswissenschaft .
so , these are networks of the ideals of complex systems .
and it also has effects on the risk of the risk .
so we could put a einflussgrad in each other .
we see the emergence of langfristiger and kapitalkräftiger programs that focus on understanding our world &apos;s connected world from the point of complexity .
wasserrohre have a festgesetzte capacity with festgesetzten durchflussraten -- except for expensive pumps and valves .
and we had a 500 of these glaskolben .
without human zutun .
so we were on top of our doppelstockbett .
and this graph doesn &apos;t even mean something that &apos;s been invented .
and my brain starts very quickly , that this is a akkurate representation of negativem to positive in the world .
because this question is , what we can predict our world &apos;s world is the truth , but the truth is that i only can predict 10 percent of the value of a person if i berücksichtige their entire external world .
and this is a scientifically scientifically inkorrekt and wrong with the other things .
we &apos;re going to move people to open their mailprogramm , a positive email to the lobs or the danks to write in their social environment .
it &apos;s hard to say -- a familiengeschäftgeschichte , you understand -- my father was the aufrichtigste man on the world .
and so i went . i went to mit , closed .
they said , make it stop .
they take a huge amount of cardboard .
he was the first digital media producer in tokyo .
do you hear that ? how cows ? this is in the morning 4 &apos;clock in logan .
so there are all these things , but most of the love i love to taste the world .
and i &apos;m going to try that with passion .
their culture doesn &apos;t come in schools . and i want to tell you ways to get through this problem .
that makes you nervous because girls don &apos;t want to go to schools , they don &apos;t have boys .
and for small moments in my life .
or mothers who raised boys ?
we need to change the stance with boys in elementary school .
and you get the impression that you think that &apos;s okay .
let &apos;s see where this hypothesis is going to be .
is this a problem ? yes , a big problem .
we believe that these &quot; why &quot; -fragen clues about the basic principles of nature .
i &apos;m going to try and give it to the end , and i &apos;m also excited to see it .
and this was really an important lesson for me to be able to really act any object .
we have a newspaper for example , a normal newspaper .
it &apos;s connected to my ipad , and it &apos;s a software that &apos;s going on on the ipad .
it &apos;s a digital sculpture , so i wanted to add a interaktionssystem , so i &apos;m going to put them in a näherungssensor so that people will react in the glass , when you go to it .
from my current i &apos;m going to turn into a man of middle-aged , and then you get into an old man .
50kg extra extra .
radio : what do you think ?
just fold the wings together , and they go further .
so i &apos;m going to ask you a different question .
and he made a königlichen kartoffel-garten , with wachmännern , who had instruction to bewachen him day and night , but with the secret instruction , not very well to bewachen him .
because they found that verlust-vermeidung are going to be more powerful .
yet we have to create a clear vielfältigeres medien-ökosystem , which one can create this kind of value , and it &apos;s also a lot of fair .
now , if we all have these tools , we just have to ask the question -- and we &apos;ve done and sunstein and sunstein , how we use these smart .
they &apos;re going to lead the new karo-shreddies .
they give small , trivialen alltagsaktivitäten .
i felt , passion , soul and heart , had left my body .
audience : no .
sb : no , no , no . &quot;
all around us , klummpig umhertreibend , let &apos;s find a different replicator in this urzeitsuppe of culture .
you probably bought them .
imagine the world full of brains and more memes than all of them is there .
we are the only gen- and mem-maschinen .
i think that &apos;s the wrong approach .
that was dangerous , but hi .
they use us to make the resource of the planet to produce more and more machine , and then another amazing things that we hear here at ted .
and will we take this third danger of how we have the second and first of the first ?
in collaboration with minustah -- this is the un-vertretung in haiti -- with the ministry of public health service , with various nicht-regierungs-organistaionen , we inspizierten more than 1,500 buildings .
it won &apos;t be going to be more cost if we do it right . &quot;
and because i had a verbrennungen to 70 percent of my body , it took about an hour .
we also found that it would have been good , and i had given me to erholen my pausen to recover from pain .
and how bad would the sentence would be if i would be caught ?
it wasn &apos;t that the religiöseren people -- who who had more commandments gewußt -- less betrogen , and that the less religious -- those who could almost no commandments could recall any commandments .
so if you &apos;re not just about money for a few seconds because you get a brand , does that make a difference ?
that is , it &apos;s like this .
i think all these forces have very bad effects on the stock market .
but you can believe . i work in the commercial world .
these are the harmloseren that i can show you today .
and all of a sudden , amazon becomes brand and konkurriert , the way you want to spend money , what money is and what it is .
maybe that seems to a big leap ?
i think i don &apos;t have to explain it to the audience -- last week i had to explain it to my neunjährigen -- and these are structures that have spermien to transport from an individual to another .
and i knew that animals like the regenwurm here , or even most animals not stabilize their tissues by doing them over bone .
and this was because every skeleton we found in nature , in nature , had the same grundelemente .
all i showed that was really surprised .
a funny song about global warming , from jill jill .
well , i must now .
all right , ok .
do we want to play a piece ?
selbstunterricht , selbstentdecken and selbstbehauptung ; are the benefits of a great education .
the minecraft-community flippte totally totally out of this , and ben has been to a medienberühmtheit .
and it &apos;s going on , what is the area of this character ?
i was forced to leave my home to the democratic republic of congo , where i was studentenaktivist .
but bemerkenswerterweise , the u.s. health organization of the united nations has estimated the wealth of the country to over 24 trillion dollars .
but we &apos;re not at the end .
they have to be very cheap .
but could not be done for that angles of the arbeitsmarktes ?
they asked to support governments of government , and in many cases they also have them .
but let &apos;s take our goal to bring new economic action on the basis of the pyramid .
because they need a whole bunch of these little transactions to make their profit .
he liked his lap because he said it was painful for him to lie in his own bed .
since 1920 , as sir arhur eddington and the british society for wissenschaftsförderung is vermutete that the sun seems to be .
so , what &apos;s fusion ? here &apos;s a little bit of kernphysik .
and this energy is it that &apos;s going to happen to happen .
it &apos;s like a traditional kraftwerken .
we need to make it a power station .
but it &apos;s the largest arab country , and it &apos;s also a great impact .
in most of the most , they wanted to do democracy , but they were all over the population who had been asked to the population of the last month in the last month , and they had only four percent .
but the expectations of people who have significant to their future .
so the question is , &quot; what drives the male support for women &apos;s health ? &quot;
i promise you she read the message .
nobody can listen to you , send them a text .
you could see the immediate effects of law or the hasserfüllten speech on a schulversammlung , and see what happens as a result .
it took 12 seconds and went to 35 feet .
this is a rocket that &apos;s going to be a rocket .
he &apos;s less than a aa-batterie .
it &apos;s the smallest lufthauch to the schieren forces of the storms of nature .
we can afford to contribute and make a voice to us .
we believe someone else , someone else , somebody fähigeres someone , is to solve a more resources with the problem .
we didn &apos;t flew it in the pacific .
it took a long full prototypes to get something that was really flying .
and so there &apos;s this incredible hochgefühl of what &apos;s going on , which is possible , and this is a place that it means .
and think about our moral footprint .
and the director was pretty amüsiert , and he told me that he was holding me mad , and he said , &quot; this place is a strafanstalt . these guys are severe .
it took several of them to find what i was supposed to do .
when i started this program four years ago , my ursprünglicher plan was a siegerteam plan to make a siegerteam of the underdogs .
and they &apos;re looking down , everything is so small and tiny .
i feel blessed and happy that i had the courage to give my post to life for a 15 years ago , to give my post to the nyu and return to my home , where i can do these incredible rides with this incredible fahrten children from ethiopia , morocco and russia .
and how many would my self to die before i understand that it doesn &apos;t exist from the beginning ?
and i was a really good dancer .
well , seltsamerweise , these insights , these insights , not my geringes sense of self-esteem , that sense of otherness .
that was because i didn &apos;t have myself , which was between .
imagine what kind of existence we could have , if we honor the unvermeidlichen of the self , the privilege of life , and the most excited about what &apos;s next .
and this is a cafe in the ocean in the u.k.
but instead of what we looked at the appearance , we focused on the way .
we also discovered that how a effizientere structure and a kostensparendere form would get through this structure .
but we found that seeds -- this really important project is actually , but that seeds -- in the leading gardens of the leading , gardens , they &apos;re not ausgestellt .
we worked with a kunstrasenhersteller to develop a miniversion of the seed cathedral , so even if you were visually impaired , it &apos;s kind of knusprig and soft , the piece of landscape you see here .
it &apos;s just the first few of the things that you &apos;re seeing , and the rest of the rest is just for postcards .
the book carries the title &quot; the blank slate , &quot; the popular notion of the human mind , is a blank slate and all his structure from his sozialisierung , culture , education and experience .
well , there &apos;s a bunch of political reasons that they enjoy the people .
it &apos;s still not clear whether these are verallgemeinerungen , but the datenlage seemed to be based on this .
another one of the geistes- and kunstwissenschaften at the universities , which are actually in decline in their decline .
well , the other hot hot is the parenting .
and i think you can &apos;t tell this .
i also call peta , just like jux , and they don &apos;t like it , but they confirm it .
there &apos;s no script , there &apos;s no script , there &apos;s no nonsense .
he says , &quot; a day . &quot;
i don &apos;t like what i &apos;m thinking right now . &quot;
oh , i live in a computer program -- that &apos;s strange .
so i asked what would happen if we challenge some of these challenges .
right ?
and it &apos;s the way -- we &apos;ve explained the war , as a society , everybody .
her iphone without the people that the same skin , the same circuits , make the same keyboard , and over and over again .
and then it &apos;s been getting bigger and bigger , and now it &apos;s 886 pages long .
and i said to brian , &quot; what did tony do ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; well , is it true that you &apos;re in gefälscht ? &quot;
but how do you sit in a perfectly normal way ?
so all of the things that came out to tony at the normalsten , they proof out that he was crazy in this new way .
he came in schwächelnde , and entließ 30 percent of the workforce , american cities just went into geisterstädte .
and i added to , &quot; i have a list of psychopathischen features in my pocket .
and the juwelen are always the most remote aspects of the personality .
anyway , that was two years ago , and this is where my book was going to end .
in fact , the trend for the rest of the world .
and as a result of this , it &apos;s very difficult for everyone to say , very difficult to say , i &apos;m vertrete the true islam . &quot;
it might be that a big war between east and west ausgefochten has been ausgefochten , and there was democracy in the underlying democracy .
and even though the president of the president , for the president , i met it , very well , very well , it &apos;s not the enemy of islam , is nonetheless , to call a natural impulse in kriegseintriit the other side as enemy .
when the treasure went down to 2000 , you just saw the peak of the best brütezeit scientists ever had for african penguins -- that was a gefährdete species of being vulnerable .
and the day after our arrival , two of us were given to the national space system with space 2 : space 2 had more than 4,000 penguins .
we &apos;ve used this way to use this way in the treasure rescue .
and this is really important because the african penguin was explaining a year ago in a very endangered way .
in the corner row , on bahnhofsparkplatz , in front of a gesundheitszentrum , in the vorgärten , and even before the police station .
people are open to the essensgeschichte .
we launched this campaign -- very amüsant -- called &quot; every egg . &quot;
that &apos;s not a schulübung of second grade .
these lessons came out of unbewiesen , abstract .
and he was hillel on a leg and said , &quot; what &apos;s your neighbor &apos;s not to do . this is the torah . the rest are commentary .
now -- but it &apos;s not the whole story .
and achilles &apos;s taking hektors leichnam and übergibt it carefully to his father , and the two men look at each other and recognize each other as a göttlich .
this is what cells really look at in biology , and science , looking at the living cells in the microscope .
every grain of grain has a size of a tenth of a millimeter .
you can see these mikrometeoriten .
this picture was the beginning of the röntgentechnologie .
we all look at the same from the inside , believe me .
the walls are made of 700 mm of a thick , solid concrete .
and that &apos;s one of the one in the left .
it &apos;s human association .
in an x-ray , we see all the little überlappungen in the corners .
i had to put the car in the middle , for not really easy to do .
yes , you gave 12 monkeys for a week , and after this week , they just used it as a toilet .
the science is actually saying that we will live forever .
no , i spucke a tooth .
for me , it &apos;s a very , very important thing .
thank you . goodbye .
how do we know that it &apos;s wrong ? maybe we don &apos;t agree .
not professor and verurteilter , just two minds to philosophieren .
and then my life was fine .
all i saw in the manufacturing was that there was right between between the feinschmeckern between the züchtern and the jägern-sammlern .
then , would have time to process information ?
we spent a lot of time , a $ billion dollar store , and you can hear a billion dollar- ölgeschäft of ölgeschäft that he was involved in , and what we found was shocking , but still more .
then there &apos;s dan .
we were a erschüttert that these shell had rapidly weiterverkauft their vermögenswerte and the most important in london &apos;s bergbauunternehmen bergbauunternehmen was very profitierten .
it &apos;s too complex and difficult to change it .
we &apos;re all going to die . we &apos;re all going to be old . we &apos;re all sick . we &apos;re leaving by people .
there are places where you can &apos;t walk , you think you can &apos;t think , &quot; worlds you can &apos;t use longer . &quot;
they have a wildheit and a freedom from which i think is the foundation of a new paradigmas .
she made the decision to get a rasierklinge or glasscherbe , but their lives to the dedicated to not happen to other girls .
we &apos;re all refugees .
but you &apos;re klemmt this thing on your head , and then you get that .
but that doesn &apos;t do it . &quot;
i miss michael .
he didn &apos;t find that , but his employees , he was knöpften him , but he said , &quot; you &apos;re going to go into the recovery , or you &apos;re going to be fired and die . &quot;
ah ! we hit her , the heimlichen beloved . let &apos;s pull out .
if it &apos;s on the box , which is the gegenseite , it &apos;s a form of it .
the characteristics that the word of kindisch are so often in adults , that we should end up with the old diskriminierende word that we should be with a kritisieren that is associated with verantwortungslosigkeit and irrationalem thinking .
if i anzweifle my sister &apos;s ability to pay 10 percent of the interest i &apos;ve ausgehandelt on her last kredit , i will have to cut your ability to get more money from me until you paid it back .
it &apos;s why we &apos;re not living in the dark times .
and the third is all the sounds that we create people , the anthrophonie .
this is after the selective .
there are many facetten of geräuschkulissen , among other things , the way animals have taught us to dance and sing that i think for another time .
so this was extremely embarrassing .
and if you &apos;re wondering , how much this is , this ebay-logo here is 16 kb .
so 37 is our demographic .
it &apos;s very impressive and a very nice concert .
and these are the issues that are actually really at heart .
one generation that makes so much more meaning in video games than the real world .
these are all problems outside my ichs .
i &apos;m not sure what the future of video games for our civilization means .
finally ! finally ! that &apos;s it .
he would like that right .
so , you get fast from the simple to complex , if you do more . we like that .
and then you can look at them , and that &apos;s a little bit of the time -- i thought at least long time , until she explained to me , that &apos;s to make you something like you think .
it &apos;s going to drive the other direction .
girl : there &apos;s a sphere and a schaumstoffball , because it &apos;s two completely different gewichte , and if you fall at the same time , you might fall .
but we couldn &apos;t train a thousand new teacher to save our lives .
and it &apos;s a märlein . &quot;
and ultimately , we &apos;re going to change ourselves as well as we have changed the world around us .
that &apos;s going to have incredible effects .
why do they do what they do ?
everybody would want to want the new version .
they affect us too .
they &apos;re going to be schwärmen in that moment .
i &apos;m going to put his words back in the order of the order .
&quot; well , yes , &quot; i said , &quot; strange , you ask that .
and you , you don &apos;t need that to do that .
and we looked at it , and i was grateful , because she just said , &quot; wow ! that &apos;s insane . &quot;
the goal of the project is very simple .
this is completely personalized medicine in topform .
now the answer is a multidisziplinäres team .
i work with the imperial and the brompton , which is a couple of serious problems with the project that have not been able to have .
there &apos;s so many people who don &apos;t want to have a change , not quite not if an dahergelaufener engineer has an answer .
you can actually find novel solutions that haven &apos;t been seen before , and that &apos;s very quickly and easy .
yes , well , your guys would get my life , because trackpads were all about , from beautiful runder form .
no , but it &apos;s true : the internet has changed the world .
you know the story .
and i met the dozo .
and i didn &apos;t ask her to draw nice cartoons .
thank you .
so , &quot; our lonely earth &quot; took me every lot of that meeting the audience .
we still have a lot of time for the existence of animals on this planet than they have been here , until we reach the second microbial era .
his impact is the distribution of these very thin einschlagschicht across the whole planet , and we had a very zügigen death of the dinosaurs , the death of this beautiful ammoniten , leconteiceras here , and celaeceras there , and so much else .
it &apos;s the top one , the t. rex of its time .
they hate animals .
this is when material comes from the depths of the earth and the surface is distributed over the surface of the planet .
i &apos;m a 130km off the coast , which will happen to me ?
they have an accident . they have two options : they will die , or they take the hydrogen sulfide , and they say 75 percent of them will be saved .
pw : blessing and fluch .
some of you are countries who believe that , in fact , deregulierung or even no regulation for the best way to promote investment is to promote trade .
the answer is simple : the chinese define these factories than chemical businesses , not as a pharmazeutische , and check them .
i don &apos;t know what we can do , but i can use my office at least to bring them together to build a solution . &quot;
they need a secure environment .
now , we have the impression that it &apos;s the beginning of a new way of the regulation international tasks .
human rights are going to be a very simple question : can i give this person back to this person ?
or otherwise , to find the boys who put the fire on the beginning to see if you can change it . &quot;
okay , ready ? go .
i was fire and flamme .
again and again , we saw the spoken word poetry of poetry .
after the fight , he schüttelte his nasses , wolkenweißes hair , and said , &quot; you &apos;re a god . &apos; &quot; no , anderson , you &apos;re the god . &quot;
i travel a lot when i teach , and i don &apos;t always get to see how my students reach their third step , but i was lucky enough to see her journey as she did .
my parents have sarah me called a sarah name , which is a biblischer name .
i want to start with a couple of ideas that drove me to become a dokumentarfotograf .
when i saw that war for each of the people had such tremendous weitreichende consequences , and that the fotojournalismus could actually be a factor in the konfliktlösung , i wanted to be a photographer to be a kriegsfotograf .
in south africa , in south africa , after nelson mandela was released from prison , the black population was the last stage of apartheid from apartheid .
the next day i made it to rwanda , and it was like i had gone up in the expressfahrstuhl .
after the fall of suharto in indonesia , i began to explore the conditions of poverty in a country that was on the way to the modernisierung .
a hospital of the physicians without borders , in a refugee camp .
the kriegsmedizin is so efficient that the fraction of the soldiers who survive a verwundung in this war is much higher than in any other in our history .
to make sure that as little as possible can be done , we have all this kind of procedures in the choice .
so you choose this .
but it &apos;s a breites and pretty difficult subject , so i had to be a einschränken .
the size of the population -- this is big china , here &apos;s big india .
and in all eastern religions , except japan , the level was equal .
because death is a child who gets to kompensiert with another child .
and what is the bottom of qatar ?
they have a great deal .
all religions in the world are able to maintain their values and adapt to this new world .
and then , like all of our generation , we lived in a himalayakloster .
day eight .
in india alone , my 150.00 best friends and i had a door to door with this same picture , to every single house in india , we made over a billion hausbesuche .
this is the überwachungssystem .
i asked them -- they &apos;re all grippespezialisten -- and i asked them to ask them those who want to ask them .
i think we owe the schulden of the gphin and ron st. john , really much , i hope , ron is somewhere in the audience -- there -- he &apos;s the founder of the gphin .
larry brilliant : when first , aren &apos;t you angry at the end of the urheberrechte ?
i &apos;ve built a klimawandel-ngo , &quot; the climate group . &quot;
why should we have a positive impact on the world , in the world , as a business ?
they save 85 percent of electricity with a led that they used to have with an old light bulb .
sometimes people think that 100 percent will be pretty hard , and we had this conversation in business .
a solarpaneel pays himself in seven or eight years .
from our 17.000 managern in ganz , a 47 percent of women , but that &apos;s not enough , and we want to close this gap and follow this way to high management .
there was an equation in my family , about this : when you &apos;re intelligent , you &apos;re not going to be spiritual .
this is , he wrote , &quot; is the zusammenhängende structure of reality . &quot;
someone who attitude it from her , or whose point of view , he can make it out of the ears .
in the end of our mittagessens , we realized that we realized the openness of others .
i would go back to bangalore and i would go and a lot of discussions in my friends , and i was home and i was a lot of discussions with my friends where we were talking about a lot of different issues , while a drink is a lot of costs for the 14 years old .
he &apos;s looking for forgiveness , and he says he wants to improve his child child child .
this kontingent seemed to be pretty happy , and it had no deaths to have todesfälle even though dozens of friedenssoldaten of liberia had been killed .
and how are we responsible for that ?
it &apos;s an alarming -- not ? -- -- that the media is the world &apos;s a bad job , that a small group of activists is able to publish more from this kind of information than the rest of the weltpresse together .
j yeah . this was the front page in the guardian , and it was then gedruckt around kenya in all countries in the tansanianischen and the south african press .
j the effects on the people who worked it was a lot of beträchtlich .
and there &apos;s a lot of information .
i would be interested in just because of what we &apos;ve already heard -- i &apos;m curious about the opinion of the ted audience .
and we said , &quot; oh , tell us more .
so you &apos;re going to be careful about the term hackers .
and just a month ago , this was what was called the isländischen parliament parliament .
and from all these figures , i start with just two or three variables .
this piece here can be very different , depending on where you &apos;re going to be hinstellt .
first i read about this in a klage in a arztbesuch , which was done between the ärztekomitee for verantwortungsvolle medicine and seven fastfood-restaurants .
so according to this study , the best way for a chicken is not to make it in a long way , but it doesn &apos;t leave it for a long time , but it &apos;s not going to be black and marinade a marinade of sugar sugar , brown sugar or the water .
and then the next summer i worked under the leitung of dr. basu at fort worth , texas .
and this insight is an incredible for the efficiency of chemotherapy , perhaps for many different types of cancer .
for example , there are organic compounds chemical pollutants that are found in our schools , and it &apos;s found in the workplace .
because all of these solutions are , of course , they &apos;re sustainable , and they &apos;re langzeitinvestitionen -- they &apos;re langzeitinvestitionen for our generation and for the next generations .
and immediately called a voice , &quot; a &quot; känguru ! &quot;
after the conference , after my talk , people came to me , men and women .
hard !
one prosthetic is not for the need for need to be a lack of a auszugleichen .
we &apos;re all different from different perspectives .
i was in the process of beijing to be a olympische of the olympic games .
about 80 percent of these microblogger are young people , by the end of 30 people .
and they &apos;re most unemployment , inflationen , anziehenden anlehnen of the banks , werterhöhung of the renmenbi , nachfragerückgang from europe and america to produce .
they have a kind of tools that you can &apos;t get off in a piece of chicken or fish , and it looks like beef .
people think about this question : are we going to keep our environment on behalf of a greater bips ?
there &apos;s nothing to eat there , but the conditions were ideal for the winterruhe .
now , the series was not even ausgestrahlt , so they are the first ones to see this .
mars as earth , as earth , it seems to be equally lebensfeindlich .
sousa was afraid that we have to lose the possibility of this quote , quote , &quot; höllenmaschinen . &quot; they would take us .
but much more important , that bmi used to use the available works to generate a new arrangements that they were weitergaben for free to their clients , and then in the year of 1940 , as a ascap with a verdoppelung of the telephone , the majority of the radio stations to bmi .
and i ...
for the ausgleich , for me , for the ausgleich , i &apos;m first trying to ask a thing from the government , a mistake , right ?
this insight is incredibly zersetzend , unheimlich beschädigend .
okay , i don &apos;t want to leave you here here , but i &apos;ve just noticed that the person on the right is a liar .
&quot; honey , you don &apos;t see fat , no . &quot;
but another study showed that strangers , three times , lies within the first 10 minutes of their space .
here &apos;s her pet koko .
i &apos;m going to say it again .
don &apos;t think we don &apos;t want to see a liars .
we say , &quot; yes , &quot; as we shake the head .
science has been much more signs in the daylight .
look at that right , and you &apos;ll see the verräterische smile in the whole video .
in this way , in this way , it can be useful for us to be a little bit more deutlicher in terms of moral rules .
and that &apos;s not true , right ?
you know , we think we &apos;re often thinking that language , in the world , is that we live , but that &apos;s not true .
so , what &apos;s going on as a exzentrischer , if not even a tragic joke about harry seems to be ethnische .
six months after that , without any explanation , they would release me free .
that &apos;s what i &apos;m doing with my difficulty .
when i was 10 , i read james baldwins &apos;s country , &quot; and i was broken by this book .
a new song i hit you .
that &apos;s why i took a time to study coke .
and in the remote areas of africa , it &apos;s hard to find a good road .
how do you incentive to you based on the effects that you &apos;re doing in these remote villages ?
klingtfür me not as appealing as &quot; waving flag . &quot;
they &apos;re waiting for being cut .
a lot more people would have been .
today i &apos;m going to tell you two things : first , what we lost , and second , how we get it .
and you can see the most part of the living creatures of florida keys .
if there is no fishing in a reef because it &apos;s protected , or abgeschieden , that &apos;s great .
after a few years , after five to seven years , the fish come back , eating the sea , and then the algae grow again .
you can see the boundary of the schutzgebietes , because there are the boats all the aneinandergereiht .
if it &apos;s so good if that &apos;s so simple , how much is it ?
so the protection of the ocean , the oceans of a senke of government and institutions has become a senke , and that &apos;s not vertretbar .
in coral reefs , we found that the pyramid is the equivalent to the serengeti , where five lions come to a gnu .
okay , so , enric , i thank you for you to have a part of your spiritual experience . thank you .
it &apos;s been proven to the longest nature in the ocean .
they &apos;re going to go to the submarine -- they come to the eyes of the window and check out in the submarine .
and among other things , we &apos;re trying to do our partners in the woods hole , this virtual world -- this world , this area of the region -- to bring into the lab .
bl : these worms have no verdauungssystem . they don &apos;t have their mouth .
what we &apos;ve seen before we were out of the pacific .
we &apos;re going to try to show you the pacific in hd .
these worms are growing several centimeters in the week .
the concept of the bestandsbewahrung is zwecklos .
and the rest of one percent are looking at what the formula they can apply .
they also have the mathematical structure that of rastern , measurements , beschriftungen , points , etc .
the students have to do these . they have to be able to ask them .
and the best , or one of the best parts , is that we don &apos;t get the answer from the antwortschlüssel end at the end of the lehrer-version .
what is going to happen with the small hadron collider ?
this is what you find the fastest growing of the world .
they &apos;re privatschulen . there are no government schools in the slums .
this is a computer that &apos;s been installed at the entrance to your slum , and the revolutionären entrepreneur , named the sugata , who took the most extraordinary experiments that showed that children are able to learn from certain conditions , on the help of a computer .
now , the key is motivation , and that &apos;s two ways .
this is a school in a bus on a site site in pune , the fastest growing in asia .
you should turn it into mcdonald &apos;s .
there &apos;s a very , very formelle framework , schools , hochschulen , hospitals where innovation can take place , and informal environments , communities , social networks .
every child , to age 15 , that would have a place in a school , will be able to get one .
and as i look at it , this scene that comes from me and i &apos;ve been doing with me for 25 years .
here are a couple of parents of teenagers , all the time we cook for them -- and they hauen every night for two , three or four in the ! it &apos;s ridiculous .
he &apos;s going on everywhere and verschlingt everything .
these homosexuellen , people like me , to be treated as a full citizen , and it &apos;s written right before our nose .
there &apos;s people fear for their job , so they don &apos;t show who they are , at home . it &apos;s not just north carolina ; in all the states without the einfärbung , it &apos;s legal .
think about it .
and i was scared .
about three years ago , i read an article in the new york times .
who were my grandparents ?
it helps us to become what we could be .
that &apos;s how evolution works .
and actually , this insect &apos;s here .
i &apos;d like to smell one of someone before .
it &apos;s not only warming up to 43 to 44 degrees c for about two days , but it holds a constant temperature .
but the contrast is going to be about this . you &apos;re going to sticht out of the background .
here , the americans hit the russians , and yes , it was -- actually , a game .
and she started to tell me about it , and all parents here are going to recognize the schlüsselworte .
i have a irische .
our lives will be determined by data , and the presentation of this data is an amazing interfaces for us to create the great stories .
i also put a look at the various perimeter , because you can select what you want to point out from the data .
it &apos;s a beinloser man sitting in the box and controls this schachspieler .
it &apos;s about 11 sheep per hour , which is a stundenlohn of 68 cents .
and so , in the left-hand side , you can see the originalframe , and on the right side , you can see the frame as it was interpreted by 16 people who had no idea what they were doing .
and then , &quot; daisy bell : &quot; daisy , &quot; daisy -- aaron koblin : and we took all those pieces and put them into a wider mechanical turk .
but we knew that we would definitely need the right person to put us out of it and build something that we could build .
and below that all the individual frames that people have been doing this project .
thank you .
so i made a series of images of images , cut , and i put them together in portfolios .
and a unvorhergesehene consequence of that is that you can always see one part of your image , and that leads to a very free bauweise .
and sometimes i have an emotional reaction to news , like the earthquake in haiti in 2010 .
then i went 50 miles , then 60 miles .
it &apos;s like the different layers that we &apos;re made of , and what we present the world as our identity .
another glasprojekt is in a public library in san jose , california .
that &apos;s how every building has his own personality .
it &apos;s probably easier than ever before , to make a good living .
i don &apos;t think we &apos;re particularly materialistisch .
it &apos;s just too strange .
you know , in the middle ages , if you met someone who was very poor , you called this one &quot; unfortunate . &quot; literally , someone who is lucky , the destiny , not hold , was a un-glücklicher .
and this will be doing the youngest trial for the most recent trial and trompeten and the heavens will open .
i told them the action of the madame .
what i think i really talked about , is success and failure .
we should make sure that it &apos;s our are that we are really the creator of our own ambitionen .
alain de botton : a freundlichere , sanftere erfolgsphilosophie erfolgsphilosophie
when you train them in exercise , you don &apos;t smile .
you know , you &apos;re floating with beschlagener , and you &apos;re going 60 trains a minute , so you never really get to anything , you don &apos;t see it .
they &apos;re all eingetaucht into the liquid .
my breath is down to three atemzüge the minute .
and they should be worried about me , i didn &apos;t have them .
i swam with this thing .
it &apos;s the only schwimmstrecke that i &apos;m interested in .
there are already today .
the gateway can be a smartphone , or it could be a particularly eingerichtetes gateway , which is now many of these things are special gateways , because they &apos;re not so good .
many of you have the direct direct life .
this is an important part of our lives . we should sleep a third of our lives .
ok . let &apos;s go to disease now .
so we can change medicine in the pflegebereich , in all ages , from frühgeborenen or ungeborenen children to the senior , the pharmazeutische arena changes ; the entire spectrum of the disease -- i hope i &apos;m giving you a sense of that -- around the globe .
so , i hope i &apos;ve convinced you -- the implications of the krankenhausressorcen are enormous , and the effects on disease are also impressive in all these different diseases and more .
how do we create our stable societies ? longevity .
and in the novel , a particular called the alvin is produced . and he says , maybe that &apos;s not the best way , and it &apos;s destroying the whole system .
and so there &apos;s no arbeitskräftet there .
and she &apos;s a great thing .
it should be faster .
and you might be wondering how we do these schnittbilder .
our is the only way in the world that &apos;s where the partielle differentialgleichungen has come .
that &apos;s the finished hamburger , the finished hamburger .
a talk about surgical robots is always a talk about surgery .
and surgeons were more than a lot of business people .
but ultimately , the woke up .
they had to give their intuitive movements with the instruments .
i told you about the big complicated robot .
and as you can see , what &apos;s going out there to do anything useful , it can &apos;t remain so zusammengeballt .
and we don &apos;t even have to be einschränken on this makro-blick .
we are here to talk about accidents .
but we had a problem .
okay , well , it was partly my fault .
we &apos;ve not just shown that bacteria can be the solution to plastic waste , but also that openness to ungewissen ausgängen and the eingehen of risk are unexpected discoveries .
the movie we &apos;re going to see is made for the weltausstellung in new york .
i &apos;m not an exception .
it went on . you always always always have to make things better .
they didn &apos;t say , &quot; our style are curves . let &apos;s make the house . &quot;
i think in my family , we have very lucky , because we &apos;ve learned the design backwards .
all right , very good .
ed : and then embassy row is really a historical stätte . there in the kymaericanischen story that the pariser in the pariser is in the beginning of the message , where the message was .
you can see this chair there ? the orange one ? this is the organic chair .
because it &apos;s part of what we want to get .
it was nachrichtenartikel full of outrage . they were full of spekulation . they were anekdotisch . no sound information .
one of them is known : the population population , the world population has gone from two to nearly seven billion people in the last 50 years .
brent lawson : beautiful here .
you see the lines pass across the lines , when the population was happening .
before i &apos;m talking about the cost of the cost , i have to realize that i &apos;m very clear to realize that .
that &apos;s what liberation actually looks like .
but just recently , we can , thanks to technological progress , so the quantum science and quantum theory .
first of these are some strands of magnetic magnetic inside , but the superconductor is not when they move , they use energy , and they &apos;re stören .
and i can expand these circular magnet , and i can also expand to form a random track .
and it was inspired by this quote from douglas adams . the situation is from &quot; by the way through the galaxy . &quot;
because of course , they don &apos;t explain how to do it , if you want to do it yourself and not schmelzanlage .
but even though they were not convinced , they said , &quot; okay , we call back . &quot; -- they never have .
tt : yeah , i did .
so some people say , &quot; what will happen if moore &apos;s law to cross its limits ? &quot;
today you can buy about half a billion , and you &apos;re even better because it &apos;s faster .
but how do we get the software ?
larry page : he was given a passionate talk about our gründungsveranstaltung where he was plädierte to ask these big challenges of humanity .
they wanted to catch the fish .
this might sound , but it &apos;s incredibly terrifying to hear a lot of gerüchte that another more flutwelle , greater than the last one , to be just 13 , or maybe , tonight or perhaps .
so the tsunami can be seen as a kind of a second moment , a moment where the blogosphere was going to grow up .
probably , within three to five percent of the geleebohnen of the glass , and it would be better than the estimate of 90 to 95 percent of them .
someone link something to link , so others are going to link and so on .
he finished his erläuterungen , and i &apos;m waiting for a 300 pounds of schweren to use . but he just says , &quot; this is all i want to do . &quot;
so i &apos;m going to show you now , i &apos;m going to end , i &apos;m going to end with this thing that i &apos;m going to end with this thing , and i &apos;m going to end with this thing about the skin of this .
these habitat are more covered more of the land than all the other habitat .
many of us , i &apos;m locked in this , thinking that the exploitation of oceans is really serious about the last 50 or maybe 100 years .
these are a cable , connected vehicles , our eyes and hands are on the sea floor .
so there &apos;s a little bit of a little bit of this product that computers tells the computer what the product is .
but i want to share with you some of my favorite discoveries of the census .
we don &apos;t know why they do this , we don &apos;t know .
this graph is based on a very recent article that &apos;s going to be in the fachzeitschrift biology biology .
but that &apos;s not all done .
as an architect , i have to confront this thing .
mitchell mitchell : don &apos;t build a house , grow it !
i think this is very interesting and very proaktiv , because what you &apos;ve heard in the last few days is the sense of going to different directions : directions , the specific and unique for the problems .
now , we all think that shelley has obviously been a big romantic poet , many of us forget that he has written some wonderful essays , and the most famous one is a verteidigung of the poetry .
i &apos;m going to read you this .
and at a certain time of his life , they siedeln up on the rocks .
but let me show you the latest robotertechnik .
if you used to , the digital radio , the radiosender einstellte and &quot; krrckkk &quot; on the other radio , that was noise .
the basic idea of bayesianischen is that you have two sources of information that you &apos;re in the conclusions of the implications .
that means i have to make predictions about the future .
now , there &apos;s a very clear example of where a von sinneseindruck feels very different than he was made by another person .
and in the meantime , i got two daughters .
so they didn &apos;t know the rules after the other person plays .
if these dots were on a rennparcours car , they would have no idea what &apos;s going on .
we &apos;ve shown that we can explain a lot of data , and people are actually planning their movements really , to mindern the negative effects of the noise .
this is from the vorbeiflug of the ocean earth .
mars has the largest einschlagkrater of the solar system , the hellas-becken .
this is my lieblingsbild . it was just taken a couple of weeks ago .
the oldest stone on earth is only 3,6 billion .
and the result of our treffens was a raketengetriebenes roboterflugzeug called ares .
we fold it , and we put it in a raumfahrzeug .
this is about tilamook , oregon .
i think it &apos;s in the packaging that &apos;s going to look at this -- &quot; 8 to 12 . &quot;
and there was a guy who sold these tools for lego because lego -- the dänen -- no , they don &apos;t stand up .
and then some examples of these things are really sculptures .
i have to tell you , for me , i had changed everything .
perhaps most important : the impact on other companies is enormous .
in fact , politics is höchstem .
in brazil , there are 29.000 ethanol-zapfsäulen , whereas the u.s. have only 700 and armselige two in california , and within three years , the fraction of four percent has gone up to 85 percent .
this is not unwesentlich . it &apos;s a really big thing .
scientists are explaining to us -- and these are just estimates -- that we need to cut the rate of greenhouse gases in half of greenhouse gases and that as fast as possible .
i can &apos;t wait to wait what we &apos;re doing tedsters against the crisis .
there are always less people who are available to be able to get , and then you get this plateu of the curve , and you get this classic sigmoidale curve .
b is on the edge of the network .
and this happens to each other nodes .
the red dots are going to be the grippe-fälle , and the yellow dots will be friends of people with flu .
would you get the immunität to populations-ebene ?
and there are , i think , three ways that we can use these data .
the building was built until collapse of the venezolanischen economy , and the death of the bauunternehmers in the &apos; 90s .
even though it seems to be a totally chaotic place , if you see it , there &apos;s a whole web of wasserwegen and channels that connect every single house .
in this tradition , the future are all showing their besitztümer , which they will soon bring their new husband .
what makes a place like the torre david , which is remarkable , this kind of skelettrahmen , where people have a basis that they can use .
we can only ask , &quot; what are the rentiere of the weihnachtsmanns ? &quot; and experience it immediately -- or whatever we want to ask .
it &apos;s replaced the workers through technology .
you can see on the left in the screen , some symbols , which show what &apos;s on the right arm .
they &apos;re older , and they &apos;re always older .
or even , if we get a lot older , we &apos;re going to drive our cars so we can visit people .
they were disappeared in a moment .
it became more obvious that we can &apos;t win .
the two specialists behind the wheel will help me bring the result on the screen .
one of the journalists asked , &quot; what &apos;s happening ? &quot;
the evangelikalen are hinzugekommen , just like jewish verbände .
i think there are some , actually , many reasons , but here only just a few of us just focus on .
he was attracted by the fire , he &apos;s jagte them , he was like a motte , a little bit of a adrenalin-junkie .
let me go to door to door at the door with the international community , and see if there is any polizeikräfte or troops for these aufteilung .
but for sergio , it was too late .
he saw her .
samantha power over a complicated hero .
this is what it means that means that jobs and the possibilities of the whole wertschöpfungskette .
but today i &apos;m going to talk about the zugänglichkeit of food , because this year , last year and 2008 , during the hungerskrise of the hungerskrise , there &apos;s plenty of food for every single kilos of calories .
and i go in those stores , if you &apos;re there , you &apos;re out of the fields , you &apos;re out of the fields to see what you can get , and i &apos;m sure you can &apos;t get food .
we see changes in the participation of the education in schools .
i want to talk about something that i call digital food .
and what i found is that instead of subventionen and other things , invest in a school program .
thank you .
we could do the same thing with cancer .
they &apos;re not going to go to a brustkrebsklinik .
it &apos;s not abstract ; it &apos;s an interaction with the environment .
it &apos;s a umwerfendes device , not because it shows me how many kilokalorien i have everyday every day , but because it &apos;s monitoring the überwacht of the überwacht of the überwacht i &apos;m doing .
it &apos;s never been shown .
the leistungskraft of these magnets is so big that we can see a single cell in this technology .
that you don &apos;t have to shrink the tumor .
if the magnet is big enough , and your resolution is high enough , you can actually actually detektieren all proteins into the body and start to understand the individual system .
most of us find that , and interestingly , 12 vibrations per minute are about the atem-frequenz of a schlafenden human .
so if i put this in here -- longer as a couple of seconds , you would feel uncomfortable ; longer than a few minutes , and you would leave the hall in the near .
that &apos;s all recognized . and this is the tune that &apos;s going to be in the world at the time in the world .
and i stood there with two very good friends of mine , richard weber and kevin vallely .
while we cross miles and miles of sastrugi -- gefrorene eis-schneeverwehungen that could be hüfttief .
so , as i &apos;m standing here today , i &apos;m talking to you about the gesamtzeit of about five years .
just 10 miles off the coast of the coast , and deep feet down .
the ocean of climate climate and weather , they think the temperature , stable and form the chemistry of the world .
one-way-reisen are easy to ...
this is the result , if you don &apos;t know , there &apos;s no boundaries that we can take the oceans .
in the past three years , the u.s. has protected gut quadratkilometer ocean for example .
we need tiefsee-u-boote , new technologies to exploration the ocean .
and most of my early career i wanted to find out how the wings of the insects are generating enough force to hold itself in the air .
let &apos;s look at this notion of simplicity .
this is a beautiful picture of visual interneurone from the lab from jeff lichtman , and you can see the wonderful images of brains he showed in his talk .
they selektieren a zellsatz to trigger any behavior , another neuronenregler has another zellsatz and patterns , and you can think that this works in a very complicated system .
our mission is to build a detailiertes and realistisches computer computer in the human brain .
he &apos;s home and drinking tea .
if you look closer to the surface of the neocortex , you &apos;ll notice it &apos;s made up of all these pieces of it . it &apos;s g5 , like in a computer .
how many a typus tree are there ? where are they ?
we can look at the tissue . and we can change neurons .
we can put all these neurons , each of the individual in its own processor , activate it , and see what happens .
henrsy markram says that the secrets of the brain can be solved . mental illness , memory , perception : they are made up of neurons and electrical signals , and he &apos;s planning them with a super-computer that &apos;s modeliert the brain with 100,000,000,000,000 synapses .
there would be two or three thousand bombs .
the air force started building smaller models , and it started .
this is what nasa did to get a acht-mann-version that would fly to mars .
i &apos;ll tell you a little bit about irrationales behavior .
it &apos;s a fantastic time to write , because there &apos;s so much resonance that you can get from people .
the bottom one ? yellow .
when you ask people this question , they usually think it has to do something with culture .
the countries on the right , the ones who give the very much , they have a slightly different form of the form .
i &apos;ll give you another example of this .
but to get it back , it becomes more complex .
a online online for $ 59 .
the general idea here , by the way , is that we don &apos;t really know our präferenzen .
in fact , in medical , this is our view .
and radio waves are limited .
infrared , you can use lower energy to protect .
their intensity can be variiert very quickly , and it can be off very quickly .
you &apos;re critical of them .
but the only way .
cars have led-scheinwerfer and led-rücklichter and can communicate with each other and through the datenaustausch traffic traffic can communicate with the cars , and so on .
dna is what everything is mean in life .
because it &apos;s actually not that many data , actually , is not that many data .
you &apos;re in the apotheker genome , and it does a molecular medicine that &apos;s better than the current -- it has no side effects .
it &apos;s really easy -- it &apos;s just 246 genes -- but we could be able to make it completely synthetisieren .
we &apos;re not walking as small organisms alone around the world , but they &apos;re part of a big ecosystem .
the consequences can be bad -- if we are toxic us or earth , but that &apos;s just the result of a gemachten that we have been .
now i &apos;m a mostly here because there &apos;s a kind of dig in the training system where we have a page , the thinking that you &apos;re going to erzieht a dog , first by creating rules , human rules .
they &apos;re just like &quot; schlagbar , &quot; just too , and that &apos;s why they &apos;re getting beaten .
no , we do , &quot; we &apos;re &quot; welpe , sit . &quot; -- you know , it can try to six to 10 .
they &apos;re like golden retriever .
and i would say if you don &apos;t need it , then you might not be it .
not only with the one , but also with the rest of the family .
these beziehungsfähigkeiten are so simple .
their children are easy to train .
wk : i want to make a windmill .
so , this windmill -- does it work ?
wk : yeah . i still think about the energy .
because i &apos;ve used scientific terms in songs , sometimes it &apos;s hard to make sound sound .
and even more likely to be accompanied by selbst-bewusstheit and sprachbeherrschung , like in my case .
one is a white flash of light .
64 multiply by 75 .
so let &apos;s take a third question .
the desert is a mile , or two a year .
and the same tool , the same tool , made the same tool over 30 generations .
you can teach them to practice a little bit of tauschhandel , and there &apos;s also a reziprozität in other animals , but the exchange of an object against another thing never happens .
it &apos;s the wealth of the wealth , in the reward of your needs , to save time .
that &apos;s what we &apos;ve done as a species .
but there &apos;s no evidence for that .
and when people started to start objects like this far herumzureichen , it was a clue that an exchange of groups existed between groups .
but who knows how to make a computer ?
but that &apos;s also , i &apos;m also , because of the connections that people are going to go and and so never even more da to meet and meet . i &apos;m sure that technology will continue to continue , and therefore , the lebensstandards will continue to improve .
this is as high as a 42-stöckiges building . i used to put the freiheitsstatue as compared .
we don &apos;t talk about it , we don &apos;t take it seriously .
they &apos;re just away , these feelings , they &apos;re disappeared .
when we think about the herrstellung pan-viraler nachweisreagenzen , then the fast development is the problem , because how can we find things that change constantly ?
i talked about -- do you know this situation if you can &apos;t get a diagnosis in the hospital ?
what about real people ?
we &apos;re sequenzierten a part of their viruses ; they &apos;re new , so far ungesehene .
after 10 days with a fever , she came back -- still a fever -- she has hypoxie -- little oxygen in her lungs .
it didn &apos;t even sequence very often .
it &apos;s a classic retrovirus , but it &apos;s completely new . no one has ever seen it before .
a huge battery could already .
let &apos;s invent something that fits the kostenpunkt of the strommarktes .
i got a flüssigmetall with lower density up , and a flüssigmetall down with high density and salt salt between them .
but david is young and smart , and he wants a doktoranden-stelle , and he &apos;s building -- he &apos;ll build the very first liquid metal battery with this chemical chemistry .
so what did we learn from all of this ?
this video was taken in the aquarius-unterwasserlabor , six miles off the coast of key largo , about 20 feet above the sea floor .
and very quickly , we realized that our garage wasn &apos;t big enough for this growing project .
i started to get interested in the maria , and the methods , and how they were doing this umsetzte and how important she found that kids are finding things themselves and they &apos;re not taught them to be a open way .
evolution is often seen as one of the one we &apos;ve chosen , but it represents a huge number of possibilities .
i &apos;m going to jump to this to the phase of space space .
our cities are at risk , because many of you are on shore .
there are stars and things like that .
so if we think about nonverbales behavior , as it &apos;s body language , as it call social scientists , it &apos;s about language . so we think about communication .
this expression , also , as a proud , was known by jessica tracy . she showed that people are and from birth to blind people , if they win at a sportwettkampf .
so i thought about it . you meet these people and see how they got involved . could you get them to do it , and they would be more involved ?
what happens in a rollenänderung , what happens when it &apos;s going on at the allerkleinsten stage ? how the following manipulation , these tiny little einmischung ?
this is happening in the lab . the small exercise , for just a few minutes , where can you really apply that ? that &apos;s what we &apos;re important to .
these things . people are kind of like their real true , they show themselves .
she was completely in the niedergeschlagen , and she said , &quot; i &apos;m not looking for nothing here . &quot;
you need your body , privacy and two minutes . it can affect the other way of life .
lachse swim flussaufwärts to get to their laichgründen , and leberegel kapern , an ant , kriechen her into the brain , and drive a grass , as a jeep .
and you have to have a kind of autoaufkleber , you have to have an answer .
so it &apos;s like i think richard and i think that these ideas are not being abused .
and of course they &apos;re now extinct in the essence .
but under all these ideas that are going to get through our technology , the whole world is unweigerlich , a lot of toxic ideas .
and like viruses , we should not try to vernichten them .
and in my game , that means you &apos;re übergestikuliert .
we put some ideas on the legs , we went international .
i know you &apos;ll say , &quot; t , in the music , don &apos;t . &quot;
audience : t , e , d.
nobody sounds like each other . nobody &apos;s familiar with the other .
you will see the orchestra in a kind of mürrischer revolte .
i don &apos;t want to go out that this should not happen , but that we need to be better , if it &apos;s about the question that you need to consider , to consider the consequences and the reactions .
they &apos;re working in regierungsbehörden . they &apos;re a driver .
five dollars can save lives .
she deserves about two dollars a day , building a erziehungs-fonds and she explained to me that she &apos;s not getting married or children before they get done .
finally , from despair , they went and konsultierten a wise old woman .
it &apos;s not even new .
and as you say , when you &apos;re angry , you will be the best speech you ever will regret .
okay , the great majority of us .
it was also a message that was basically , and the verbundenheit of everything and the unity of everything , and his value was worth of respect , was kindness to strangers .
who is fighting , while he &apos;s going ?
they started to go in israel and palestine , in jordan , in turkey , in syria .
and so more and more wanderer , and since recently , they have a income for their family .
just go to someone with a different culture , from another country , with a different kind of ethnizität , which is kind of different , and they &apos;re going to engage it in a conversation ; they hear it .
i &apos;m going to start with where the story began in zentral-australien .
this morning , before she herkamen , who had the opportunity to take a shower ?
you &apos;re looking at -- 35 percent of these fewer famous houses in which 50,000 people have lived , 35 percent of the houses had a functioning shower .
21 percent of what we fix is the consequences of baumängeln , things that are actually embedded in the wrong way .
we did it . he was able to get it .
we found later that in this region , the cause of disease and death is death .
one thing is in relation to everything we did , and nelson mandela said , &quot; like slavery and apartheid is not naturgegeben poverty . it &apos;s the work of people . &quot;
i don &apos;t think if you call me a lesbe , really .
it sounds really abgedroschen , that &apos;s up from here , but if you try to use it , it &apos;s really powerful .
and i &apos;m performing that statement , i &apos;m performing them in the belief that children shouldn &apos;t leave their community to live in a better better .
this is the youngest staatlich , arbeiterschaft in america with our bezirksbürgermeister in the bronx .
this is a picture of the mayor of the bronx who empfing the children in his house , not in prison , so they felt themselves .
we gave something back .
when you &apos;re having big kids with little zusammensteckt , they &apos;re the big , thick man in the middle , which is cool , and they create these accountability under gleichaltrigen that is incredible .
now , you might be wondering about these children .
keep children in the shops .
stephen ritz : a teacher who begrünt the south bronx
second , i bet that even as a laien is the difference here , there &apos;s a increase in the st-segments right after this sharp line .
ten : 06 suffered the pig &apos;s heart attack .
people with migraine who vorausgeht an aura , they have a band with nervösen neurons -- in red -- that &apos;s moving three to five millimeter per minute .
the problem is that 30 million americans have migraine , and we need a behandlungsmittel . i think we now have this .
my first wish is that the reaktive neurostimulator of epilepsy , the rns , for reaktiver neurostimulator -- an spitzenmäßiges akronym -- for treatment to treat other gehirnstörungen .
lawyers are taking cases on provisionsbasis in the hope of fat anteile in abfindungen , who zusprechen the poor patients with pity .
and a half and a half ago , four of the vollzeitbeschäftigten of the vollzeitbeschäftigten were in ushahidi , by the way , in the way , &quot; zeugenaussage , &quot; also ted-mitglieder .
how do you know what &apos;s really important to you ?
so i thought , &quot; i &apos;m going to talk about death . &quot;
i first hervorgeholt it to get it here .
these people are unterhalb below the barrier , because they &apos;re really going to get out of the process to share their knowledge with the world .
they have to use , using it as a platform to develop their lehrmaterialien and auszuhändigen , which teach the world of teachers in the world teach teaching teaching .
yes , books , maybe 100 or 1,000 spending of the year are sold .
it didn &apos;t surprise that it was all like , or ?
how do we protect it for the future ?
so this isn &apos;t very hard .
the days of the pilotprojekte are over when people say , &quot; well , we would like to have three or viertausend of this in our country to see how this works . &quot;
no , it &apos;s not a laptop-projekt . it &apos;s a bildungsprojekt .
you can use a couple of thousand children with two megabit .
so it &apos;s something like an electronic book .
everyone says that &apos;s a $ 100 laptop , that can &apos;t be done .
and this is the markteinführung .
you click on things around and stare at screens . &quot;
he says , &quot; no , no , no . there &apos;s a better way . &quot;
we &apos;re all playing &quot; i love lucy &quot; on a big line of assembly line , and all of information , and we can &apos;t keep up with it .
thank you .
i think most people think that a hiv-positive mother , always , ansteckt her child .
that &apos;s not possible . it &apos;s not .
it &apos;s all good . they &apos;re going to live .
one , the mutter-kind-übertragung to prevent the mutter-kind-übertragung .
two years ago , one of the mentor mothers came to me and told me a story .
how do you build a better healthcare system ?
the außergewöhnlichste is , just like the system .
if you look at the volume of gray matter at the age of four to 22 years , you take up to childhood , which shows this graph , it &apos;s gipfelt in early adolescence .
the idea that her father was singing in the public , so she was reichte .
this is the gokart we built together .
after the first year , it was invited by the ars electronica museum in austria to install it in its lobby , and i &apos;m happy to say that it stayed up there , 24 hours a day , for almost nine years .
but at night , while we were zusammenpackten , i asked the tele-schauspielerin , what the tele-regisseure decided would have decided to kiss sam donaldson .
and here &apos;s the result .
a place that my family has been working for four generations &apos;s in the safari-geschäft .
it &apos;s really honest : i have no idea what it has on hirten , but they &apos;re immensely findig .
the first thing you notice when you realize that is the terrible force of the bisses .
he &apos;s got it around my leg , raise me up , puts me to a vehicle , and can bring me a doctor .
it was a depression in the ground .
and she said , &quot; well , it &apos;s about them . &quot;
we &apos;ve calculated that 200 years of the end of our direct kontaktes with the world .
it &apos;s just as easy to see technology as a metaphor for memory , but our brains are not perfect speichergeräte of what technology .
she &apos;s the mitbegründerin of my 200-jahr-plans .
i would like to think -- thank you .
and i can assure you : corn is in all kinds of things .
you should know that in every community , the number of hofläden are already growing .
i ran three tauchexpeditionen to antarctica .
but i tell you where you are and what country you are . &quot;
we also explored the surface of the islands -- a very important nistplatz for birds , one of the most important vögelnistplätze in the pacific .
and we are as the rest of the world with a problem .
he coined the term &quot; reverse fischfanglizenz . &quot;
and of course , the tiefseegebiete and the open sea were unbeschädigt , but the korallenteil that everybody likes to look at was in trouble .
this is the pacific , with enormous meeresschutzgebieten and huge umweltschutzzonen .
now there &apos;s an mehrsprachige , immediate , automatische übersetzungsdienste for free to be available for many of our devices , even in the smartphone .
it &apos;s an endless debate , and there &apos;s no way to have a conclusions , no one &apos;s answer to that , but if you &apos;re a computerfreak like me , you say , &quot; well , what do we tell us ? &quot;
instead , he has very carefully documented what &apos;s happened over and over again , when technology is in a environment and in a community .
so there are , of course , two different possibilities .
this is a blue field -- it &apos;s actually a yves kline painting .
i mean , that was at least the way it made me happy .
well , there was a question of course , which was a zeitlang for me in my head , well , i can do more of the things that i like to do in design , and less of those who i don &apos;t like to do .
and here it is on the front .
they are in a terrible situation without a ausweg .
they &apos;re going to go into hospitals .
for example , i was considered as an extraordinarily begabt at multiplikationen , because i had the mulitplikationstabellen auswendig , and i know how to use logarithmen , and i can work fast with the rechenschieber .
i saw this value of older people in so many of my friends &apos; &apos; 60s , &apos; 70s and &apos; 90s , and the 90s are still active as anlageverwalter , farmers , juristen and doctors .
as a christian ikonographie , he was transformed and made of kruzifixen swastikas , made young jewish men in the u.s. and canada who are fighting and superman , who also besannen back to the bible .
the case of granada , the last muslim of the world &apos;s economy , has been the last muslim .
the biggest bösewicht , rughal , doesn &apos;t want these rocks to be updaten . so he tries to prevent them from the updaten .
and one of my favorites is al-batina of yemen .
&quot; and , when does the article come out ? &quot;
rughal : there must be something that we can do .
&#91; &quot; the 99 &quot; &#93; thank you .
it &apos;s dangerous when a group is identifiziert .
naif al-mutawa : from islam beflügelte &quot; a superhelden . &quot;
let &apos;s look at it .
so let me highlight it for you .
let me show you this here .
and when i started designing with the design , i discovered something curious about myself .
so you have the eye , and then the concepts come .
but of course , china has a tremendous population .
but what it shows is that this kind of visual information is a form of wissenskomprimierung .
it &apos;s actually a pleasure to deal with you , because you &apos;re visual .
the eden-kopfnote is named after the eden project in the u.k.
why don &apos;t it smell like potato or veilchen ? so there are two theories .
and a theory allows a less to work .
now after a few months of the search , i discovered that there &apos;s a kind of molecule that you call borane , and that &apos;s what the same thing has done .
this is the basis of the device that these two people have built by ford .
they made it ... and it would like coumarin like coumarin .
that was a good thing .
now , there &apos;s a series of things going on , and i want to point it .
and she actually had no idea of the context that she had landed in .
norman !
i said no one , i said , &quot; neither of my mother , &quot; my father , not my sister , my brother , my mentor , my cousins , my grandparents , no one .
i &apos;m reports of it . i &apos;m reports of it , just to say that i had two things i left the orphanage i wanted to do . this was one that was to find my family and the other was to write poems .
and this is how we &apos;re looking for them .
and then you hope that one of us are walking around and small bits .
he had a skoliose , and therefore , it has to be penibel by others , female and probably much smaller familienmitgliedern family members to reach his age of 12 years .
is this a good evolutionary adaptation , or will it lead to us that we will be the kind of the kind of the kind of the kind of the kind of the kind of the kind of the kind of thing that exists on the planet &apos;s planet ?
but will we do that or will we take nature to take their run ?
one day , a couple of weeks or maybe a year later , i was with my kinderm in a store for künstlerbedarf . i wanted to buy a tonwerkzeug . we had a bastel-tag plan .
that meant a basic shift for me .
my point : about 70 layers of this , matt-schwarze auto-grundierung .
you want to know how obsessed i really am , i &apos;m just for me , and yet i &apos;ve been so far to buy a chinese newspaper from san francisco to make the bird vernünftig vernünftig .
when we went to the path of the spectacular blue mountains in the west of sydney , it was a perfect herbsttag : the sun , the smell of eukalyptus and a dream .
&quot; no , it &apos;s too hard . &quot;
and if you ever become again , just with a laufgestell . &quot;
i remember my dad moved me out in the wheelchair , and i was in the top down , and i felt like the sun on my face .
and they said , &quot; we &apos;re going to put them next to you , because we think that &apos;s good for you . &quot;
she was enough to me , and i called the school , i buchte , and i said i &apos;d like to go to a flugstunde buchen .
and i said , &quot; jap . &quot;
and mom and dad ? never up .
i &apos;m in this world , but i &apos;m in a lot of the way .
it &apos;s like a anish kapoor that flies through a richard serra .
how to hell do i have a phone in three weeks when i &apos;ve developed these things that have developed over millions of years ?
each of these elements could be hanging on the wall as a kind of kunstobjekt .
in his day he was the highest steuerzahler in british .
i look at the individual and how they &apos;re flowing -- how they expand and flow , it &apos;s based on furniture , but it &apos;s not the endmotivation . it &apos;s made out of aluminum , as opposed to a aluminium , and it &apos;s grown .
this is the car of the future . it &apos;s a wassertröpfchen .
if you put it in the next contemporary architecture , it feels completely naturally for me .
this is my studio . it &apos;s underground .
it was made from the kevlar .
and the same thing i did , i was lucky enough to be a member of a forschergruppe , who used to use it for the first time to explore the sea .
there was one of these rippenquallen .
he uses red bioluminescence like a scharfschütze um for animals that are blind for red light and can see them without seen .
so they use it to be eating and mate .
i urge you to call a different science that used to be used to hundreds of years old technology .
this is a magical place .
so i made up to the value of the schlafes .
and on june june , i heard a loud bang in the disk that changed my life and ended the duck .
and here &apos;s the duck .
after the price , my life changed .
another example of the impact of the impact of the life of birds .
so , for example , i think , for example , this is the sound of purple .
the after i anrichte it , i can hear music with the lunch and i &apos;m going to hear it .
one is &quot; i have a dream &quot; by martin luther king , and the others is from hitler .
now , you can see more and more and more and more and more and more likely to see that former rechtsberater are now the hauptgeschäftsführer .
you don &apos;t want to say anything unbedachtes that might be used to use . &quot;
absolutely vital .
and what happens when teachers want to make a difference ?
and why not ? they don &apos;t trust the law . why don &apos;t they trust to the law ?
because it &apos;s so freedom has a formale structure .
because life is complex . and here is the hardest and biggest change : we need to be abgeben the authority to the auslegung and the use of the law to judge and the officer .
a free society needs red and green lights , otherwise she will be very violent of a death of death .
boundaries for the interest that can compute the kreditkarten-unternehmen , and for the telephone they can take .
well , if you think about it , it &apos;s really a very difficult round to a rule with a rule .
he had a very bad job .
he had just been a spielzeugpistole .
but the problem of leaving rules and incentives is that they &apos;re demoralisieren the professional activity , and they &apos;re doing the most important activity in two ways .
so smart gesetzlose are better than nothing , but it &apos;s hard to imagine that any smart gesetzloser can sustain this for the unbegrenzte time .
why has this idea spread ?
people want to be tugendhaft .
it was an extraordinary time . i &apos;m going to be a little bit more of a little bit more of a little bit more of a little bit of a little bit of light that we -- america and the rest of the world .
this was bert , the turtle .
we have this full of a complete realitätsverlust .
what i want to show you is what you need to transport for 34 pounds of angereichertes uranium .
what would have been if they had nuclear weapons ?
we get down and bring the truck you saw , somewhere here in the finanzviertel .
part of the problem is that the katastrophenplaner themselves , are overwhelmed with the thought of a nuclear disaster .
it was sent to me from someone who is a kenner of the zivilschutzmaßnahmen , and the fact is that it had a lot of america .
there are a lot of black sheep out there who do the wrong things and have the problems .
we can show our results . we can make things better .
how can we tap them into it ?
it &apos;s rentabel to have a dangerous environment .
imagine if we could , because if we could do it , we could achieve more .
the governments that make most progress , the governments that have found ways to have shared value in business is instead of seeing the government to see the actor who &apos;s going to say the alleinige .
and maybe i can cut , i can cut , i can see the brain , and i can change my slice .
i want to take a look .
come back to me in the 19th century , just for june june .
we could certainly be all going to be so productive , if facebook or twitter won &apos;t cost us so much time .
they &apos;re looking at unerbittlich on the british government to get money for building babbage &apos;s machines , because they believed that these machines would have tremendous practical effects for society .
these benefits didn &apos;t only make fewer wealthy men the research , but also also regten to look at the tellerrand , rather than answering questions of questions .
i &apos;m going to tell you how i learned something about life .
once you start looking at the very little things -- this person wrote a whole article and said , &quot; hey , these are bacteria . &quot;
and all of them who are not old enough , they have no idea how this infection happened -- which is through these disketten .
there are about 10,000 programs in the world .
this would be the frequency that you can see every single 26 of the alphabets in one random affen .
all wherever life is , you will have this distribution , unlike that distribution .
too hot , too hot , too hot .
the cop asks , &quot; are you safe ? hey , you know , you &apos;ve lost this ? &quot;
this is the data from one survey to a single district in zambia , from a few years ago that i &apos;ve been mitgearbeitet .
as you can see , bruce , bruce , was much more hair .
you could talk about 10,000 , 20,000 or 30,000 dollars if i had the time or it was in my plan , and i wasn &apos;t going to be on vacation .
instead of teaching people how to put the paper on the cell phones , we should develop software that allows them to do it without practice and without my zutun .
that &apos;s less than i earned at the time when i went to a berater for two weeks .
and then we understand that if we want to change our trajectory , in life or in the balloon , we need to change the height .
that can be in the spirituality .
and that &apos;s why they need to be meteorologen .
i promised myself that i would like to take this next time i would fly around the world , no fuel will take a fuel , independent from fossil energieträgern to be safe , not by the tankanzeige .
i think you need a pilot at the aircraft that can be able to talk to the universities who can talk to students who can speak with politicians in the flight , and really can make it really to a human adventure .
and what is the objective ?
that &apos;s why all the people who believe in those who are welcome to be part of this team .
now you need a laptop .
anyway , for us , africa was a magical place .
the next thing i want to create clarity is what &apos;s this problem and what it &apos;s not .
this is crazy , really , if you think about it .
let &apos;s stop with a unsinn for a second .
in fact , we &apos;re the first generation to see the disease and these extreme poverty in the eyes , look across the ocean , say it and my own . we don &apos;t have to stand .
it &apos;s going to be on nerves .
this year is a test for us , specifically for the leaders of the g8 states who are in the angetreten and look at the history of the world .
people are getting out of this .
and with this one campaign as our screen , my organization , data , and other groups of energy and enthusiasm that &apos;s all the way from hollywood to the hinterland of america .
and step for step is going forward , a nurse , a teacher , a hausfrau , and life will be saved .
the idea that the internet has changed all their lives , a country can change -- and a continent that just made it into analog , let alone to digitally -- it &apos;s got my head .
lips are not lips , but volcanoes .
your job is to recognize what these forms are bouba and what &apos;s the kiki .
now , if you &apos;re not just a gefängniswärter , then this sentence is literally , falsch .
if we can solve a problem or to discover something new , we compare what we already know about what &apos;s unknown to us .
nadia al-sakkaf : i &apos;m glad to be here .
you can &apos;t fit in all of those darstellungen .
pm : i don &apos;t think that .
how are you about to do it , but you &apos;re also with your mitarbeiterinnen ?
some of my reporter were arrested .
this shows clearly a different picture of yemen .
my heart was a three and a half times .
this is a list of side effects : when you eat too much salt like a erdnußbutter and marmeladen sandwich , you &apos;re probably going to land in the intensive care intensive .
but soon i showed symptoms for rechtsherzinsuffizienz , and i had to go back to meeresspiegelhöhe , knowing that i would never see my home again .
i sat there and i was talking little excited about the chefchirung of the transplantationen and i asked him what i needed to do a transplant , to prepare me .
i was hanging on a dozen machines that kept me in life .
thank you .
interestingly , one of these geburtsschäden is also angestiegen 200 percent in the u.s.
also , interesting is that the same company that sells 80 million pounds of atrazine , the brustkrebs-förderer , also the antidote to sell -- and the same company .
we also started as a wasserorganismen .
what would our kids say to us , if you once again , you know , every day , i had a little bit of octylphenol , some artificial moschusriechstoffe , and a little bit of bisphenol a.
the problem is that in my village , oakland , in most of our villages , that connection .
here you see the accumulation of the biona creek in los angeles .
i offered five cents for each other .
the wegwerfgesellschaft can &apos;t be eingedämmt , it &apos;s become global .
and you see here in red , the spread of the küstenmammutbaums .
they &apos;re like a mouse that looks at the foot of an elephant , and the biggest part of them is hidden behind them .
they &apos;re looking out of their hängematte and vogelgezwitscher all around the directions around us .
redwoods have a tremendous surface that &apos;s expanding in the sky because they tend to be something called reiteration .
strebebögen , the top of the world &apos;s top , just like a cathedral , and help the tree live longer .
it &apos;s absolutely herzzerreißend to see that .
but recently , all the doors of the palastes are open and break out the walls .
this was 25 years ago .
so , let &apos;s take a look at the centipede-virus .
how do these people do their own with these infected infected ?
and you can afford to watch how we work -- how sicherheitsleute works -- and try to find a way to get the sicherheitsvorkehrungen that we meet .
and you &apos;ll notice that you can see a internetadresse , unionseek.com / ioo.exe , and if you open this image image on your computer , this program will be heruntergeladen and ausgeführt .
and if you look closer to the images of the scene , you can see that the mark of the the mercedes is the kennzeichen .
we have to make any way to make sure that everything is going to be like , even when the computer is .
but i didn &apos;t have anything to do .
this person around the beratern .
why should we believe what he says ? &quot;
what does his future look like ?
these forces completely disappear , no one of the understützt of the 2011 .
it would be good if people were aufmerksamer , and that kind of calculation take seriously and participate , because this would change things , but it would change things on two different ways .
that means that we can see a copy of themselves , if you &apos;ve only used a part of the originaldatei , that &apos;s happening in motion motion and a schlechtere bild- and tonqualität .
and the happy few , jill and kevin ? well , they came back from their hochzeitsreise and saw her video of suddenly spread it was a lauffeuer .
thank you .
you &apos;re going to go into the distance .
that &apos;s what it taught to do , since he was five years old .
i &apos;m grateful for the fact that i had a mentor like mau who taught me how to get .
what is it that drives you today today ? not 10 years ago .
what do you do with what you &apos;re doing and you can happen ?
didn &apos;t have -- time . i didn &apos;t have it -- technology . you know , i didn &apos;t have the right manager .
in this moment , consciously or unconscious . right now , in the moment you entscheidest to focus on something , you can geben. it , and whatever it means , it makes emotion .
you &apos;ve ever done anything , and you &apos;re going to be with this : &quot; that &apos;s me . &quot;
you &apos;re bored to death . so god in his infinite wisdom , gave us another human need , the uncertainty .
but that &apos;s true : we need it . we can do it through intimacy through friendship , through prayers , through wanderungen in nature .
and there are seven different beliefs . i can &apos;t go through it because i &apos;m through , the last element is feeling .
and so , a jüdischer man with family in the besetzten area , someone in new york , who died , if he had been in the day at work , and this man who wanted to be a terrorist and he clearly said .
instead , i &apos;m interested in developing tools that a large number of people can tell their stories , people all over the world .
the color of particles is the kind of feeling -- happy , positive feelings , bright colors .
we see , &quot; i feel like i was the whole day on the computer . &quot;
and when i go over here , the list starts to walk , and there are thousands of feelings that were collected .
the ten themes rays and orbit the time time .
it &apos;s called &quot; universe : unveiling of our modern mythology . &quot;
we can click on this , and see this ikonische image of the betty ford , as she does the sarg of her husband .
you can also see quotes , if you like to read a quote to climate change .
so people are feeling clouds than something that is in the way .
in life , they have tens of thousands of members of the earth today .
you just need to take a step out , and to notice that , that &apos;s usually , so normal is so trivial , that everybody else is missing it .
so , you look up , you admire the kurzlebige beauty , and you &apos;re always thinking about wearing your head in the clouds .
they had 25,000 pictures that would have done this , &quot; 25.0000 , good , good .
and you know , 10 years ago , it was about 10 years ago when i got the fördergelder to buy my first grafikcomputer . it was a giant machine .
these images are from virtual physical .
and you can see how the knife is being in the heart .
it &apos;s a little , a little pen , which has built inside a very , very fast schrittmotoren .
now this is a really interesting project .
so he does .
so , very skilled people .
i went to kids as often as possible to make the academic stuff with the real world .
it &apos;s not all , but it &apos;s an incredibly leistungsfähige summary of everything we know about the basic underlying nature .
i &apos;m not going to go into the details why we think the universe , but it makes it out of mathematics and try to explain the physics that we know .
in my career , i always started doing something in me .
in 2001 , i went to see her during a forschungsaufenthalts .
we got a lot of bewerbungen .
this shows the stood after the first degree in 2004 .
he &apos;s just recently and just a abschluss and he was filmed with someone you all know .
each will have a panafrikanische studentenschaft , but in various scientific disciplines , they will be specialized .
i got my first computer as a teenager in a little bit of a teenager , and it was a really great device .
he &apos;s exploring the brain using mri , and he says this is the most beautiful brain he ever scanned .
so , i &apos;m going to tell you the next few slides , i &apos;ll tell you .
transistors are going to smaller , to enable that , and that &apos;s what we do is much better .
our netzhautchip is behind this lens here .
i had such a feeling that we might be wrong .
so in this sense , it &apos;s a very simple object .
so we know what a schwarzschild radius is .
i like to call them the primadonnen of the galaxywelt , because they &apos;re kind of angeber .
we can see as a galaxy in our galaxy , as somewhere else .
and that brings us a factor of 20 .
so there were a bunch of alternative to the notion that there was a supermassive black hole in the center of the galaxy , because you could put a lot of stuff out there .
it &apos;s pulling a lot more stronger than the other , and the cloud gets apart apart .
and i hope that i believe that i believe that we really have a supermassive black hole at the center of the galaxy .
one day i was traveling in the streets of new york and saw some kids between stairs , cars and hydranten baseball .
so , for example , people like the 11. century that ended up .
in the first eight centuries of this tradition , the big one was about the big , &quot; what &quot; god to appreciate and prices .
and then , in new and improved instruments , the age of virtuosen collapsed .
but one question is : what happens when the music stops ?
michael tilson thomas : music and feelings over time , over time of time , over time .
so we &apos;re at the beginning of a new drachenzeitalters .
until 1945 , they brought it up to 100,000 every year .
so i &apos;m going to talk about musikkomposition , even though i don &apos;t know where i &apos;m going to start .
wow , a volunteer , great .
but recently , my interest in betrachten has been geweckt through a new view of great menschenmassen , because there are conditions where these things really can make a cool .
well , i think this is the aktuellste development of a phenomenon that we call &quot; massen-beschleunigte innovation . &quot;
but the element of desire is really the most important .
we got a fantastic talk from them .
so let me introduce you to this point sam haber .
but even if you &apos;re weglässt the screen , you &apos;ll be more übermittelt than just words .
thousands of individuals and organizations share their knowledge and their data online .
it &apos;s not crazy ; it &apos;s happening right now .
how webvideos innovation promote global innovation .
one , i have to turn to the audience to the audience , and i &apos;m talking about what i &apos;m going to give him rather than saying what i can &apos;t offer .
and they &apos;re fun to design your own ultimate or the worst tedtalk .
now , you can &apos;t compare it to each other .
they &apos;re holding them alive and give them the sugar , so a kind of verhaltensimpuls that we call supermacht .
this kind of tests , you know , this kind of thing , ok ?
someone asked , &quot; why ? &quot;
and the thought he could turn the waves . he couldn &apos;t .
i think there are three big changes , and that in the areas of transparency , choice and nachprüfbarkeit , where people have a real power .
how do we do that ?
my bridge-coach , sharon osberg , claims , all of the photos of their head exist as any other .
11 of 14 countries .
and second , they were taking care of the videoaufzeichnungen and fragebögen , as a hilfreiche , da tools , because they were related to specific areas where a fortbildung makes sense .
so i wish for all a nice weekend .
and reading dna and writing , it &apos;s becoming easier and cheaper .
biohacker work alone .
now you might ask yourself , &quot; what would i do in a biolab ? &quot;
if you &apos;ve got this whole world , this can lead to a perspektivenwechsel who will allow you to perform biotechnology .
the kingdom , his laws will allow him to be foreign , foreign einzusperren , or abzuschieben , which is an economic risk or health or risk or health or health care .
these laws are a schlag in the face of science and based on bias and ignorance and a umschreiben of traditions and a selektiven .
why are you going to be pregnant when you &apos;re positive ? &quot;
one of 10 people &apos;s in people who inject drugs .
so that social workers , they &apos;re giving out condoms to endangered animals , not even being verfolgt by the police , or they &apos;re locked in randomly or randomly .
there were children born , people died .
building office for personal work is already obsolete .
they have beseitigt the high line that zurückerobert the road , the river below the road , and you get from a end of the end to cross the fahrstraße .
people say , &quot; we don &apos;t want to live in a tiny apartments . &quot;
also , also , jobs , also , jobs .
their liver makes oil out of oil .
and they killed to the 12,000 sharks at that time , just to put a hanfseil from the landzunge in keem bay to the island island .
we know very little about them .
so this tag finds the place of a hais , depending on time and off the sunset , the temperature and depth .
so , let &apos;s look at the nukleotide , which has what &apos;s been passed on by the parents , then we see basking sharks , compared to the first study , one factor 10 less than other people &apos;s haiarten .
so , verfeinerte les this research , and found that the size of 9,000 lies .
and what was fine . we got wet . no problem .
and i thought , &quot; hey , i can build it . &quot;
so if we can tell the gender of the shark , before we take a sample , we can tell the geneticists to see if they were from a male or a female .
so i decided to give myself the händler .
your body are broken up with macheten , and are determined to be used for any zaubertrank to make money -- people tell a lot of these stories .
not to do any business with anybody .
my journalism is not fit on other continents or other countries , in my part of africa , but it works . let &apos;s talk about corruption , people ask people immediately , &quot; where are the evidence ?
thank you .
i was raised in downtown manhattan in the early 1980s , two blocks away from the epizentrum of the punkmusik .
i wouldn &apos;t be as a transsexueller .
and had these people ever realized a victim of their diskrimierung ?
today , you can be in 29 states , in more than half of the country , because of the sexualität of the sexualität of rechtmäßig .
at some point i realized that my mission &quot; schwule &quot; was in fehlerhaft , because there was a million different schattierungen of gay gay .
at least i hope it &apos;s getting harder to do their human rights .
one is the world , and it &apos;s always good and evil , because good and evil and yang and yang are the mensch-sein .
and third , i had access to all 1,000 pictures that were making soldiers .
in three ways , the vorherrschende way of it is .
this is a stanley milgram , a jewish boy from the bronx , and he asked himself , &quot; could the holocaust happen , here and now ? &quot;
&quot; my lord , who is responsible when it happens to him ? &quot;
and the stanley milgram , and i was , by the way , 1954 the high school , at the james monroe in the bronx .
here are the guards with the symbols of power and anonymity .
entmenschlichung of the other . entindividualisierung of the self .
alexander solschenitsyn says that the boundary between good and evil through the heart of a man is .
and i hired the experiment on the next day .
and he said , &quot; i did what everybody could do , &quot; no big thing to jump on the tracks .
it &apos;s a mystery that really , really hard to get .
we have a self .
but on my left retina , a delle delle that &apos;s labeled by the red arrow .
there &apos;s only one referenzpunkt , which is the body .
i promise i &apos;m not saying anything except for it to be erschrecken .
and the autobiographische self has extended memory , thinking , imagination creativity and language .
thank you . thank you for a hip-hop -- anita hill .
now i &apos;m telling you this -- i &apos;m telling you , and i &apos;m a lächerlich , because i think feminism has partly the task , to admit that aesthetics , and beauty and fun .
we don &apos;t want a hero .
and you can see , i didn &apos;t set myself on fire .
she was talking about vorstandssitzungen , she started friedensorganisationen , she organized fahrgemeinschaften , she tröstete friends -- all these everyday acts of care and creativity .
i mean , it &apos;s this selbstwahrnehmung that &apos;s different from the homo sapiens of early menschheitsformen .
in fact , this is a sensor for brain cells that reads the electrical activity in my brain while i &apos;m holding this talk .
we erweckten a bunch of prototypes and products that you can control with thought , like gedankenkontrollierte appliances , or a schwebenden chair .
the communication is wireless with an ipad or a smartphone .
how these kids can use their new consciousness to their recovery , many of the harmful and social social stigmata , people who are diagnosed as a different .
she understood the power of human narrative , and that the value that we zuteilen in human beings is changing , evolviert and growing .
and said , &quot; how are you going to celebrate ? &quot;
my capabilities and my possibilities .
and so , very , very unexpected , they gave it .
this spezialist , i don &apos;t think , was in my eyes .
i was a track track that i know well .
and it &apos;s really , very slow .
i didn &apos;t really believe in myself , not really , not to all the anteile of me , all the little ichs in all of us .
that &apos;s me . my whole .
what we have is the same thing , the same thing , but in one of them , they feel great , and in the other , with just a small change in attitude , they feel terrible .
but i think it &apos;s a different debate that has to take place , which is the measure of control that we have about our tax tax .
for 0,01 percent of this money , you could have wifi wifi into the trains , which couldn &apos;t reduce the duration of the journey , but what would have been improved and the nützlichkeit .
i &apos;m not asking the full one of the other one over the other .
sometimes the lines are very , very long .
i think the threat in the world today is that the field of economics is understood as the vorausgehende discipline of human psychology .
if the average answer would have been to say 50 to 60 percent .
it will zugetraut you that they don &apos;t have themselves or other people .
juhu !
they &apos;re going back 20 , 30 years .
but that doesn &apos;t mean i had a coin on both sides .
it &apos;s not hard to solve this problem .
but this is our hülle of the visible universe .
thank you .
we had a lot of hyperscore with the hyperscore , actually , very strong effects on children around the world , and now at people every ages .
it &apos;s a guy , rich , successful , powerful , who wants to live forever .
hi . my name is dan ellsey . i &apos;m 34 years old and i &apos;ve got zerebralparese .
this is actually the score of dans piece that he completely wrote in a hyperscore .
odysseus said , &quot; well , let &apos;s make a probelauf .
there &apos;s the present self .
i have to write five pages on the day for articles , or i had to give up five dollars .
it &apos;s not possible that this is going to work today . &quot;
and i &apos;m going to show you some of these tools here .
the last thing i &apos;m going to show you is the last verhaltensrelevante machine machine , is something i &apos;ve done with hal hershfield , which i was introduced to my own my own , and bill sharpe .
it &apos;s pretty good that it &apos;s not affected by people because when one of the faces smile , the other face looks at the face .
this is one of the reasons that we think about western science , mathematics and baukunst , actually in the first few centuries of our zeitrechnung , the ersten of the persern , arabern and türken .
x is the unknown , because it &apos;s not a &quot; sch . &quot;
so it didn &apos;t surprise that when you &apos;re talking about these mental illness , you probably have stories of verstecktem suffering , shame and discrimination in almost all of the life life .
a little over 30 years ago , the nations in the world gathered in alma-ata and gave this legendäre explanation .
what is it about ?
if you look at the level of species , you &apos;ve heard about fishing .
if you look at these profits , you can see that nearly 8,000 of these dollars are actually subventionen .
this was in the early 2000ern , when india was driving his bip-wachstum -- as a means to the recovery -- after china , with his rasanten growth of 8 , nine , 10 percent , and asked , why can &apos;t we ?
they &apos;re not versetzt them in any happy situation , but they have trust and the courage to vorzutreten and say , &quot; we &apos;ve got it .
carbon carbon , which is emissions from deforestation and agriculture , and blue carbon , together , 25 percent of our emissions .
richard feynman was a very complex man .
we loved it .
i didn &apos;t know what these things were , dick , not too -- in sydney , by the way .
i also liked these intellectual machospiele .
and he said he &apos;d basically had the same relationship with his father .
there was a theory .
he did it again .
they don &apos;t move , and because they don &apos;t move through the course of the experiment , you don &apos;t have to worry about how they move .
we removed the whole vinyl , and the zolatone color , which is just fantastic fantastic .
many of these ideas actually flossen in the produced of the produced trailer for an inch .
if you think about your children to the school school , you &apos;ll come back with prellungen , kratzern and blutig .
but let &apos;s take it for your own circumstances and trust me , you &apos;re going to learn things that you can &apos;t learn from the dora of the entdeckerin .
if you want to throw a machine next time , you don &apos;t .
i think that &apos;s all . this is number fünfeinhalb . okay .
so here you can see the sick knee on the left , and here my wife , in the travels today , are four months after that , and in good constitution .
how about a completely bionischem knieersatz , not just the sharing ?
this is one of the seven existing sputniks that were not going into all of the shot .
and so it came out that in the years of western druckerpressen , they started to buy the ganz and thousands of thousands of individual , and finally millions of individual , small pieces of paper that should bring a middle of hell to the heavens .
but how does it work ?
but we never think about the hidden compounds .
as the edison invented the light bulb , she looked like this .
you have to be quite smart , and even though i don &apos;t have a hochschulabschluss , it doesn &apos;t mean i &apos;m dumb , because you can &apos;t be stupid now and get it to the world .
they literally have the door to eingerannt us .
when you listen to the stereogerät of your listening , both ears both listen to a speaker .
we have the problem that the antenna is vibriert .
even thank you .
and i &apos;m particularly interested in the systems of systems and anordungen .
recently , i &apos;ve created some pretty sophisticated barocke bordüren from anspruchslosen nudeln .
and i drew their own special card for every person , and i wrote her name on it , and verschickte them .
i &apos;m sure i can see how you &apos;re errötest .
and i &apos;m convinced that it &apos;s ersterbenswert , my valuable and limited life on this earth is right now .
in this mode , he tries to hold his position .
i thought i was telling a little bit about how nature creates materials .
we think about future technologies . we start at the beginning of the world .
and if you look at it , you can see the amino acids with the ph-werten , where they have different charges .
and through a sequence of auswahl-evolution , you can fish one of a billion fish , which is what you want to grow up like a battery or a solar cell .
in this case , you can see sauerstoffblasen .
when you ask people the question , where do they go to do something important ?
i sat at my desk , i used my expensive computer .
what happens -- sometimes you have a few days when you wake up at eight o &apos;clock in the morning , or you get seven or when you get up , and you say , man , i didn &apos;t sleep very well .
in the office , most unterbrechungen and distractions that people actually have to prevent the work , unwillentlich .
we all know that that &apos;s true . you would never experience a meeting meeting that employees will be einberufen .
and so , the meetings and managers are now the two main problems in companies today , especially in offices .
maybe all two weeks , or every week , once a week , nachmittage , that nobody can talk to .
you know , to be honest , i &apos;m going to do this for seven years , and i have no idea what the future will look .
but if you ask people about the three most important things you &apos;re wearing -- no matter what culture , which gender and what context -- most people say , key , money , and if you own one , the cell phone .
but this is a very big , but we have the tendency to forget .
now , i want to give you a practical example of the delegierens .
they take 10 or 20 percent , and then -- the owner of the country &apos;s taking 10 or 20 percent , and there &apos;s the remaining amount of money in the bar in my family .
it challenges the norm .
and he sort of anerkennung an recognition for the value of the livestrong .
at the same time with the spread of these mobile devices , we have an expectation of availability .
our current reality is less interesting than the story we &apos;ll be telling about it later .
what was we talking about ?
dean ornish shares a new research show that shows how the aneignung of healthy lifestyle can impact a human way .
until i tell you who it was .
within this context , we can clearly feel regret about a lot of different things .
when i went home at home , after i got my tattoo , i stayed almost all night .
but i want to suggest that there &apos;s another fifth .
i mean , even the silly &quot; answer to all of all of us can be back in qualen for us .
and as i said , i &apos;m a perfektionistin .
i thought i &apos;d been in preparation for my ted wish to try to try to make what i try to do , and how to fit it to what they &apos;re trying to reach .
none in india . now , at least one million active active .
and i thought that anybody in this whole world could have to think about the organization of the kollektivgütermärkte .
and so we did it to do that .
listen to this : less than four percent of a prozents of those who were treated , they used to use their drugs , or vernachlässigten , in sonstige ways .
it &apos;s worth a try and i think it &apos;s successful .
the pulte are not rechteckig .
when the turbine is used , they will produce 8,000 watts of electricity . day and night .
and people put their green industries , hopefully their green restaurants , with green school .
and einheimische women in bali cooking food for sägemehlbrennern , and they use secrets that only know their grandmothers .
we need somebody who &apos;s coming and studied it .
the green school is a model that we built for the world .
my tongue , kehlkopf and stimmbänder were still healthy and nicht . &quot;
then apple alex came out , the best voice i &apos;ve been hearing .
there was a reason that i was .
the sprachfluss is not natural .
but it &apos;s not about that .
at first , the internet was a hilfreiches tool , and now it &apos;s something that i &apos;m going to leave for my real , daily life .
&quot; it &apos;s human , to ignore disease .
you all know the test for artificial intelligence , the turingtest .
i was an architect , before , and my grandmother once asked me , &quot; what are you going to do ? &quot;
we are treating two gegenüberstehende pages as one single page , because the readers &apos;s going to be true .
so what is the lesson behind ?
but one day my grandmother said , &quot; no , this time you &apos;re not going to be in front of it .
it happened and terrible things happened with me .
all of the hope for my cure .
so they went to their lagerräumen , and they all raised their überzähligen furniture -- they gave me a töpfe and pfannen , bettlaken , everything .
they don &apos;t know how far away this street is , and they don &apos;t know if they go straight and they hear cars and they flitzen , and they had a terrible accident that they had brought them .
i thought , for some reason , the time stayed and have gone to family and friends .
for example , the understanding of molecular structures .
he took me to the tempeln of nikko .
can we say we were discovering the symmetries of the alhambra ?
i can &apos;t turn it , because i &apos;ve made a little bit of a little bit , right ?
if i put a magical move and then you get one , it &apos;ll get a third one .
galois set a set of rules for the same tables , these symmetries .
we call a symmetry like this .
instead of all the mess , i want to know , how many digits the number has . ok ?
i need your name . symmetrical objects have , basically -- please buchstabieren it for me .
one : poor diet , maybe even more kürzere .
thomas edison had a very wohlgefühlt computer company today .
penicillin was discovered in a while , but even though , even in the brain , even there were no commercial and medizinisch amounts of it .
it was the source of the xerox-kopierers , who had his 50th birthday last year .
for me , the lesson of unintended consequences that chaos has once happen . let &apos;s make the best of it .
it works with every computer and browser . minus , minus , minus , and the text is smaller .
they don &apos;t need to delete that .
and therefore , a kind of a kind of information that i &apos;m inspired by my real desk .
a means of a rasteranordnung is like a rasteranordnung , so you can get the more traditional desktop , and these things are ausgelegt on the grid .
now i get to the hearts of my music , and there &apos;s no boundaries .
but i think the point is , it &apos;s a metaphor with a bite . and with such a bite i want to suggest that we &apos;re a bit of überdenken the role of contemporary mathematics a little bit -- not just finanzmathematik , but mathematics in general .
and he said , &quot; well , there are 2,000 physicists at wall street , and i &apos;m a one of them . &quot;
you can find this : this is a book about flying that you might have on amazon .
these are not finanzdaten ; that &apos;s culture .
you can do it very , very far .
and it &apos;s not the money that &apos;s actually so interesting .
here we go . it &apos;s all about .
i want to tell you a secret .
so , kreuzungen without traffic traffic , so with stoppschildern , saving lives , but there &apos;s a übermäßige of them .
the answer is to allow cars to allow the road to be safe from the road .
warren buffet had recommend this : honestly , say what works and what doesn &apos;t work and doing this to a annual thing .
in fact , we see the only known disease that in africa , living , in africa , has been developed several things to avoid the malariatod .
this means that the economy is going to be feststeckt in these areas because it &apos;s just verhindert .
but that &apos;s not yet us yet .
not only did they weak ; she gets schwächer .
and a teacher &apos;s teacher &apos;s teacher will be done by their grade -- measured on prüfungsergebnissen -- in a year by 10 percent .
but it doesn &apos;t have a relationship to be a better teacher .
&quot; what &apos;s happening here ? &quot;
and these free courses could not just be available in the internet , but you can also make dvds everywhere , so everyone who can have access to a teacher who can have very best teachers .
traditional vessels , like this cup , takes eight to 10 hours of burning .
he &apos;s a bildhauer richard serra talks about how he thought he was a young artist , he was a painter and he was living in his school .
when i look at these pictures , i got the smoke back in my clothes when i went home to my family at night .
my parents were great to say , and they said , &apos; we know that you &apos;re afraid , but let &apos;s go tomorrow .
but is it so bad to keep us so powerful ?
this is , at the end of the general general in boston .
and the pathologe takes the sample , friert it , zerschneidet it , it looked at it under the microscope and then the informiert of the operating room .
so in this process , a solution to this dreiteiligen , with a farbstoff , shown here , here , in green , injiziert into the vene of a tumor , and normal tissue can &apos;t separate these molecules .
with farbmarkierten lymph lymph as a part of our modern , the surgeon that we find the surgeon to the single knot , the lymph nodes , where the cancer begins .
if nerves are damaged , they can cause the brain , and it &apos;s pain .
if we zusammennehmen these two samples ...
we know that this is feasible and we &apos;re determined to realize this .
and this cell is a thousand different kinds of information that we &apos;re learning from .
it will affect the normal circuits as the sick they want to fix .
and one morning in the summer of 2004 we tried it and it &apos;s been done in the first time .
we &apos;ve shown that already a quick aktivierung of these cells are enough to power .
and it goes . now .
i want to end with a story that we believe might find a clinical application .
now you can see that the animal actually tatsächlich the walls and go to the little platform and use his eyes again .
buildings are kolonisiert with befindlichen microbes that hineingelangen through the windows and belüftungssysteme over mechanical .
and if you &apos;re out there , the air contains microbes that are associated with pflanzenblättern and schmutz .
obviously , i &apos;m a physical person , as you can see , so i don &apos;t have a worry to carry this thing in 20 blocks .
the same thing for the question , who was living on the 11th of the 11th that the streets in my neighborhood ?
and you can get a list .
one of these things i &apos;ve been doing with this is something called google , basically , you just take a abstract term and google for google afterwards , and then you go into these results after the name of someone .
this is britney spears . i mean , ok , interesting .
if you have the second side here , you can link one most .
what we all had to do for us 40 years ago -- that &apos;s stories between generations -- now rarely .
so in the year , the film is older than most grandparents our members of our members .
was the story okay ?
why don &apos;t we see this in the same passion as reading ?
in california , they &apos;re going to be sending out with a warnhinweis : &quot; this product contains chemicals that will be seen by the state of california as a cause of cancer , geburtsschäden and other fortpflanzungsschäden . &quot;
so we might have a änderungsstrategie design that requires humility , and for my career as an architect , it &apos;s an unglück that words are bescheidenheit and &quot; architect &quot; since the &quot; eternal &quot; seit &quot; since the &quot; eternal quell &quot; has been mentioned .
i don &apos;t know if you remember your answer , but it was , &quot; the stone age didn &apos;t end , because we ran out of the stones . &quot;
and this can be very well , for berlin , but we &apos;re building habens on the ground , and all the windows are closed , and with all the products that are obviously not used for use in innenräumen , that &apos;s actually a vertical gaskammer .
if we look at the word competition , i &apos;m sure most of you are using it .
we &apos;ve been using the 4,000 4000 industrie-chemikalien to the most common industrie-chemikalien in a database that we put in six weeks of public .
now we have 160 pounds of heavy mechaniker to learn the vogelgesänge on the internet .
we started to put commercial and mixed use of buildings , so all people are centers and places where they can sit .
and this is the berüchtigte nsa-datenzentrum in the room .
and that &apos;s not true . don &apos;t let anyone tell you that we knew it all , because we didn &apos;t know .
for example , they put the news that in microsoft , at microsoft , on the 11th of september , on the 12th of september , on the 12th of 2008 , and then the other one : google , facebook , skype , apple and so on .
i voted sweden , because sweden similar similar laws , as the united states has .
and whoever tells you , he doesn &apos;t have anything to hide that just haven &apos;t thought long .
your email were read , and she was talking to the un-hauptquartier and said , &quot; if there &apos;s no right on privacy , there can &apos;t be any free of freedom , and therefore no effective democracy can be . &quot;
a lot of people , for the first time , is to see a frisches human brain , saying , &quot; normally it looks different if you &apos;re showing a brain . &quot;
all these empty areas are the areas that go through the leitungen .
and the nature of a specific cell , to basically power , is a liegende , which is what 25,000 genes are switched on , and what are they going to be on .
now , experts are coming into play , and they &apos;re doing basic anatomische .
we take the markierte material and we put it into what &apos;s called a genchip .
so what can scientists learn from this data ?
you look at your whole genomes , and you try to find aktivitätsherde , which are linked to the genes .
whether it depends on the individual genetic background or their experiences , we don &apos;t know .
we know how we can kill poverty , we need to do more for this ?
so here are a couple more questions .
how can you know ?
so what is the problem ?
well , before that , it was all right .
and it became a lot of experiments that all came together , so i &apos;m going to just talk about one .
so what is the best ?
we need this kind of information . we need more of it . and we need to steer the politics .
and maybe we start small , with things that we &apos;re sure that it &apos;s going to work .
poverty is more mutmaßen than scientific work and lack of data about the effects of hilfsmitteln wirft the question that you &apos;re going to do . but clark-medaillen-gewinnerin esther says that it might be able to figure out what the entwicklungsmaßnahmen are going to help and what damage -- with help randomisierter studies .
so we start , because africa is , in a certain way , in the umbruch .
and the legende reported that alexander was walking through this desert .
but you could say , &quot; invest in africa with 1,000 languages , and it wouldn &apos;t move . &quot;
so we &apos;re looking at the countries , and the specific materials and data .
i want to talk about this from the perspective of the kapitalmärkte .
in tanzania , last week of the standard of ostafrikanische bioerzeugnisse , the standard of the standard bioerzeugnisse .
if i &apos;d ask you , &quot; what was the börsenmarkt in 2005 , with the world &apos;s top of the world &apos;s best performance ? &quot; would you think about egypt ?
because there are amazing possibilities .
&quot; god &quot; is the journey that we all want to be inspired to feel and feel a universe that is feiert .
you &apos;re a switch on -- there &apos;s an electrical light .
i don &apos;t know why , but they thought .
i &apos;m going to walk that , so you can kind of capture it , and i &apos;m going to describe my reactions when i first saw this .
very carefully .
ok , change , raise your right hand .
kt : yes .
kt : no , no . i &apos;m just looking at the road .
i couldn &apos;t see the way through the lens .
again , gone back .
kb : how often did you feel that ?
let your eyes close , in five , four , three , two , one .
it &apos;s only when you want the pressure to be nachlässt , you make a aufwärtsbewegung , so , but only if you want the pressure to be nachlässt .
do you want to do it ?
you &apos;re feeling a certain sensation , and if you feel the emotion emotion , i want you to throw the glassstück into the bottle .
there &apos;s one thing i want to share with you .
ready ?
my hand is , here , in lebensgefahr .
kb : ok . do you think he &apos;s here , yes or no ?
and first of the keith , the keith barry , how our brain can austricksen our body -- with a trick that works by podcast , he actually refers to the audience in some amazing kunststücke of the brain .
i &apos;m aufraffen .
this is not for the one of four , &quot; that &apos;s for all four .
i witnessed that both religious and nichtreligiöse people are obsessed with morality .
the basislinie is almost to zero when there &apos;s no stimulation for ausschüttung .
and they &apos;d get the message from the computer , &quot; person one has sent them to this amount of money .
we showed that the gift of oxytocin that we had for großzügigkeit to einseitigen percent .
i just found the molecule .
he asked me , &quot; what should we do ? &quot;
in experiments , we &apos;ve given a lot of testosterone testosterone .
that tells us that we invented this ritual to connect us with this new few .
and it &apos;s very easy to engage a brain to oxytocinproduktion .
to get the device to walk , you need many , many people .
or should you not ?
they said , they said , &quot; you &apos;ve given us a device that works only in english , so we taught ourselves english so we can use it . &quot;
i decided to destroy my own argument by making a absurde statement .
silly . but i had to follow the viktorianischen norm .
what will this morning ?
we have to reverse this imbalance , and we need to be vergnügen by the threat .
i think it &apos;s right here in the focus of the focus .
i &apos;ve asked all sorts of incredible questions -- &quot; when was the beginning of the world ? how will you end ? &quot; -- to nine-year-old .
and just one last thing .
maybe we should go to the next piece , because i just lost the string .
shivdutt went to local katasteramt in the local pradesh , found that he was led to the official unterlagen as dead .
that &apos;s why this area is .
polygamie is in the privileged layer that &apos;s able to pay multiple numbers of numbers and to run multiple households .
after these four children , you see zumras younger sister who are going to follow their children that were killed .
and finally , there was one single one that was sitting for me , and later , his participation , so i had to verpixeln it to make it unkenntlich .
with 16 , the children have to leave the orphanage , even though they can &apos;t go anywhere .
one of the interesting things is , of course , the combination of the naked hand on the instrument and the technology , and of course , what he told about the listening to our young people .
now my career could continue a little bit longer .
and i said , &quot; well , how do you hear it ? &quot;
it comes from the sound coming through the resonanzkörper .
or we &apos;re doing this , and we think that &apos;s what blindness is blindness .
rain . not bad . not bad .
one thing that &apos;s happening is , but why can &apos;t i do that if i &apos;m learning a piece of music ?
in this steigernden demonstation , the dove perkussionistin evelyn glennie , why listening from music is much more about the beinhaltet to make sound sound to his own .
and it became so big , until the point where there was a festwagen festwagen last year at macy &apos;s thanksgiving , and rick astley rausspringt and &quot; million people on television .
but that &apos;s not the interesting thing .
cp : you &apos;re lucky that it &apos;s not going to be übertragen to you .
peace and love were mentioned .
cp : yeah , but you still don &apos;t know what to keep it .
that &apos;s 10 times longer than the mammals needed to reach their maximale and erobern all of these habitats .
we &apos;re very similar to the dinosaurs , and we &apos;re unusual in our zweibeinigen attitude .
basically , it &apos;s a country that didn &apos;t have a containerverkehr at the beginning of our work .
this is a erwachsenes orinoko-krokodil in his jaw .
paul has never seen a fossil so .
these are all landtiere . there &apos;s a range of possibilities .
i became an artist and started to draw .
the question is -- and we &apos;re dealing with this question for centuries -- how to deal with these kids in science .
bad news for derartu tulu , though -- some other läufer had the same idea that the olympic goldmedaillengewinnerin and paula radcliffe that is a complete ungeheuer , the fastest marathon-läuferin of all time .
show me an animal with schwimmhäuten and kiemen , then it has a little bit of water .
we don &apos;t have our physical strength , because we &apos;re the largest memmen in the jungle .
now , emily baer -- one of 500 läuferinnen and läufern -- it ends up for the best 10 , even though she has gone on all erste-hilfe-stationen halt to stillen her baby -- and defeat denoch 492 .
that &apos;s all we could .
but maybe it &apos;s different .
sounds to focus on the focus on this stadt-marathons , which you have failed when you need four hours .
in the robotertechnik , it was always about interacting with things , not with people -- not with people -- certainly not in a social way , of course , for us , and that would really help people accept robots as part of our everyday lives .
cookie cookie is very , very bad .
the remote-projektmitarbeiter was a experimentator of our group , where they used three of three different technologies to interact with the participants .
and with this technology , you can become this active participants in your life in your grandchildren , in a way that it &apos;s not possible today .
and the third way is a simple journal of the paper and the pen , because this is the standard-methode that you normally used when you start a diät- and sportprogramm .
another important idea is this notion of the realitätsübergreifenden persistenz of the character .
i have style , you know , you know , you know , it &apos;s really hard , because it &apos;s not going to be , it &apos;s not about to be , but it &apos;s going to be geseh .
walking away , comes not far . i fire , &quot; bang ! &quot; the narr is falling between two geparkte cars .
when he wrote a broadway-show , i was in front of the door .
i &apos;m showing a number of photographs and films , but i also do fernsehproduktionen , books and a little advertising , all the same concept .
in fact , the fotografie is going to make you begierde and voyeurismus , what you can &apos;t have , you want to get more .
as you einschleichen into collective consciousness , without that we know that all , and how it happens .
it &apos;s very commercial .
and then you take the picture that he &apos;s shooting at , and suddenly it gets quite serious , and perhaps less .
85 percent of global health care for disease disease is in developing countries -- not in the west -- and yet , 90 percent of the resources in the west .
just to treat . look at the position of the island .
but if you tell them , so we &apos;re trying to do the same thing in nigeria , then all of them are going on .
it allows the existence of ländlicher centers , and we can use the experience very smart .
and we have to be able to have a part of the solution -- that &apos;s important .
and we &apos;re starting to be an engineering technology program that we can use local people who can fix the equipment .
autism has a very large range of a very large range of very large -- the child is not a language -- until i go to brilliant scientists and engineers .
i love the film that they all have my projects all of my projects . this is the spinner in me .
now , what i learned early on , because i wasn &apos;t so gesellig to sell my work and not myself .
one other thing is the sensory problems .
in other words , a problem with equipment is a problem with the equipment .
that is called the movie of dr. carlock .
i made praktika during the process . i built things and also learned how to do tasks .
another very aussichtsreiche idea is to teach kids about a few of the many pensionierten computerspezialist / en .
tg : i have passion for that , the things i do is making the world better .
it &apos;s a distributed reality that can be tracking and systems , or simply a digital storyteller .
the fifth times i &apos;m standing on this coast , the kubanischen , i &apos;m going to look out on the far horizon and faith , again that i will be able to make it all the way across the vast , dangerous wilderness of the ocean .
but it went deeper : how much life is there left ?
and then we have our grundregel , that you never really tell me how far it is , we don &apos;t know how far it is .
but quite frankly , all these talks i &apos;ve been eingeübt , just to survive the schwimmtrainings , they were completely different .
thank you very much , and much fun at the conference .
and that might be the tragischste , he lost his self-esteem .
he closes the army . the army gives him a rifle .
so , what happens when a medium is going to get a lot of new ideas ?
they had to synchronize quickly , what other people knew , otherwise , you couldn &apos;t have the right kind of conversation .
but there was a programmer who decided that that was not the best way of work .
each of you can do change , and you can do it for getaner work , even if you knew nothing about the existence of the other before .
this is called a &quot; diff , &quot; this thing right here .
something that can happen to a culture is that you can acquire a new consumer strategy : schwurgerichtsverfahren , abstimmungen , peer-review , now that &apos;s not true ?
try to make the other thing that others do , a little bit better , because that doesn &apos;t get you very far .
and if you tell you you don &apos;t , then you don &apos;t hear it .
six to nine months at the end of the günstigsten season .
but we &apos;ve tried these rover in the ausführlich , before we put them out there -- or this one rover -- and they made sure that everything works .
so we sent a spacecraft on the way to mars , it &apos;s called the phoenix , and this probe will land in 17 days , seven hours and 20 seconds , so you can ask your clocks .
and that would be bad .
we &apos;re talking about this , as we &apos;re talking to the next rover to try to send to mars .
and i know , many of you have been talking about the last time that these are the airbags of the cool things .
there were two trabanten that were particularly interested in the particular .
it &apos;s sort of like the cycle of the earth , but because it &apos;s so cold , it can &apos;t be water , because water would be frozen .
today i want to talk about how these exponentially are growing into understanding .
so , we &apos;re looking at how exponential growing technology affected the health care system .
this is an example of this paradigmenwechsels .
there are wireless waagen .
and i think many of these technologies will help us be connected to our patients , and to take more time to focus on the important human elements of medicine , which will be augmented by this kind of technology .
the current trend in medicine is , but it &apos;s a exponentiell .
let &apos;s get genomics , when 10 years ago , the first human genom-sequenzierungen were done , the cost of cost about a billion dollars .
so to websites like patients , or the data of your data on microsft or google health , it will always be more important to use all of these possibilities in a way that way .
we used the cells from bone marrow to treat a patient with heart disease , we found a better herzfunktion and higher überlebenschancen , the use of your own blood cells , cells to a heart attack .
my poem is &quot; schmutz . &quot;
their cats , god knows how many , who are pinkeln , their flure , a widerlicher gestank .
as you cross the zersplitterten fliesen , stufe , brummt , brummt , not looking at me , &quot; can you help me ? &quot;
i was frightened , a unterdrückter part of me would have been out of control , and i would be stuck in the schockierenden brodeln of her gestanks .
but i &apos;m afraid that ricky comes from and show me his .
if we love , they hold me around me around me , i &apos;m there and not there .
we &apos;re looking for images that direct attention to critical topics , images are the grenzübergreifend that are überschreiten religions , images that are provozieren , to stand up and to do something , in other words , to act .
in the &apos; 80s , the stigma with this disease was an enormous obstacle to discuss this disease or just mention them .
jonathan klein : photos that changed the world .
i had read many books , and i studied , and i studied land- and seekarten .
i could see the flag on the floor , and i could see the flag , well , it was -- ah , a glorreicher moment , and the music was going to a crescendo .
finally , at the morning of the day , we got the startsignal . we beluden the helicopter -- two helicopter in the tandemflug -- the edge of the packeises absetzten .
i knew there was more open water , and i had a geheimwaffe .
i had known that , but i had expected to .
this was the view of my tent when i got this schicksalsschweren call .
and i just looked at the air that i had .
and they were drehten and they wanted to go back to shore , and all five died on the rückreise .
and this was a jewish man , so that &apos;s a very much way .
but a few days later , we thought we were going to do our students and we said , &quot; what would happen if this betrunkene guy didn &apos;t have been in this condition ?
one day in 1819 5.500 miles off the coast of chiles in one of the most remote regions of the pacific , 20 american sea were going to sink their ship in the ocean .
but at one point , most of the time , most of the time , the visions of aufzugeben , and they will grow up .
they have the same structure .
some of us tend to be more deeply to read their fears .
it &apos;s really , fear is a great gift of imagination , a kind of hellsehen in life , a way of looking at a glimpse of the future , if time is to change their appearance .
nothing happened . no violence . nothing .
we took them in every living room in the arab world -- international , global , through our english channel .
they were separated from their people , and the masses and now we &apos;re going to have to collapse them , one after the other .
thank you very much .
because we discovered that it &apos;s taking care of people , and people want to be informed -- they receive the stream through our internet .
and i said , &quot; i &apos;m a 22 on the row , and i see the needle toward me , and there &apos;s blood everywhere .
you want a needle just as little as you want to share a toothbrush , even with somebody you &apos;re doing .
so this is a überblick of all the studies of all the very high animals in the united states , and these are the studies that show that the nadel-austauschprogramme are effective , quite many of them .
so you can see these awful images from africa .
now i say , well , great präventions-strategie , i say , well .
it &apos;s a transgender-nutte on the streets of jakartas . she &apos;s a girl with tail .
she was 105 years old when i made this picture of her .
hey , hey , black-eyed susie , hey .
and a little bit of banjo play . here &apos;s a little medley .
we were with the car in gatesville , texas , where i spent my early childhood .
and mother was only sitting in the car .
and let &apos;s try it with this old song . i sing : there &apos;s a long white robe in heaven , i know .
and initially , from the gebrüdern dopyera , which later built the &quot; dobro , &quot; an instrument with hölzernem body and metallkonus , where the sound is coming .
well , that &apos;s easier to say .
we were not stupid : we put a piece of plywood in about five feet .
and the idea was , as a drumsets , i thought , why can &apos;t you take the oldest musikart , the &quot; hambone &quot; rhythms , and then combine it with the latest technology ?
well , i think it works because scientists are connected to a ethic .
it &apos;s significant to show up a place in the room , because it &apos;s critical , not in terms of where other things are , but it &apos;s about this absolute notion of space that was god for newton .
and in a more effective universe , the only possible explanation was that it has somehow created itself .
and you understand some things better than others , and therefore there is a dauerndes gerempel and there &apos;s politics .
there &apos;s a different tedsters that i talked about two years ago , jonathan jonathan , who was defined in three different levels .
and just let &apos;s leave it .
while five months he took away to experiment with a complete experiment .
it wasn &apos;t very successful . and so on and so on .
or philip glass or lou reed or the chemical brothers that all played there , they all had their own da da logo logo .
after two weeks , three weeks , four weeks , five weeks .
a little bit of gemustert .
and it &apos;s a transition that &apos;s exactly what the identity of the living is about to do with memory of the dead .
but the büffelopfer and the rituelle representation of wealth also shows the status of the deceased , and it &apos;s a infolgedessen of the family of the deceased .
if we could expand our definition of death to include life , we could experience death as part of our lives , and perhaps the death of the death of something else as fear .
i wanted to end my show with a dance ...
your talk about the water of living monkeys , and the relationship between darwinism and the fact that we &apos;re all naked , less behaart and that we can swim well .
ok , gordon , come on .
&quot; and now she has a kater . &quot;
eight years of american history , eight minutes of my show , are just over .
and jack nicholson says , &quot; i want to be a better person . &quot;
&quot; make this world a better place if you can .
so i give you the message in advance : it &apos;s not trying to auszusterben .
where are the little ? &quot;
here &apos;s people verirrt .
as you can imagine , it &apos;s one thing , a beinknochen aufzuschneiden , but if you go to a museum , and you say , &quot; it doesn &apos;t matter if i &apos;m aufsäge your saurierschädel , or ? &quot;
and you might think that &apos;s a hint .
so we &apos;re losgezogen , and we &apos;ve collected some things , and we &apos;ve found a lot of small animals .
so we now know that , in fact , that is a ausgewachsener triceratops .
it looks like it could even be bigger .
we wanted to make a atmospheric architecture .
all the water in the world are served , so we thought , after you &apos;re at the water , you move through water , breathing water , you could drink the building .
the drill was a roboterarm .
then you get up in this glass elevator in the vorhang-fassade .
before and afterwards .
this is a guy from salt lake city . this is what they look like .
&quot; hineingezogen &quot; -- as if they were being verführt into a gewaltverbrechen .
she &apos;s not sure that this would be so abgelaufen if the redakteurin had no woman .
by the way , wired &apos;s got to hearts .
analyzing the news , they talk to the news , if something is missing , that the people in the new york times did .
this particular plant of filters formaldehyde and other chemical chemicals out of the air .
m most of the time i have the most of the time when i aufstehe to try to figure out what &apos;s going to happen .
and then -- remember , when condoleezza rice was wearing a event that was wearing and criticized for it ?
pm : are you ever met by resistance than you &apos;ve made this for the grundprinzip of foreign policy ?
when i was secretary of secretary , only 13 women were foreign foreign women in other countries .
thank you for today .
malaria : there are eight countries in sub-saharan africa that could reduce their sterberaten to 75 percent .
for daten-freunde , like us , this is a erogene zone , and it &apos;s fair to say that i &apos;m so sexually erregt by this datensammlung .
to be right now , in your capital , some of those who are in those great times , kürzen and kürzen the money and to save the global fund for global fund .
in the opposite , it could save a lot of lives .
if we take this metaphor a programm , you have to think that chris anderson is an computer-erzeugter thing , like jim watson , craig venter , and all of us .
you design something like a cell phone , and in a very abstract language , you describes this cell phone .
this is normal dna , which is keeping for normal dna .
we heat them up , put some salt , and they put it almost to the siedepunkt and cool them , and during the abkühlens , the little strands of the little strands fixieren the long , and it creates a structure .
so this works really well , and you can build patterns as well as well , ok ?
you zoom in , there are only four strands of dna , and you &apos;re sitting on you that are individual teilstränge that can be heften to other tiles if you fit .
we have a very sensibles computer program where small changes -- tiny , single mutations -- something that created a square of a size , and make a much bigger .
and the calculation are molekular , and to understand that , and it better to handle the handle as feynman said we need to build something .
but as we saw it , we had three kernziele : a world class ambulanzdienst , which has completely separate einnahmequellen einnahmequellen and universal universal to anyone with an medical case , independent of his resources .
in the modern time , where time is an important thing , and the struggle is hard for survival , the ordinary glücklose person is , and pays the bribe to keep on the way .
in my last 18 months , as a lawyer , a fight against small and large korruptionsfälle , the case of india &apos;s largest geschäftlichen betrüger .
sm : well , the anfallenden cost was less than 200 rupees .
this is the global footprint of all the tedx-talks of the last four years , all over the world , from new york to the little new zealand in the corner .
in a lot of content , we usually do some things to make it easier .
so we use these netzwerkmotive to find unique talks , which are in creative ways , the ones that are verschmelzen in the creative ways , those that are essential to their subject , and those that are really creative between grundverschiedenen fields .
no wonder that it &apos;s going to come up my colleague , because the truth is hard to digest .
the work of the hausmeisters could be as well as a leichenhalle in a hospital .
ted is ubiquitous .
how do these things happen ?
second , for you to know for you , zweifellose nature of modern american education . drehbuchartige , step for step .
and said , &quot; would you be willing to have a atommüll-endlager in your community ? &quot;
a way to do this . teaching more ethic courses .
why ? because they &apos;re happy to do something that &apos;s right .
bill gates talked about the importance of education , and in particular , about the model of the building , &quot; knowledge is . &quot;
barry barry makes a passionate call for a society that has lost in the bürokratismus , and he argued that rules often can &apos;t be a result , incentives , zurückschlagen , everyday wisdom , will help us build our world .
&quot; by the way , dean , the arm has to fit a 50. perzentil of a frauengestalt , so 81 cm from the little finger , and he &apos;s got to weigh less than four pounds .
it takes another nine to make it functional and useful . &quot;
he does that what darpa asked me .
boys and girls , you &apos;ve given enough .
it was amazing , how positive you were all .
he wants to help . he told me that he wants to go back to help his kumpels .
how do we get out ?
it can be a tragedy or a farce .
ford moved . she spreizte a leg , and then the other .
in london i lived for 44 days in a glaskasten days with nothing like water .
and i got gezittert . i was trying to hold my breath , i didn &apos;t even have a minute of my breath .
there are tiefenrekorde , where people are going to come as deep as possible .
he &apos;s 1,95m groß , wiegt .
because of the movement of the movement , i &apos;m wasted oxygen .
then his hauptkonkurrent came out and broke his record .
and there was no way to slow my heart rate down .
after 14 minutes , i had this fürchterlichen kontraktionen of how to breathe this need .
as a magician , i try to show people things that seem impossible .
thank you . they &apos;re abgeschlossen the institution .
in fact , you take this ?
even now , the human being changed perhaps the weltklima through the abfallprodukte of its civilization .
in africa , people have spent 600 million wildlife wildlife last year 600 million wildlife plants and two billion pounds of meat meat .
one , even if all co2 co2 stopped today would continue to pass global warming .
and then we saw a case to the east coast of the united states , and it moved more westwärts around every year .
today , there &apos;s another movement . the movement to save earth .
pharaoh ramses of the fifth , whose picture we see here , died .
i want to give you a introduction of a kind of schnelltour , umd wants to end what this change means : i want to explain to you what the consequences of this change for us and our biodiversity has also affected how much of this change changes our culture .
and if it was just about it , it would be really interesting .
and in this part of the lachs , it &apos;s a genetically bearbeiteter lachs , which is made from the intersection of a gene that &apos;s developed by a gene that &apos;s developed by a gene of this lachses and another speisefischs that &apos;s growing much faster with much less food .
these are actually kreuzungen , and not real animals .
we &apos;ve taken this animal to its autonomy . &quot;
in other words , this was the first thing in the history of this world , which had a computer as a parent -- it had no organic parents .
paul root wolpe : it &apos;s time to be hinterfragen critical of it .
if darwin only had nasa .
so , melanin , in his various forms , probably there is probably on earth for billions of years . it has been rekrutiert by evolution as often happens .
and only in the last 5,000 years , at age frequency and distance .
evolution helps us .
tell it .
so old and antik , he might be , so he &apos;s very complicated and very simple -- and that at the same time .
then you measure ... and measure ... and measure ...
i sort of ertappt , sort of , to erdenken a geometry , which actually didn &apos;t have any geometry .
they took place in the time from 1875 to 1925 , an extraordinary era , where the mathematics was about to break out of this world .
langwierige measurements , big brownsche movement , ... 1,33 ?
and this is a little bit of unfug that &apos;s what &apos;s going on .
this was one of my favorite bedeutsamsten , because these islands were the same as the großformatige were all over , or less or less .
should you remove the breast ? should you get them ?
right ? it &apos;s got to be a bit more , so that &apos;s very good for the very good .
anyone ? it &apos;s a lot harder .
that can happen in a medical environment .
and why not ?
a couple months later , they go back to the market when prices are the highest , in what &apos;s called the magersaison -- when food is scarce -- because she has to feed their family and no choice .
this leads to very high handhabungskosten .
almost three years ago , i decided to leave my job as an american economist at the world bank and to return to my geburtsland ethiopia , for almost 30 years in abroad .
we build a system that serves all the marktakteuren that &apos;s serves to integrity , trust , trust , efficiency and transparency , and the small farmers helps to deal with the risks that i described .
we believe that this is going to require a political political will , and we need to adapt to the financial sector , and the it-sektor , and even the underlying legal framework .
my answer is a sandsteinerne wall from the bacteria of bacteria , verhärtetem sand that &apos;s going to go through the desert .
you &apos;re really threatened by the existenzgrundlage of millions of people , especially in africa and china .
a problem with plants of trees is that people in this region are so poor that they &apos;re going to consume trees to use them as a feuerholz .
and , after the einmaligen cost of 60 dollars for the bacteria that you never would have to pay again , a cubic meter of bakteriensand would cost about 11 dollars .
in a time , population growth and more likely to be erweisen .
the world shows me possibilities , and i picked up .
our goal is to create a very useful veröffentlicher , so übersichtlich and completely , that a single gebrannte dvd is basically a zivilisations-startpaket dvd .
all these eggs , zysten , bacteria , viruses can travel to one gram of human exkremente .
it &apos;s a wonderful tool for abfallbeseitigung .
you might think it &apos;s just good , if these men are rühren , but it &apos;s also economically economic , because it save a billion dollars every year .
and she found the entsetzen to notice that the family had no toilet .
at the rate , we will be able to supply the goal to supply people with sanitation .
these reefs in discovery bay , in fact , were 20 years most of the ocean reefs in the world .
he was ernährte the slaves who were brought to the antillen , the song &quot; jamaica farewell &quot; -- &quot; aki rice salt are &apos;s are , &quot; is a sinnbild for the importance of the stockfisches in the nordöstlichen canada .
and we &apos;ve been able to do this in the last 100 to 150 years .
i &apos;ve talked about millions of times , but it &apos;s incredible .
the other kinds of impact of climate change is the ausbleichen of coral , it &apos;s a beautiful picture , right ?
that &apos;s not selling .
and yet we are , according to our best knowledge , alone .
what i saw ? stars , satellites , blinkende airplanes -- typical himmelschrott .
and what would be behind these gummimasken if they were ?
and i was embarrassed to all of the time i was embarrassed , because i didn &apos;t read the novel &quot; dune &quot; at the time .
and it was so successful that it was even verfilmt .
faro is a living small town , and to come to the beach , she said , you need to take a bus and take a boat .
one of them was joseph , and he asked me to what i did , and i explained .
and so we put in the case .
companies are making goods for households -- that &apos;s us -- and we &apos;re giving income to income , and that &apos;s better for us to spend those income for more goods and performance .
the ersparnisrate , nettoersparnisse , was under zero in the middle of the crisis , right before the crisis .
you can hear the thoughts of the age .
and at the same time , the solution will realize because these don &apos;t require human nature .
we need to actually invest in the notion of a meaningful wealth that offer the opportunity to develop people .
one , it &apos;s not going to be interested in economics , so it might be that they have to feilen on their sound .
i painted it directly to the man .
it was about space and light .
this photo was taken when i was visiting bay in alaska 2002 , to verbrennen the minerals management service in the test of her verfahrens , verbrennen in ice .
another thing is that it &apos;s spreading when it &apos;s true of water .
and that &apos;s actually really pervers .
and then there was john d. rockefeller .
it was also the reason for the national umweltpolitik act , the clean air , the clean water act .
they have abschlüsse in politikwissenschaft , in economics . they &apos;re entrepreneurs . they don &apos;t want to do what they do .
if you look at people who make a 50,000 $ jahre , who have two children who might have three jobs or more , and then they have to pendeln .
we have to find something like rationalisieren , and they can find more about these politics .
the first person is sure you know .
and here she tells you to &quot; afghan star , &quot; how her friends got her back to join , and they said they will leave their friends for democracy .
last year i was here , i was talking about my swimming at the north pole .
it feels like someone &apos;s behind you and you beat your head down .
and we put it there , and we besprachen , which went wrong there was on mt . everest .
bloggt about it , talking about it , and give a hundred percent . because there are only very few things that cannot be able to do when we use our whole power to do it .
this is a zustandsdiagramm . it &apos;s a very simple computer computer .
can we reach a kind of selbst-replizierungs-verhalten ?
now what i &apos;m showing you now is that we can create a 2d-form -- the b -- aneinandergefügt from a string of components that follow extremely simple rules .
these are three minutes .
and when you saw amy smith , she talks about how to get students to work with communities in haiti .
and it might be that all of us are the sensations of today &apos;s realities and connected to it , and the number of problems we need to solve .
we &apos;re increasingly aware of that we don &apos;t even have to go to the entire stadtfläche of the whole .
okay . i also have one .
can we connect to the natural ecosystems around us , by putting up rivers more and these renaturieren ?
as you can see , the death rate of the amount of deaths per conflict , a year in the 1950s to 2,000 deaths per conflict per year , in this decade , is so terrible .
because we did something right , and it would be a good figure out what it is .
they want to be the generika .
if not , one of the two , has to be aktualisiert , right ?
the developing world had soap water and water , impfungen .
and now i have the prokopfeinkommen on this axis .
and they remember the beginning of the last century , which was very bad . to this sogenannten jump forward .
see how it grows ? and how hundreds of millions and billions of people have come out of poverty in asia ?
here we are . we have a continuity in the world .
look . this is the world .
they get clean water . they buy food for poor . they &apos;re rotten malaria .
and we need to have the way we bring the world to look at facts .
don &apos;t make africa . they don &apos;t make a rassenproblem .
it &apos;s not sustainable . and it &apos;s not going to happen to a supermacht .
and many of you have heard the term &quot; memes . &quot; the evolution of technology is something that i &apos;m very much , much , much , so you know , one of the first things you had was a little handaxt .
my argument is , basically , that , well , nicht-nullsummen-spiele , always , part of our lives .
and this is quite new , and i think that it &apos;s going to be much worse -- this possibility -- because of course , in the technology technology , in techologien , which can be used as weapons , like biotechnology or nanotechnology .
i do my best , okay .
&quot; yahweh is our erlöser &quot; means &quot; he saved the people who are saved , &quot; which was a pretty sophisticated sozialstruktur .
we &apos;ve only civil wars in six countries , which means that media is only about six countries .
so , so , how should we put our money ?
none of these countries , including africa &apos;s largest nation , has ever been the quote of its own .
during this development , we were africans , the africans , to the edges of development , the direction of politics and practice in our countries .
the overhead , mostly vetternwirtschaft , costs 690 billion .
we &apos;d like to interview them . &quot; and i said , &quot; great . &quot;
and now 14 of the diseases are behandelbar , two of them .
in the last 10 years , and as hope for the future , we have seen the beginning of a science of positive psychology : a science of what life makes worthwhile .
and i think there are three different -- and i call them different , because they &apos;re reasons for different interventions , it &apos;s possible to have one rather than another -- three different kinds of lives .
but it turns out that there was no sexual trauma .
you don &apos;t see the wie reynolds .
and what you find is that if you do something fun , the rechtwinklig goes .
when i was a therapeut , i thought , when i was a therapeut , i thought if i was good enough to get someone to get depressed , not afraid , i wouldn &apos;t make him happy .
a polar bear that goes in the arctic , aufgenommen by paul nicklen .
but these so-called &quot; look &quot; is what we call &quot; momentaufnahme &quot; when all parts can be together , and not just the event , but also my emotional connection to happen .
nick -- again , with an automatic camera -- thousands of photos shot from this .
sometimes you can tell a umfangreiche story in a focused way .
we want to find solutions .
and then they all go and jump .
thank you .
what &apos;s even more important is that this is a fotometrischer process that you can capture in just three seconds : we can take emily in a period of time than a single afternoon in several different gesichtsposen and -ausdrücken .
emily : image metrics is a markenfreie , leistungsgesteuerte animationsfirma .
i eventually got involved in it .
in the reserve there is a few beautiful primates .
but i was out of the west and i was working in the east .
all over the time , erze all over the time , animals killed , the forest forest forest , and so on .
and there &apos;s some coltan , and gold .
one day we met with the oberkommandeur .
the elephant verweste up , and they took the stoßzähne .
i don &apos;t think anybody can blame google , because google does the right thing , even if people like al google use to connect .
corneille ewango -- a hero of the regenwalds of congo .
we have almost , almost without noticed , from a market to a marktgesellschaft .
you don &apos;t have to pay it off your budget .
i should aufklären what happened with these experiments .
democracy doesn &apos;t need perfect equality , but it needs citizens to share a common life .
überholen the u.s. as a leading nation in 1900 , where the line is wechselt .
we got this gift in the &apos; 70s and &apos; 80s to be given to women &apos;s erwerbsleben .
electricity was also helpful to the women of women .
an amazing fact for technologie-optimisten is that in the first half of the 20th century , the improvement of life expectancy has gone up three times as fast as in the second half of the 19th century .
this was the paper i wrote with 11 years ago and i got a two + .
i have some that thought long , and it was a long time , between five and 15 , this was my nebenbeschäftigung , and this led to a sense of failure .
so when i look at creativity , i think , i think , this is a sense of sense , or the unvermögen , the zusammenhänge that i see in the way that i live in life .
this is what a fishermen are saying because they &apos;re not going to kill a living organism .
and you &apos;ll notice it more .
and i had to find what was going to fit in the story .
how are we going to festsetzen what the responsibility and the causes are , outside of a dish ?
and you have to be in all ways , including those who i &apos;ve never seen before .
i hope you &apos;ll see me when i &apos;m going to see these examples , because i &apos;m actually talking about everything you could spend your time .
now there are magazines about water .
people pay the full price for both , and the only thing they have in common is they have nothing in common .
the corners of abrunden , the mitte , that &apos;s the big market .
these guys are making the lauteste auto-stereoanlage of the world .
but you don &apos;t have to be ozzy osbourne -- you don &apos;t have to be completely überdreht .
so what you need to do is to figure out who it is interested .
nine months later , i &apos;ll spend messages on tahrir square . i was a picture i saw in my newsfeed .
thank you .
it &apos;s usually tends to look at cultural heritage in the way that we look back and to romantisieren the past .
my first story for national geographic , where i realized that you could bring environmental issues in a report on the story of nature , i was dedicated to sattelrobben .
these are the lions and tigers of the ocean .
and because i love sharks -- i &apos;m sort of obsessed with you -- i wanted to make a different , more positive story about sharks to talk about the need for sharks .
after i left bimini , i learned that this habitat is going to be planiert to create a new golfresort .
she was also verfangen in fischereigerät .
but when the fish come back and back again , the population was controlled , forests of the forests grew in the flat water .
she &apos;s now lives in the jungle of sungai wain , and this is matahari , her second son , by the way , the son of the second of the second , i &apos;ve rescued .
it was a biological desert .
then you can see the returns , and it starts to measure what &apos;s coming out .
so how did we break this cycle ?
and you need bacteria to bind the nitrogen , and without any mikroorganismen , there will be no performance .
the humidity is 10 percent higher .
so we can really change climate .
in nord-suoahlisi , it &apos;s the genossenschaft , there &apos;s a democratic culture , so you can use the justice to protect your own system .
the spiralförmige strudel , who umwirbelt a paddel on a kanutrip .
i &apos;m going to show you one .
reuben margolin creates kinetische sculptures , beautiful works that are regentropfen in the patterns of fallender regentropfen or sich waves . in nine minutes he &apos;s verzaubert us with his meditativen art -- at least by math and nature .
every city has their own design .
23 years later , you asked to come and get this idea .
this is italian portal , the ukrainische park , the polnische park , the japanese space , the german park .
i &apos;m going to talk about consciousness .
either it doesn &apos;t exist , or it &apos;s something else , a computer program or something , but no , in a case , the science of science .
people always say that consciousness is hard to define .
you can &apos;t think about the existence of your consciousness .
it &apos;s a digital computer program in the brain and to create consciousness , we need to find the right program .
we &apos;re constantly bringing the objektivität and subjektivität as properties of reality and rather than properties of the people .
... don &apos;t you find ?
but i meet people who are love what they do , love , and they can &apos;t imagine , to do something else .
we don &apos;t teach american history in britain .
teenagers don &apos;t wear a armbanduhren .
maybe later , it &apos;s not immediately .
no , does not .
i could just not work for this thing , whatever often i do , or how much i &apos;m going to .
but we have to change from an industrial model to a landwirtschafts-modell that could flourish every single school in the morning .
and i was going to get it out and i wanted to figure out more about it .
the reason that this is that the historical report is being able to get digitized at the rasantem rate .
and she went on a light , and she said , &quot; okay , it &apos;s serious .
they led a group of students in protest in the streets in protest .
i stood up , i got a tea , i sat down , and everything i &apos;m here , and i &apos;m still paralyzed , but here .
so , in the peace , i &apos;m going to give you the back .
he wrote a book called &quot; from the diktatur to democracy , &quot; with 81 vorgehensweisen to the gewaltfreien resistance .
it &apos;s not a kultisches thing .
and actually , chris got worried and said , &quot; look , show you this picture , you &apos;ll think you &apos;re one of these crazy modern artists who don &apos;t do much . &quot;
it &apos;s an object for the mind .
and the solution that i &apos;m going to do is to focus on the greatest übeltäter in this massive misshandlung of the earth through humanity , and it &apos;s resultierenden destruction of the biosphere .
so i said , &quot; what would t from the zähler -- we call it the auswirkungen , where it increases the effects , in the denominator -- we call him t2 , can we bring the impact ? &quot;
and he was a huge unterscheidungsfaktor on the market that has increased sales and profit .
we literally won marktanteile .
but five days later , back in atlanta , i got an email from glenn thomas , one of my people from the meeting of california .
so , frankly , many of us who work in the industry is that the industry is threatened by technology and possibly entformt .
and truly , we need somebody to convey for us , so that we have an experience with a mentally göttlichen ?
the arts , whatever you do , always make us every time you &apos;re zusammenführen to look at our gegenüber and curiosity .
the three sisters , ahn , ahn with her passionate new life . at tedwomen they start with the fröhlichen and poppigen , &quot; skylife &quot; by david balakrishnan , and then they play a hinreißende version of astor piazzollas &apos;s oblivion .
the manchester handwerker genossenschaft is named after my quarter .
he makes a bunch of money through the design of specific furniture for rich people .
we &apos;ve taken over the lehrplan of the american kochinstituts , which is the harvard of the kochschulen of the kochschulen , and we kreierten a gourmet-kochprogramm for mothers in the middle of the inner center in the middle of downtown .
we realized that you have to give them flowers and sunlight and eat and expectations and herbie &apos;s music , and so you can cure the spiritual cancer always .
these kids who were given up from the whole world , who are from public schools , and that &apos;s what they are capable of ; with affection and sunlight and food and good music and self-esteem .
and it works so well until it &apos;s been working .
and i will allow you to take the concert , and i &apos;ll give you the music , and i &apos;ve ever got to decide to sell you , you have to sign a agreement that the money is used to support school . &quot;
this is a room that of nancy wilson built that her album took on our school for christmas .
the brown building that you &apos;ve looked at , and i tell you where i made my greatest mistake .
he came to me after that . he said , &quot; man , this is a fabulous story .
and so he &apos;s got a group of people .
bill strickland shares a quiet and amazing story of wars through art , music and unusual .
and the transducer is then the ausgangszellen to weiterzuleiten the code to the brain , and the result is a netzhautprothese that produces a normal netzhaut-output .
but there was the limitierenden factor , the problem with the code , and how to make cells better answers to make normal reactions , and so that was our contributions .
they cover us with a invisible körperschutzhülle , the attacks of the environment , so that we remain healthy .
but if the bacteria grow and they &apos;re going to double and they all get involved to make these molecules , the number of these molecules are proportional to the cell .
now we know that all bacteria can talk .
this is just a picture -- a mikroskopaufnahme of your skin .
bacteria have become incredibly arzneimittelresistent , which is what they &apos;re zurückzuführen is that we kill bacteria with antibiotics .
and the fact is that bacteria have collective behavior , and they meet tasks that they would never be able to do if they were only operating as individuals .
it &apos;s a great honor for me to come to this conference .
or the first ones that come into the hall .
but if we think about justice , aristotle says that what we need to think about is the actual character of the most complex activity and qualities that are worth that you can come and find them honoriert .
what would you have ?
charlie , what does it say to warren ?
here &apos;s how he auslegt it .
so , aristotle has flutes to flutes , golfwägen and the heftig question of homoehen recht. of the marriage marriage .
michael sandel : the lost art of democratic argument .
many people said , &quot; well , you know , städter don &apos;t have to tell us rural guys , what we should do with our time .
and i think that &apos;s good -- the future humanity may make a decision .
if that is , what does that mean for us ?
i &apos;m saying that the speed of the therapieverbesserungen will be going to be going .
i &apos;m saying that &apos;s nonsense .
we know that there are this threshold because we don &apos;t get any altersbedingten to get rid of the beschwerden before we reach an mittleres age , and that even though the damage is since before we were born .
that means you have to do your homework to understand , is that the right ?
audience : hi . i read somewhere in the past 20 years , the average life of almost every single on earth has been expanding for 10 years .
not one of their media has the most .
we don &apos;t care how we make our profit .
they went into the center of reykjavik and setzten frauenthemen on the agenda .
i can &apos;t have a design-argumente present , which are schlagkräftiger than the arguments i &apos;ve learned from economists , epidemiologen and umweltschützern .
the gesundheitsargument is something scary , and probably you know a part of the arguments .
vierzehn americans die a day of asthma , which is three times a lot of times like in the &apos; 90s , and almost everything comes from autoabgasen .
he obviously had sense of humor .
politicians and marketing-leute have fear to market öko as &quot; lifestyle-entscheidung . &quot;
second , because we had eradicated them .
so we thought , &quot; we try it . &quot;
there &apos;s some amazing animals .
immediately , the government said , &quot; enough -- we &apos;ll go out . &quot; and pay for the pay people for this to see every single person they saw .
he might think he would have ever born the baby baby , so he might need a little bit of help from the outside .
i asked peter , if something changed , and he said , &quot; no . &quot;
we want to talk about africa : the next chapter , and this is : a healthy , lächelnder , more africans .
but most of all , they have to be productive in their lives , and they have a kind of productive environment in our countries so that things can be done .
we can we connect this ?
we were on the side of the biafra .
i had to climb between the legs of these people , and i had to get my sister on my back to find a window .
you know , we need to use everything .
and i often see the african employees under them .
the question is , how can we take use of all this good will to come against us ?
you &apos;re undiszipliniert . &quot;
we have ibukun awosika in nigeria with the stuhlfabrik .
and with this idea that artistic creativity is effective in a product product , i decided that this is to make this case , so that we can study them , just like we can study any other complex neurological process .
the way i &apos;ve been used for the 90s was used to study extremely complex processes .
i want to try to show this for you for a moment .
and then i &apos;m in the room room , here , games in the change .
so how do you study a rap ?
there &apos;s a massive activity that is involved in bewegunsgkoordination .
i want to say , probabilities and statistics , that is the mathematics of games and the glücksspiele .
it &apos;s very zeitaufwendig and it &apos;s not just pleasant .
but keep the thought of the whole time of eight seconds .
in play and virtual worlds , for example , their facial expressions can be used , of course , and intuitive , to control a avatar or virtual character .
otherwise they &apos;re very quickly verderben very fast , and without a stable grid , that &apos;s not possible , so children die .
another statement of esther , that we react to a tragedy like haiti , but this is a andauerndetragödie .
it &apos;s produced by the malaria-parasiten and it &apos;s a very interesting kristalline substance .
we have every street , every village , almost every square square square of madagascar .
in your bluray-player , a very cheap blue system .
audience : yes .
interesting , though we &apos;ve been gekillt them all the time , we &apos;ve never been able to get the flügelschlag in the air .
this is the restaurant acorn house .
this orangenbaum you can see here , actually grows in a autoreifen that &apos;s been turned out from outside to the inside .
so water is an important aspect .
&quot; metal &quot; and earth are still out of the earth .
the idea is not yet .
they don &apos;t even enjoy the show .
thank you .
i could show you this animal here .
as soon as it touches the water , you should hear how air comes out .
once we sequenced these two genomes , we said , if this is the smallest genome of a self to a selbst species , could it actually give a little smaller genome ?
and we realized that once that worked , and the way that worked , and a really real chance would have that if we could get the synthetic chromosomes , it &apos;s the bacteria .
so , care is a unumgänglich .
and the last one is a quote from robert feynman : &quot; what i can &apos;t build myself , i can &apos;t understand that . &quot;
but actually , we live here in the northwest very close to the actual notion of the world &apos;s model , which is the 36 times , the 36 , bewässert by running streams .
but the more you add , the more it seems to be lost .
and this number 72 comes from .
this is a nest of a tires colony , and that &apos;s the nest entrance .
this is a colony that was founded by a queen in the previous summer .
the patrouilleure -- this is a picture of glass -- are an interesting group . they go out in the morning before the first group of food .
and strangely , and interestingly , it looks like about half the ant colony just nothing .
the nest maintenance workers are just taking out all the zahnstocher , and put them to the äusseren edge of the nesthügels and put them there .
the nahrungssuchenden decide , somehow , not to get out .
and we did experiments that show that the longer the ant is aufhält out , the simple hydrokarbone changes on their surface , and it smell the ants of the ants in different ways that they &apos;re doing different work .
they cover the entire earth , except antarctica .
and you can see that the cost of all of this is about 89 million barrels of oil , and the annual cost of three trillion dollars .
and we do that for four percent of the world &apos;s population .
it &apos;s nothing to do with this .
i thought , where we can use the natural gas .
and when i was in the windkraftgeschäft of the einstieg , natural gas cost nine dollars .
why don &apos;t you worry about it ?
so just 500 million people have been wiped out .
it never been verschmutzt or something like that .
tbp : i lost 150 million in the wind , okay ?
some have 5,000 . many have more .
there were dotcom-fieber . and there were goldfieber .
ourbeginning.com. life is an event . let &apos;s make it a world .
these are work in lower manhattan , where you built the first elektrizitätswerke .
these were in maybe six different colors .
i mean , you didn &apos;t want this thing to make this light light .
a friend of mine told me this story : that was not just to come and wait , but then the fachmänner had to be there , for the third time , they had to call someone .
so i &apos;m going to use a more clinical language , and so maybe it will not be warm to the heart of the heart as a lot of talking about compassion .
and here &apos;s the basic idea that migefühl is to good actions for people who are going to be revanchieren for that .
basically , it &apos;s about when you &apos;re my enemy or my rivale , if you &apos;re not my friend or to my family , i &apos;m going to get much less to apply the golden rule on it .
so , or so , the results are going to pick up . this is a game game .
every form of the wechselseitigen , nicht-nullsummen-beziehung , force one of the humanity of others .
and they &apos;ll tell you , the other people think that america doesn &apos;t respect them , and they &apos;re actually going to dominate it , and they hate america .
most of the diseases are associated with poverty , but in the case of cancer in children , the children who died of cancer , mostly from wealthy families .
a child died every week , but nothing changed .
because you can &apos;t take this kind of energy and time , if it doesn &apos;t really care .
and so he didn &apos;t really want to say something .
openness is not the end .
well , the dominant krebstheorie would say that there &apos;s a single single single single single person in a single cell cell and that they make you a krebsopfer .
what does that mean ?
we found some kind of zähflüssiges material that the right matrix , the right thing , we put the cells in , and lo and behold it , and then the roughly four days , you can see the umorganisiert and the right , you see what we created in a culture .
and of course , of course , are we asking ourselves where we go to this ?
and so i want to end with a poem .
we have a hochkarätigen journalists who was caught in the abschreiben , a young star-autor , whose book so many fingierte quotes contains that you took it out of the shelves ; a exposé of fake buchrezensionen in the new york times .
it sounds a little like a weird book , but it &apos;s actually about new kinds of lying .
he wrote very , very positive reviews about themselves . surprise .
you &apos;d have four good friends of a person who you have .
that &apos;s really bad . why is it that bad ?
i can look at lying ; they used to be talked to them , and they were on .
they told how big it was the bathroom , or said the einkaufsmöglichkeiten are so far away from the hotel .
that &apos;s right there . okay , glass , do a picture .
and also , you want to be able to freihalten your eyes .
but it really opened my eyes , like i &apos;ve been left out of life from life , for email , social networks , and so on , even though there was nothing really important or dringendes .
i read peter and the wolf to this beautiful band .
and everyone who then umdrehte , i went behind .
at least for me , because if i just do the same thing , i &apos;m very , very boring . i &apos;m very quickly .
i look like i &apos;m -- i don &apos;t know what i see .
are you nervous , ashleigh ?
im : do you worry ? you &apos;re looking at that cute .
anyway , i don &apos;t claim it &apos;s good , but only that it doesn &apos;t langweilt , ok ?
if you have the sahne of the sahne , it becomes buttermilch .
i call it the era of the world -- which is people to be different race or ethnien , but as citizens can all be equal equal .
in egypt , i was eventually discovered .
this had studied in london , was in yemen , and in amsterdam up in amsterdam an airplane to attack america .
there are no ideas and narratives and leaders and symbols that are using democratic culture on the ground .
so , as an anecdote , we can show that if poverty is the only factor , well , a family &apos;s family is one of the richest families in saudi arabiens .
what happened there was a political coalition that was zusammenfand for a political goal , and that was to remove the leaders .
these tools are only socially interesting when they get technically bored .
it ermittelt the boundaries of the individual networks , and then they färbt .
and because of social networking , chinese students who studied abroad , or companies from the rest of the world , the offices in china were there , people all over the world were listening to these stories .
and finally the chinese griffen .
we &apos;re always more in a media media environment , socially , socially , ubiquitous and cheap .
but all in consider , i &apos;m going to do that as i &apos;m doing it .
in my fourth abstecher , a komet is a komet of the mountain .
this look at the eisbruch , the first 600 feet of the base of base .
and this is in camps , four .
and there were some climbers on this ridge ridge .
we also got the bad news that beck was weathers , one of other climbers , in this storm , collapsed and died in the snow .
it &apos;s so hard to work on top of the way that i sometimes actually gave them a little while right through the clothes .
this is the climbers .
and i can only do the way he did that .
and so he will turn thoughts into action .
these are the sherpas , the wacholderzweige .
and the fourth thing that i &apos;m really significant for me is , &quot; ideas where we need to share . &quot;
but today , after 60 years , with the liberal rise , entrepreneurs were becoming as models , and they &apos;re wearing a great degree to society .
it was enige people who wanted democracy because they were putting the ideas in their wolten , from the universal wahlrecht , parliament and constitution and so on .
the third thing is , again , the cities .
the second is the beschäftigungspolitik that we have , which is difficult to make a lot of work for entrepreneurs to create a lot of the indian jobs in the unorganisierten area .
so , if you &apos;re a young country , you have a chance to make a modern rentensystem , so you don &apos;t have the anspruchsprobleme when you get older .
you have to have a clear strategy , which is important for india and important for the world .
so the government decides to be vote .
even though some people on the left , they don &apos;t like to hear it was actually the revolution of the markets that the losung ausgab : &quot; the government has no idea . &quot;
they don &apos;t fear the masses .
so this whole konstruktive mistrust between the volksvertretern and those who are represented .
dreiundvierzig .
each one of these would would be statistically statistically , for two years after the gefängnisaufenthalt .
david cameron spent 20 million pounds in a social social society , to support this idea .
toby eccles : investment in social change .
i &apos;m working on . &quot;
why ? are you too tired to get to the wange ?
even if i &apos;m with my friend named jack there , i say , &quot; i &apos;m going to get you guys , jack . servus , jack . &quot;
if you haven &apos;t found it , my name is tom thum , and i &apos;m a beatboxer . that means i &apos;ve just done everything you &apos;ve just heard , only and just with my voice , just with my voice .
and finally , with this one right here , i can make my sound wieder- , wieder- .
our people had to try to try to find about 5,000 different mischungen in order to find the right .
don &apos;t hear the people who say that &apos;s not going to be able to do . everybody can do that .
on the right side , a ultraschallwandler is a ultraschallwandler .
and i &apos;ll give you some examples .
you can see the blue beleuchteten .
his wife said , &quot; the happiest day in your life . &quot;
many of these patients are moving away .
the results are better than the surgical .
he can stop the surgery and stop it .
canal street , i know .
and this is where they really herbekommen a lot of their creative inspiration . so it &apos;s a business that &apos;s going on in both directions .
and so they want to go to the next trend and that &apos;s how fast as possible .
and their jokes , like the modedesigns of a modedesigners , are really just working within these aesthetics .
you need many lawyers and a lot of time in court , and the händler have decided that it would be much too expensive .
these are the two hauptsächlichen , ziemlich , binären , in the logic of the urheberrechts .
and i want to thank this point of veronica jauriqui for that she did this very modische presentation .
once one of the boat took me to a remote fjord , and i noticed that the archäologen i should meet , they were not aufzufinden .
i think this is one of the most stillsten and robustesten things on the planet .
there are many ancient eiben on friedhöfen everywhere in the u.k. , once you &apos;re nachrechnen , you &apos;ll notice that the eiben were off the churches .
here &apos;s the klonische creosotebusch that &apos;s about 12000 years old .
i hope that by finding these organisms , i can help make the remarkable robustheit look at their remarkable robustheit , and my part of the protection of their fortdauernden longevity is contribute to the very future .
let &apos;s put it in something else .
20 years later , criminals are still using mobile phones , but they also create their own mobiltelefonnetze , like this , which is used by the drogenkartells in all 31 states .
what did they do with it ?
what could terrorists do today , using the available technology ?
recently , the fbi has been arrested to have a al-qaida-mitglied in the united states that they wanted to use these ferngesteuerten drohnen to use the ferngesteuerten of c4-sprengstoff in the u.s.
as we see here , we turn ourselves into a cyborgs .
now , mortality rate is 70 percent when you get it , but that &apos;s hard .
it &apos;s going to be a lot of people who are actually killing the only leistbare funeral in not gekennzeichneten gräbern , like this one outside of ciudad juarez .
but on the other hand , i hear people how they talk about fear , a certain aversion against the risk of risk .
and in 1999 , they became in colombia with the u wa-volk , with the objective of keeping their culture and language , with two other colleagues from the guerillas to the farc and getötet and killed .
and there &apos;s no group that would be more susceptible to this kind of manipulation as young men .
patient capital is uncomfortable for the people who are looking for simple solutions , leichte categories , because we don &apos;t consider profit as a bloßes .
but the entire community , all different sekten , the shia and sunni , would be and pray . &quot;
because when it &apos;s full of the juice , it &apos;s beautiful , it &apos;s green , it feed the world , it goes to the heavens . &quot;
but not faces ?
ok , let &apos;s look at these three portraits .
i tried to make my wife a little joy .
why do i not put my wife to make a local producing pad ?
but here &apos;s the problem , because a company is made a sanitary pad of cotton and it works .
muruganantham : i see this thing in my hands , &quot; why do you have a ekligen lappen ? &quot;
now , 110 countries can access that . okay ?
and it was so beautiful that i was there in the last seven years .
then i took a huge amount of training . i swam in the eiswasser .
it actually happened that the cells were einfroren in my fingers and ausdehnten it .
and my good friend david saw david , i thought , and he came up to me and said , &quot; lewis , i know you since you &apos;re 18 years old .
the prospect you could go in 30 , 40 years , could be a very furchterregender , a very furchterregender .
england , america , japan , south africa , the congo .
it &apos;s about 380 trillion gallons of oil on earth today , which can be erschlossen and gefördert .
now , this might be the end of the story -- okay , we &apos;re just replace all of the things that we &apos;re using , renewable resources -- but i think that &apos;s going to be more on the story .
so , very special material that the seeohren itself , the million of the seeohren , all the time , every day , every year .
and the idea behind it was basically that i &apos;m the paintbrush in the hand of the great characters that come and i was interviewing .
but i wanted interviews that are different .
in fact , my first interviewpartner george abbott was 97 years old , and she was full of the lebenskraft of life , i think that you can define .
we know the big sprüche , we know the great moments , we know what we don &apos;t want to say , and the point is that nobody &apos;s ridiculous .
when we were alone , i was her audience .
it wasn &apos;t that armdrücken , but it was a überraschungsmoment for my gesprächspartner .
he said , &quot; but i understand that . i can understand this .
half the body was a geschwächt , the other ones .
this is a säuglings-intensivstation in kathmandu , nepal .
i don &apos;t want to make a beautiful stuff .
there &apos;s a certain kind of treatment , which is called austauschtransfusion .
it &apos;s not the painting that we would draw , but what we actually made .
another example : again , stupid mother .
thank you .
no , we &apos;re talking about 10 million , 20 million dollars on the swiss bankkonten , in the bankkonten in liechtenstein , from the ministern of the president , the high officers of the state of state .
she was zollten .
most of the big companies are now convinced that they need to use very strict policies , and so on , to become bribe .
if you want to go to a restaurant , if you look at the card card , then you expect you to order everything on the map ?
and this was the first time i thought that the expression actually reflects on her face , what she keeps him .
well , he shares his life .
this französischer painter , in the 18th century , was known for his life , but occasionally people .
unfortunately , these are all over the time of a series of other orphans in the archive , and some of them are beautiful paintings .
the first time i wore it in a aufwändigen dinner that your parents gave us to honor .
&quot; i &apos;m going to take you to your bevorstehenden marriage , james .
my father lived most of his erwachsenenlebens in east africa .
i &apos;d like to show you six minutes .
lancelot imasen : but our movies are stories that we can identify with .
so it &apos;s a young man out there , to get out there , and he must think about certain negative things and all this , or any untugendhaftes behavior .
franco sacchi : so much to say , so little time .
i think this is really the subject of this event .
so , you know , you &apos;ve described this as a drittgrösste film film .
it &apos;s basically a cd . a kompaktdisk .
now the art industry . oh , that was fantastic .
that was really fantastic .
video games can be very profound , even though they &apos;re completely geistlos .
we show &quot; portal , &quot; because you &apos;re shooting at walls to create new spaces .
so , time , space , aesthetics , and then , on the most important , the most important .
and i had to leave some bridges on my way .
it all refers to the bauherren and students , who came from the first meeting , they said they will be verweigert .
so i made some sketches on the servietten -- little boxes and morandi-artige things that i used to draw .
it &apos;s one of the most beautiful pieces i &apos;ve ever done .
this beautiful object , the swiss army army for me to be angerechnet .
and one day i had one -- oh , the other way .
i &apos;ve been doing the verzinkung and the copper very thin , so it was wölbt .
and that &apos;s my cafeteria .
and it reminded me of why i agiere my house like my house .
it &apos;s never been completed .
the dome was a wish of the bauherrin .
it was an attempt , this little piece of land -- it &apos;s 30 in the 76 of the country -- to turn into a anwesen , trennte these areas and the wohn- and the dining room in this room , with a high space in it .
they call this &quot; plan coupé . &quot;
here it is .
the building in the background is vorbeigleitender iceberg in the mountains .
our client doesn &apos;t want to be a galleries , so -- and when we met our new akustiker , he told us that this was the right shape .
in the case , i was asked to do a fish , we &apos;re just working on this , and we &apos;re building the ritz-carlton-turms that was built by skidmore , owings and merrill .
can we make a clean burning of kochbrennstoffe ?
and one of the things that she found was that she wasn &apos;t brannten .
and this is our hausgemachten briketts .
and he &apos;s compared the problem of health effects and coal .
it &apos;s a place where , for example , if this was india , in this room , only three of us would have a car .
so you can &apos;t use the same concepts as in the united states to make things move .
there &apos;s a big difference .
after a surgery , everything .
now , this is not surprising . but we also asked them to judge their honesty and intelligence to judge , kindness and aggressivität .
he married . he had a son named jerehmia .
is this business with our social space and our employment with this kind of westliches phenomenon ?
i want to tell you a little bit about the surgeries that we &apos;re doing , how far we are and where we want to .
we can replace the liegende of the liegende , but we &apos;re not very far with replace gesichtshaut .
my theme is food in schools , because this is about social justice .
and the next is bio-lebensmittel .
people are always talking about sustainability , but we should find out what that &apos;s at all .
you know , all of you think you &apos;d have to eat more and more ?
and then they have rausbekommen , hey , we can sell the stuff to kids .
and this is a typical essensplan , which is a typical essensplan .
the things that we might do at home , and we &apos;re important to think about that , we need to teach kids to schools .
we need to educate the employees .
these 8 billion , by the way , two dollars and 49 cents -- so much money is willing to get the government for lunch .
as a little girl , my grandfather was sitting in a hot sommertagen with me out in the sun .
when i go to a party and people ask me what i do , and i say , &quot; i &apos;m a professor , &quot; you &apos;re going to matt .
i want to know their selbstsicherheit , all about her innerstes beings , untergraben -- that you are a professional in your own conscious consciousness .
don &apos;t break the tension . i want to be verzaubert .
it &apos;s a documentary that &apos;s a documentary in spielfilmlänge about consciousness .
and as i got closer , i expected to see all the details of most people , their clothes and so on .
how do you know that it was what you did ?
do you see ? who &apos;s not see it ? it will help .
we &apos;re starting to start . some examples .
today , jeff has described his efforts , a good , great theory to bring in neuroscience .
and the verkehrsplaner in london said , &quot; what my she is saying , &quot; who &apos;s in charge of the city -- &quot; i mean , no one &apos;s charge . &quot;
now , congestion pricing were introduced in stockholm in the third of january , and the first picture , here &apos;s a picture of stockholm , a typical street on the second of january .
so we did this enormous survey with a lot of verkehrsbetrieben , and tried to figure out who changed and where they disappeared .
then i went to ostwärts for 20 years -- from eastern europe to central asia -- through the mountains of the kaukasus , southern east , north africa , russia .
what do we know from the todesdrohungen of the taliban who are going to be genagelt to the doors of people who are going to send their daughters to school like in ?
the world changed .
i was in my office , my desk was a aufgeräumt , i had the blue trennwand-teppich on the walls .
and there were actually two of them .
there was really what .
how amazing is that ?
i &apos;m going to just briefly talk about some other patients that all of you do in your power to improve health care .
and then i realized that the page of google earth reminded us where we can fly to each address .
we are , most of the most most important resource in healthcare .
umkehrosmose of seawater is a membranfiltertechnologie .
here &apos;s the resolution . a wonderful creature , right ?
they don &apos;t take their environment from the help of sound waves . i &apos;m talking about the flughunden .
in the united states alone , the annual cost of annual cost would cost 22 billion dollars for the cost of 22 billion dollars , so we can see bats in any case .
why should we even have a deal with aging ?
if you &apos;re going to go out and look at the night sky and see this beautiful flying animal , i wish you smile . thank you .
europe had to be gezerrt into economic development .
the boom of the resources of resources are pumpt , not everyone , but many countries at the bottom billion .
so what &apos;s going wrong ? why is there that so-called &quot; ressourcenfluch ? &quot;
and so the countries of the bottom billion are really , very ausgewogene politics .
some economists just came in time and said , &quot; why don &apos;t you try to a auction ? it &apos;s going to reveal value . &quot;
in this moment , a billion people in poor people are stuck in poor or poor countries . how can we help them ? the economist paul collier is a kühnen , compassionate plan that we can close the gap between the arm and rich .
we have no container in which they &apos;re made .
here he gives a englischsprachigen surgeon in africa of this basiswissen that is needed to take care of minimal-invasiver surgery .
so we have this : imagine , imagine a lecture , and could talk to people in their native language at the same time .
&quot; grundlagen of laparoskopischen surgery .
i found a little bit about 14 years ago for the first time in this common material , fischnetz , which has been used for centuries .
he asked me if i could build this as a dauerhaftes piece of town .
so we were doing small atomisierten wasserpartikeln to produce a dry fog that &apos;s shaped by the wind , and it turns out that it can be shaped by people who can interact and move through without being naß .
they were lying in their geschäftsanzügen in the grass , and they were watching the verändernden patterns of the windes next to people they didn &apos;t know and shared the wiederentdeckung of wonder .
and i also notice that this is an enormous risk for our society .
when peter &apos;s moving his arm , this yellow spot there you see there , the brain activity in the activity that geschiet in peters mind .
if you do this , what will you control ?
and to say that these changes can be able to pass beyond death , is even a claim that can be true , of course , or wrong .
now , let me just let me just let me say what i don &apos;t say , i don &apos;t say science can guarantee this room or that we will have scientific answers to any vorstellbaren moral question .
now , why would this not untergraben an objective morality ?
what &apos;s the chance that this is a peak of human development ?
on the left-hand side , you can see edward witten .
we live in a world full of destruktiver technologies , and these technologies can &apos;t be un-erfunden , it &apos;s always easier to break things than they &apos;re together .
but then we need to talk about well-being in a larger context .
and what is the natural enemy , which is the tools of the good bugs we &apos;re talking about ?
it &apos;s a parasite , not a zweibeiniger , but a parasitäre , two mm long , schlank , a rapid and wendige fliegerin .
and if we put these good blumenwanzen for example , for example , in a paprika-feld , you go to the flowers .
in israel , like we &apos;re on over 1,000 acres -- that &apos;s the equivalent of 10,000 israeli dunams -- biological schädlingsbekämpfung in süßpaprika , 75 percent of the pesticides in the pesticides .
third , to increase the conscious of farmers for the potential of this .
automobilretrofuturismus is one of my favorite .
it &apos;s still fun to make the hirnlosen fun than about irgendwen , and i do that often .
&quot; urban absurdism &quot; -- that &apos;s what the new yorker needs .
her name was fay wray , and so this was -- i wasn &apos;t schlagfertig enough to say , &quot; take the drawing . &quot;
or also , the soviet union found only several decades , maybe within a decade , after the time , which was the soviet union most most most powerful .
because there &apos;s 80 percent out there that really eat insects .
they are at the beginning of nahrungsketten .
why do we actually do these balls in soup , but it &apos;s still meat in it anyway ?
it &apos;s 25 kilograms per person per year .
so now we decide for one , or to five kilograms of output .
we can increase it a little bit of a cost of the united states , but it will soon be a boundary .
and you might think , well , they &apos;re not available at all .
i haven &apos;t even started three minutes .
he said , &quot; well , we need to put it on the table .
and i saw a sign .
even if the kanadier hintergehen the system , they do it in a way that society has to benefit .
and in this book , little lewis would find the great idea .
this is a linealwerkzeug . and on the back , some other pieces are spielereien , messwerkzeuge and scales to make some of the kalkulationen .
right . so , this is what the device is using .
there &apos;s a quality of handwerkskunst and precision that &apos;s just amazing and remarkable .
so , the first robot i want to talk about is called the &quot;
this is just using it , showing you that if you have cameras or other sensors because it &apos;s high , it &apos;s a meter of 80 to be able to hinwegsehen over hindernisse to büsche and dererlei .
for example , in this case , even though the left and the right wheel is connected to a single axis , and therefore quickly turn around .
welcome to romela , the robot mechanics lab , the robot of virgina technology . &quot;
but the cool thing about this is the benutzerschnittstelle .
let &apos;s see how he does . this was our first attempt , and we &apos;re going to ...
but what is the secret of our success ?
but just to talk about a radio of imagination is not enough .
and this kind of education is very important .
innenstädte , who are going to be geisterstädten .
there &apos;s basically no pool of good teachers , and only eight percent of the people who have a bachelor- or a higher degree .
there &apos;s a full empty space of the creative capital in bertie county .
the goal of the game is to have all the teammitglieder in the wheels , then the team won .
but for the last few decades , but a lot of money that was determined for a while was a completely completely way .
and out , and the neighbors of interview what they &apos;re buying for food and where and why , is a homework assignment .
in this , it &apos;s really impossible to produce large kahle surfaces .
i &apos;d invite you to follow my journey of the umdenkens and exploration .
after four months of the season , it &apos;s a lot of sprießt , and now it &apos;s going to dry up 8 months before .
here &apos;s a couple of results .
this global action is going to lead to climate change , how it might fossil fuels , perhaps even more than those .
when i learned about these two things , it was very , very , very , very , for both personal reasons , as well as scientific reasons .
it has a very good ausgestattetes pediatrisches , which is part of the british mcdonald &apos;s foundation in part .
after treatment , we &apos;re going to take a bunch of a series of simple sehtests wöchentlich to see how his vision has to fit .
and the answer is in motion . this is what i want to show you in the next video .
i had to argue for a long time .
we &apos;re tracking these forschungsrichtung , and i hope to report more results .
and then i took this leichtathletikveranstaltungen to physically disabled disabled , and i thought , oh i don &apos;t know , but before i ask about it , i used to look at how that is .
but that was the fall of &apos; 95 , and then when the winter anbrach , he said , &quot; you know , you &apos;re good enough .
ss : well , it &apos;s got aimee to the paralympics of 1996 , and she &apos;s excited . her family travels -- it &apos;s a big deal .
i tried everyone who i could , auszufragen against who , against what , who are , for whom , i &apos;m going to do this ?
i always won everything , and now i thought , what ?
you can be big big . take it off . &quot;
moderator : aimee and designers will be at ted med 2 , and we &apos;ll talk about design .
they got somebody who came over and absägte the shoes .
it &apos;s almost impossible to think the actual losses of economics , unless we use math .
or for the more time , the 75.000 jobs .
and yet something about mathematics : mathematics , sometimes it looks like math -- like in this example , and sometimes it &apos;s not doing it -- like , &quot; am i drunk ? &quot;
in education , we spend about 80 percent of time to teach people how to do three hand .
when people ask me , is that true ?
but the robots in cars allowed to separate these things , so that &apos;s what drive the other thing than building a car and the learning of his wartung .
completely wrong .
but i think we can do both the same time .
and one of the reasons that &apos;s so important , so it &apos;s very important to miteinzubeziehen computers into the exams .
it was in winter , and i &apos;ve been blind for about a year .
i was especially thinking about my father , who died in a kind of surgical surgical brain .
similarly , just by the handle of the stocks that can help itself the soil , and with time , it &apos;s a notion of where you are and what you &apos;re doing .
but when i was erblindet and walking along the way i was blessed .
if you design a city in the spirit of the blind , there are many , many jobs .
to give you a sense of this experience , the article &quot; i think you think you are . &quot;
and the rangierten of the famous that i knew -- the ten commandments , love your next , is the fruchtbar and mehre you ...
you give money for a good purpose and it &apos;s made sense of emotional sense of purpose .
she &apos;s not a book written , and it was herabkam by the heavens .
so , for me , this is actually the key to me , the key to me , to remember that , on the way that car don &apos;t überschlug here , and i &apos;m not going to get up on the way through the steps i &apos;m not going to get on the stairs .
that was very inspiring for me .
so if we want to make this book any meaning , we really need to get to it , and it &apos;s a struggle with him .
so we have this wonderful progress .
and the academics that really believed this work to be unseriös , so we developed ernstere applications like this optik-prototypen entwicklungstisch , which is the kappe of a zahnpastatube auf at a laser laser .
alex was working on a little bit , a little bit , independent kunstfilm , called &quot; minority report &quot; for steven spielberg , and she invited us to the interface that &apos;s going to be used in the movie .
we &apos;re going to take this boolesche operation through because we like yellow and tapire to the green ones .
let &apos;s pull the apart : i &apos;m bringing it in explosionsansicht .
we , as humans , are the ones that are designing things , and we should make sure that our machines help us and build on it .
john , thank you for making the science fiction .
what okolloh did would not have been possible without digital technologies .
but here &apos;s the point . the albernste creative act is still a creative act .
but the institutions that are represented by this black line , said , &quot; we change this deal immediately .
they &apos;re created by the members of the community .
and how all the good seifenopern does it take a leap of 20 years when the interest of the audience changes .
you have not available five days . so changes , and we started playing 50-overs-cricket .
india didn &apos;t want to play the t20-weltmeisterschaft .
the other was a indisches cricket .
was this that new india ? this was a different world where you could get player from all over the place , as long as you get the best player for the best price .
we all had seen games in calcutta , but we &apos;ve never seen this . shahrukh khan took the audience to the audience with a bengalischen song , for calcutta , not for india , but for calcutta .
could you imagine that day would come ?
i hope i &apos;ve got any of you to make a sense of richer and the game is popular and hopefully there &apos;s a long time to work in this business .
and you know that the average dogs is because you &apos;re going through your memory fast , as you often saw dogs and pigs to a rope .
why in the world should anyone have a lottery ?
on the other hand , if you go to a developing country and buy a gourmet-menü for 25 dollars , it &apos;s a big mac for a big mac .
would you spend your $ 20 dollars for a ticket ?
i &apos;ll give you an example .
and if the way to the other end of the city &apos;s worth 100 mice , it &apos;s worth 100 bucks , totally no matter what they &apos;re going to be saved , but people don &apos;t think that way .
well , in the big and whole , you &apos;re enormous impatient .
watch what happens when we leave einge .
dan , i would like to hear more about this . so you say , that our answer to terrorism is , i mean , that he &apos;s a kind of mental error ?
there are no weapons going to be abgefeuert .
and so some people look at economists than a stupid people .
and the subject and variation is one of these spielarten that requires a certain intellectual activity , because you can compare the variation in the subject you have in mind .
&quot; so in words , in fashion , the same rule is the same rule in the gleichsam , and at the old , not the first of the new trials of the new tried , or the last one that &apos;s been going on for the old . &quot;
and i woke up one day and i said , &quot; well , maybe that &apos;s not that ? &quot;
first , my willingness to reach me to a critical audience without suggesting i &apos;m sure i &apos;m sure .
it &apos;s my intention to take the poster to begleiten , should you not understand it yet .
so , in the big and whole , that they can make our survival .
jews have a unangenehm süßlichen smell .
if the room stank , we could see that people were going to be more negative attitudes toward schwulen men .
it &apos;s like i was heimgekommen to talk about what i did in those 20 years .
it feeds my mind and my soul .
they &apos;re shit .
there &apos;s a young director , hollywood director , with his friends , other filmemachern , and they talk about what cinema means .
without food , i was sick .
we don &apos;t need trouble more of the idiots .
our government was corrupt .
so for me , the idea that we have all these children , it &apos;s a generation , we have a whole generation of children that have to go through so much psychological trauma or damage and africa has to live with it .
through all of the book , they go to an hour of dokumentarischer filmbeiträge and interactive animations .
what is the business of doing ?
it had at least the seemingly that you could remain , and always , the most true to you .
so i thought , &quot; yeah , that &apos;s a good idea . &quot;
they still talk about it .
when i came from college , i worked in southern kontextuell , and they were gewöhnte on the spanischen kolonialziegel on the roofs and stuff like that .
rsw : how does it look like this ?
the mit-projekt -- they were interviewed me for mit and sent their technical hilfskräfte to bilbao .
that reminded me of it .
and the guy looked at me and said , &quot; what can i do for you , mr. gehry ? &quot;
if you want to do three months long , you will have the ideas on this and more and more and more and more alive .
and one thing i wanted to mention from my danksagung , but somehow missed it was to thank all the companies that helped me to help me .
but in the meantime , these things are winning .
and this is 10 weeks later , demoliert by hand .
you see the anzüge , the blumensträuße .
the kakophonie of stilen and things is remarkable , and this is what i &apos;m supposed to be .
it &apos;s an incredible endeavor , 15,000 workers , i think , five and the sixth is going to be here .
in this level , to be 1,500 workers .
50 percent of the computer in the world are land to recycling in china .
it was quite unusual , so stefan that less than five percent of advertising had an image of the main commercials .
and wish is three : imax-film . i was told to be a machen , and i always wanted to do something like this .
and it becomes more important that we can figure out how we can win these materials from these extremely complex economic .
the traditional ways to separate material is simply not working for kunstoff .
the traditional way to make plastk is happening to oil or petrochemikalien .
at the end of this process , we have a mixed kunststoff-zusammensetzung : many different kinds of kunstoff and many different qualities of plastic .
now i &apos;m seeing a lot of the grinser out there .
and what we see is that people tend to make mistakes in the same way , again and again .
maybe we should be looking at how monkeys make economic choices and find out if they are doing the same dummheiten as we do .
here &apos;s a mayday . it &apos;s going to trade a jeton for food and wait for it , and you get food .
and you &apos;re a impatient to it that the market is opening .
imagine that i put every one of you in the hand of your hand in your hand -- 10 hundred hundred dollars of grades .
you can either choose a riskanten loss -- you can , i throw a coin . you &apos;re going to lose a lot .
if we made the same szenarien , the same scenarios were , they would be doing the same things as people do ?
the person on the left is a secure loss .
maybe it &apos;s not just the people on the last stage of development that make stupid mistakes .
and this is the catch .
but if we think about buildings , it &apos;s only four stories tall .
we need to build less with concrete and steel , and we need to build higher . we &apos;ve been working on 30-geschossigen holzgebäuden .
that &apos;s as much as we had 900 cars less in the streets in a year .
kugelsichere vorhänge verdeckten my windows .
perhaps , &quot; citizens , &quot; because recently they stood up to fight against the decline of the justice , and the citizens of these networks are working together to help each other .
sberbank , the largest and the oldest bank in russia , largely in the property of the russian government , is now crowdsourcing to be crowdsourcing to angestellte employees and citizens into development innovation .
we &apos;ve heard about ted talks about people who have been gehackt to their plants with arduino , and mozilla is working on to motivate people all over the world , creating websites and turn video .
and so i started thinking that the eternal mother always asks , &quot; are all children there ? &quot;
that &apos;s compassion .
he asked them to communicate a message , and all of their own language was a central bekundung , which was a version of the golden rule , &quot; what you don &apos;t want to do , not to anyone else . &quot;
being a pastor means to take care of these individual needs .
and we do this by some fallbeispiele .
there are about 180 messages in washington d.c. d.c.
it &apos;s already taken by parks and sculptures .
it &apos;s made up of silizium-beschichteter fiber .
there are also some limitations on its lighting .
the bubble is a anti-denkmal .
i saw my aunt raped when i was only five .
one of the things i witnessed when i was trying to eat my friend because we had no food and we were around 400 .
as a child , as young and zart , words i can &apos;t forget , it &apos;s not forget .
this is my story , mitgeteilt in the form of a single lesson .
my breakfast , my lunch , i took a foundation that i founded , because we want to build a school in sudan .
give us tools . give the farmers tools .
audience : yes .
the third chapter is a more complicated rechtsverfahren called federal hebeas corpus proceeding .
that means more than 60 percent are .
we &apos;re doing this problem the best , by expanding the problem of death .
and even if that happens , it &apos;s not too late .
i remember nothing from time when i was five years old .
santa knows whether you were artig or not . right ? &quot;
but , julie , you were so ready for school . you were so ready . &quot;
they looked at each other and they were , in the sense , that was the right answer , and then they said , &quot; do you think we all are brothers and sisters on this earth ? &quot;
maybe your greater capacity to cooperate and adapt ?
i think this film shows the hardest look at the modern times : &quot; the road &quot; is the road .
in the second world war , we had to produce a lot of stuff .
but we can &apos;t forget that it takes a core piece of value , and that &apos;s how many resources of the planet we use .
now , to the good news .
it may be in latin america .
and at this point the skeptiker and the leugner of climate change happen .
we did a project for a couple of years ago , a big program , it was , the vorsorgeprogramm -- with many , many people -- many experts were involved -- all at the evidence , at the evidence , a big wälzer .
a group of people , they &apos;re asking them to spend on themselves , and the other group is to spend it on other people .
when they went to the second one , all of the man , all of the time , went to a man who had been krümmte and stöhnte , and clearly the help needed . the question is , did they stop and helped ?
the word is &quot; pizzled , &quot; a combination of puzzled and pissed off .
there &apos;s a wonderful book called the &#91; it &#93; : &#93; it &apos;s a hidden thing that hidden life &apos;s hidden .
since -- now , four decades , i &apos;ve been trained with the best in this area , the world &apos;s best , in the world , had a young and old , kreierte , choreographierte , und , and knüpfte a rich web of art , and the most exciting .
and i found this in my dance , my dance , my strength , my energy , my passion , my real life force .
i was dancing between chemo- and bestrahlungszyklen and drängte him to fit these in my aufführungsplan .
well , it was essentially frustration .
it &apos;s the way it was .
he put them together , combined it , put it together into something that he put it into this software , which i think she was originally designed to be his son , and he &apos;s doing this wonderful presentation .
these documents are small pieces of pieces , little boxes .
i want to suggest -- yes , you make a beautiful website . how could i say you don &apos;t have to make a beautiful website ?
now , you ask the linked data that you &apos;ve put on you now , 32 hits each one of those protein with these properties and you can look at them .
and that &apos;s what linked data goes .
all of this will lead to each year two million children die less than the last year , as in 2000 .
and if it is , we &apos;re willing to get to iterieren feedback and give feedback to make sure that the promise really deliver results ?
you can just show you one of the numbers there , the 5,000 -- is that the number ?
my brothers started to draw on the tips of the drawing and draw on the tips .
and that &apos;s what i &apos;ve been fascinated to explore this area .
how many of you have a cow on the road going on the road from bangalore to a mysore ?
it &apos;s just as people are trained to be so wahrzunehmen , and that makes meaning .
and they said , &quot; she &apos;s fine .
can &apos;t you do anything , you &apos;re artists ? &quot;
this is a box of wellpappe .
because if we can see someone by a way , we see the footprint .
what percentage of that have been made foreign direktinvestitionen ?
obviously , he has been sitting for the last 20,000 years in a cave .
so the auslandshilfe is actually very , very good to conclude , because -- if you think about it , i &apos;ve been thinking about the unter annahme assumption that most things are very binnenlastig .
this is the place i showed you at the beginning .
we &apos;re going to be a technical now .
think about the toyota .
you can &apos;t get it out of it , so you accept it and you &apos;ll find a way to work with it .
it &apos;s very hard to vote .
it &apos;s wetteifernd and zielgerichtet .
pizza you can get a hunger .
there are millions of different beläge .
so , remember , if we think about sexual education and activity , they &apos;re out in baseball .
it &apos;s the poet yuan , and it &apos;s like , &quot; i can &apos;t feel the bambusmatte wegzupacken .
and that is , &quot; how much percent of the day you think of that person ? &quot;
in about the 175 societies , people have left zeugnisse of these machtvollen gehirnstruktur .
they came home with 60-80 percent of the house .
and it really became a strong force .
and i said , &quot; why do you think men are untreuer than women ? &quot;
at no time , at that point , there were no time that women were educated , so interesting , so that it could be true .
she &apos;s 23 she took her since she was 13 .
i started to fagen , why you &apos;re more in love with one person than the other .
they will be long as long as the human race is what shakespeare called &quot; these sterbliche spiral . &quot;
but i &apos;m sure i know .
most researchers believe that obesity is the cause of insulin resistance .
maybe we should ask ourselves , whether it might be that insulin resistance is the cause of causing weight and more effective diseases -- at least most people ?
others , it &apos;s too much nahrungsfett .
peter attia : what if our views were wrong about diabetes ?
my grandfather , henry ford , believed that it was the mission of ford motor company , to make life of people and make cars for everyone affordable .
and the good news is that we &apos;re now to tackle the big problems of cars and environmental environment -- not only as it is , but in total than industry .
i think you can imagine .
but what really inspired me is the ways we &apos;re going to have when our cars start communicate .
we need infrastructure that is able to support this flexible future .
this is a minute of 59. .
i think now my mother is , i &apos;m so kind of a innenarchitekt .
and the nurses need to enter data .
that &apos;s really important . it &apos;s a lot . &quot;
so what &apos;s the herausgekommen ?
it was great for us , because we won a lot of awards .
i got infected , when i was 17 , then as a student student , i met adults who really believed in my ideas , herausforderten me and drinking lots of tassen chai with me .
now it was just about children . so we don &apos;t .
basically , we gave the children a simple task .
for our auction , we have some wonderful images for them , for a really good purpose of the money that they give us to buy aids aids .
but what i never said , and what i want to do is make a clear is that it &apos;s cool .
in a way , in the elegant or alternativ available product here , we have großzügigerweise mittags , the maxin , which is another kind of development -- and inspired by the incredible kind of experience .
if you think about the change in our society , the zuzug of the country to the cities that have taken 200 years is the same process in 20 years .
it looked at changes , even though that still were unknown .
so , for example , we would put the models under an artificial sky .
i think a reduction in höhe percent for almost pure .
and how do we do something in this growing world , especially in some places i &apos;m talking about -- china for example that will build 400 new airports in the next 10 years .
and this is the focus of the 18-minütigen talk -- there are no lighting in the positive sense that is healthy and our well-being for without proper darkness .
unlike the first office i showed you at the beginning of the talk , this is an extremely famous office , which is that the white-gruppe .
and behind you , you &apos;ll see the seagram building that was later on a icon of modern lichtdesigns .
i think that you &apos;re quite amazing , which is how much light it &apos;s in the sky , and never reach the floor .
it &apos;s not very pleasant and behaglich .
they &apos;re not gestört .
if our innenminister , as a couple of weeks before , a war in a third of india has been ankündigt , about 200 distrikte , the unregierbar , he missed the subject .
and one day -- i don &apos;t know what happened -- while i was traveling home from the office , i might have a honigbiene , or it came to me in the sense , i could be like a honigbiene , would be wonderful .
ag : but what is it going to use ? what was it used ?
to do what ? to break rocks .
this is the only place that you could express your creativity .
they don &apos;t want to be a second choice of standards and qualitätsprodukten .
and this is what mansukh bhai prajapati has done .
i had to my favorite one .
mr. kharai , who lives with a physical challenge , is only 50 inches in size .
assam , kanak gogoi .
this is erfreulich .
this is 3,2 billion people .
or skifahren . it &apos;s just fun , and people love to do it and doing fun things .
so we worked very , very hard , but we knew that it would not be so hard to develop the technology as the acceptance of what &apos;s important and how technology could be used .
cars are not made for the same to match each other , and they &apos;re wonderful machinen to drive between cities and forth , but think about it : we &apos;ve solved all the problems in terms of reach and speed .
so if we could put this box on a couple of years , we could have a solution to transport , electricity , and communication , and perhaps drinking water in a sustainable package that weighs 60 pounds ?
and in fact , in a moment , the people who die of the drug is kind of involved in the drug trade , and we take the fact that they have either been gefoltert or professional exekutiert or even both .
los zetas will be a bande of a psychopath that was afraid and schrecken in cities and bringing the press to the silence , and that &apos;s true for most of the most .
in mexico , and the u.s. , now , on a truly international organization , the partnerships with the production with production in the south and global partnerships in global distribution .
but also part of it , a month of a month , you live in the future , and we have a long time of a long time .
and after it falls under a critical price , it tends to be successful , if you &apos;re successful , about a critical mass , a breakthrough .
but they &apos;re going to be very , very cheap , and look at the interesting effects , if you &apos;re going to be cheaper , brands lose , the sonys and the no-names , the apexe , they win .
if you look here , linux is in red , it has done 20 percent .
it &apos;s really open to it , you know , the gift of the silicon world &apos;s gift to the world .
because of some of the technologies we talked about .
patient capital works in between and trying to take the best from both of the two .
the second thing to do it was really , really , really cheap .
president obama understands that .
because one of the poorest farmers of the world had access to a technology that allowed him to change his life .
and yet , these are the characteristics of the characteristics for men and women , by all generations , through all of us .
you remember , during the wirbelsturms , msnbc berichtete msnbc on the wirbelsturm and aktualisierte it often . it &apos;s just possible because it &apos;s easy to use .
i like music , and i like banjos , and i think i heard steve martin play , and i told myself , i can .
i wrote this post , and i took this to einstein today .
and you see this post .
these little things just .
and i might have to schluchzen because i tend to talk about it .
it has been sustainable for a long time , except for the generation .
we need to use this procedure to use a better understanding of the way that the oceans works .
we studied these fish , but we had to learn how to keep them .
but it &apos;s only half the size of the greatest tuna that we &apos;ve ever been .
they come together . this could be sex under the age of it . and there it is .
you can auswerfen a lure -- it &apos;s teppichförmig like a seal -- and a white shark will go to this , a neugierige creature that &apos;s very close to our 16 feet of boat .
and then these animals are actually giving us one place by helping us .
and the white shark .
i think he didn &apos;t think the records of my termine were so right .
they said , &quot; aside from the one we talked about , are they groups that they want to harm the united states ? &quot;
you don &apos;t need to waste your energy .
now , who &apos;s looking at my bankauszüge , and i know i was there , and i know i &apos;d 14.79 a 14.79 for $ 9. for $ $ .
all of the moments i &apos;m going to press a zeitstempel on my life .
when i started with the project , people said , &quot; why would you want to say everyone , what you do and where you are ?
now it &apos;s normal .
now , look at this heatmap of paris to see how incredibly fast the growth is .
i looked at thousands of these kinds of marktplätze , and trust and efficiency are all the things that are on the other elements .
how do we feel like trust is being built up to face ?
i was a mind in the system .
this site gets a day of fünfeinhalbtausend questions and 80 percent of them get a precise answer .
i want to start with a paradox .
and here you see it in relation to the degree of inequality that i showed you , i &apos;m going to return to you again .
first with the rich , developed countries , and then in a second second , with the 50 american states -- the same question : do the more unequal states make worse at all these scales ?
it &apos;s a devastating impact that the benefit of people &apos;s benefit .
and in our analysis of the u.s. states , we find the same as opposed .
the social einschätzenden judgments , and the fear of that judge .
or for example , the reason violence is more prevalent in more than the more democratic societies is because people are sensitive to being verachtet .
a year , more than three million amputierte have a new knee or a ersatzknie .
you remember , i think , kamal thought that was a bambusstab .
if you &apos;re wearing it under your pants or a cotton , or a sari , it &apos;s very clear that you &apos;re wearing a prosthetic , and in societies where disability with a social stigma , the people are very sensitive .
so thank you .
you want a dirty magazine ?
i actually bought the vergoldete sondermodell , there &apos;s a little piece of paper that says , &quot; use these saftpresse to pressen juice .
these are the results of the results , and 20 , &quot; google just as many &quot; o , &quot; as it is .
strong fear of lähmt .
but if you were always in this condition , the work would never get done , because you would suddenly say , &quot; oh , i found a new way to do it . &quot;
almost everything we do is subconscious .
it &apos;s about being safe in this world .
if the freizeitpark would be , it would be , and it would fall apart , then you would never go to a ride .
it &apos;s a very small piece of paper -- you should not get the results .
i &apos;m going to talk about kids and self-organization and a series of experiments that led me to the idea of an alternative education .
and this day , the day surften 70 children on the internet .
so i could actually vote for a couple of a querschnitt , which is part of the world .
what you &apos;re obvious is there is a child who &apos;s operating the computer .
natural systems are all selbst-organisiert : galaxies , molecules , cells , organisms , societies -- except the discussion of the theory of smart designers .
and it &apos;s about wiederentdeckung of idealism all over the whole .
i bought a nice suit and wearing shoes with ledersohle and i was making this remarkable access that i had to weltereignissen .
but 2002 , as my tour went out to the end , i decided i was not going to go to the job that was waiting for me in london .
i felt something was destroyed .
and i went through . i went through these amounts .
and i went to kosovo and beriet there .
independent diplomat is part of the trends that come out the world , obviously , and shows that the world is fragmentiert .
it &apos;s terrible that you &apos;re actually affected , not konsultieren .
that &apos;s the politics of the 21st century , and in a sense , independent diplomat verkörpert these zersplitterung , this change that &apos;s happening to us .
&quot; hey , could you get me to get a magermilch ? &quot;
because when we go back to the beziehungskrise , they understood through these exercise that a simple mistake can tell you what you don &apos;t , or remember why you love something .
we feel awe , pity .
here we go .
what is the number one ?
no . in the &apos; 70s , the &quot; the &quot; sieben-millionen-dollar-frau &quot; was the sieben-millionen-dollar-frau , the 1973 , in the top 10 times , followed by the &quot; sechs-millionen-dollar-mann &quot; and three angels for charlie .
i can choose you from the island .
and i &apos;m really excited to argue about this , i &apos;m going to go in and say , &quot; can someone ask me to explain the main reason and why it &apos;s so cool ? &quot;
and the next thing is this virus-dna stuff that zerstückelt the bakterien-dna .
for a number of reasons .
or even worse , more naturwissenschaftliche education is going to be more like the guy who always says , &quot; actually ... &quot;
but we still have so much work before us , and if there &apos;s someone in science , i ask you to join me .
we climb the staircase and we get a state of changing consciousness .
so many books about war , they &apos;re saying that , that nothing is that there is nothing like war .
so , she believed that everything that united us , a seemingly , annimmt .
he continued to say that &quot; selbstlose and streitsüchtige people are not going to be zusammenhalten , and without no zusammenhalt can be moving . &quot;
he uses the other .
once they were all in a same tribe , they could keep the benefits of cooperation .
it &apos;s about connecting to others , to make ethical beliefs .
jh : thank you .
so quickly i realized that männerbereiche must not just be inside .
and right next to the garage , he has his own trophäenraum , where he can sonnen himself into his achievements , which is a piece of important role in männerbereichen .
everything is always easier to design , and here &apos;s this riesenflughafen , and , my god , i just photographed it .
&quot; the end of print &quot; now is going to print it back to the fifth time .
this book is called &quot; probes . &quot; it &apos;s a different word for quote .
this is actually an experiment for a client , quicksilver , where we took a sequence of six photos , and tried to get people to get the gedruckte medium into the internet .
they thought they didn &apos;t like it .
one article about brian ferry -- a really boring article -- so i set up the whole article on dingbats .
and someone told me today there are these things that are called the folder , but i don &apos;t know what it is .
that &apos;s pretty high to most of the jobs .
before , it was obvious , obviously , not technology . but obviously .
this is not a different planet . these are things that are hidden on our planet .
and i finally come back to this nacktschnecke .
this is niles , he was stephen jay &apos;s gould mitentwickler &apos;s theory of the punktualismus theory .
we &apos;ve heard about japanern who give up the guns .
and i think that &apos;s really important , because if you can imagine mozart before the invention of the technology , what is a loss that is a loss of society ?
oktopoden faszinierten me for the first time i was very young .
he picks up again , taking a arm full of kies , let &apos;s go out of -- &quot; tschk tschk tschk tschk tschk ! &quot; -- the same thing happens .
but the point is : we were there for a month , and i wanted to get used to the animals so that we could see their behaviors without them .
and if you go down to the bottom , the lovely blue water you &apos;d leave you at the beginning , and you &apos;d always dunkelblauer them .
but there &apos;s no sun , there &apos;s no photosynthese , it &apos;s a chemosynthetische world down there , the lenkt , and it &apos;s all vergänglich .
but i also saw the exact opposite of the opposite .
everybody talks with each one . then there &apos;s no isolierten dots on a map , then it &apos;s a network that we &apos;ve created .
she was a hausfrau , and i didn &apos;t go and benahmen us , like little girl , and she didn &apos;t buy a pink clothes , but knew i knew .
my parents had dropped to get a scheiden , and my sister was arrested .
cities are the schmelztiegel of civilization .
is edinburgh a horse ?
we have our entire economy , like , in the corner left , hockeyschläger .
the heart rate is reduced , you live longer , diffusion from sauerstof and nutrients through the membranes , etc . , etc .
now , the most important thing is that the exponent , the equivalent to the drei-viertel-rate of the metabolismus , is bigger than one -- that &apos;s what &apos;s about one .
they grow quickly and stop , part of our wiederstandsfähigkeit .
it looks like a hockeyschläger .
children in 12 grade are fewer begeistert of political systems .
he had to talk to a high school in a high school .
my students made this infografiken as a result of a task that we had been asked to the oil end of the year .
this is my lieblingsfoto , because it was made tuesday when i was going to make the students of aufforderte .
and with this one , it &apos;s like that .
actually , you could -- -- we don &apos;t go to that .
it &apos;s a grobkonzept .
and he asked a very important question .
and i &apos;m going to show you this 15 million dollars of picture .
you see stem cells coming back .
and many of these patients are hard to get .
the european union , the same thing .
and even though i don &apos;t have patents , so much of me , i &apos;m going to meet some of my inventions today .
you know , of course , what that means .
and they &apos;ve made all of these progress in such short time . they &apos;re all so young .
thank you all .
in school -- actually , i have an organization that makes a organisation , you know , like this , you would like it , and so .
she was also very schick , but she was so full of ennui .
my daughter -- my daughter wrote this , she told me , &quot; start your talk with humor . &quot;
i &apos;m a lesbian . &quot;
i want to hold your hand .
and then finally , i finally got a call that i should talk directly to j.j. abrams .
and i thought , if i could write books where these world were small and connected , i could perhaps be people to the problems that affect us all , and perhaps they might even make the world better .
and john said , &quot; bet on good people doing good .
there was no a specific media company focused on the public interest .
i thought the problem came to us in a 30-50 years .
i learned that there is not just a real way to change .
what do you think a lot of officers are on this taxi ? well ? three .
now , look at this . this is the anästhesie-gerät .
yes , the medical advice of the vorstandsvorsitzenden , &quot; yes , i told you that , you don &apos;t , don &apos;t do it , i &apos;m going to see that . &quot;
this is our first patient , just out of the intensivbehandlung , and now , watch this chair .
that &apos;s the grundzüge of my apparates , or our apparats .
i have to serve . &quot;
this is in the schottischen parliament .
they put them on a very special nährstoffreiche diet and they treat them with big care .
his app was only wiedereingestellt when he won the pulitzer prize .
but there was a lot of debates about how to be mr. this problem .
so we have the situation in the world today where there are more countries that are being able to get the relationship between citizens and government over the internet , which is being managed by the most private service .
rebecca maxkinnon : let &apos;s bring us back to the internet
they usually won the goldmedaillen in the gewichtheben and in the olympics , and they were the great berühmtheiten of communism . and with a great lifestyle that came with that .
the european union , who started to harvest the fruits of the globalization , and &#91; the &#93; european union &#93; was transformed to the richest konsumentenmarkt in the story with total 500 million people in total .
in 1994 , for seven years , 20 of these boats were adria by montenegro to italy , every single night .
and let me get to the 1x1 of the organized crime .
i &apos;d like to introduce you mr. pringle .
they are shaping our bankkonten .
i mean ... if i &apos;m a good darwinist , i have to believe that there &apos;s a reason for that .
this made it very unbeliebt . they didn &apos;t want to go back to the beginning .
it was waited since 1960 , when alister , a meeresbiologe , said , &quot; i think our ancestors might live in the water for a period long . &quot;
as an absolute connection , it only works in one direction .
and then the fact that we are in the stromlinienförmig .
for example , professor tobias . he understood it .
so if it comes and when it &apos;s going to happen , who or what is it going to happen ?
one , i want to give you the way i can make this happen .
yeah , i was hanging yesterday with a couple of google-typen .
you see , somehow , in other people &apos;s lives , and i have this feeling of getting a lot of inspiration from the user .
this is called &quot; atheist . &quot;
online online -- you &apos;ve seen a lot of things .
performer and web-toymaker ze frank gives a very äußerst standup-show , and tells us what he &apos;s going to be with passion : people help to build and interact with little suchterzeugenden web-programmen .
the answer is pretty strange .
so point 4 : tell people , &quot; if any of you give them any data , i offer my help . &quot;
and every time i talk about what i &apos;m doing , i &apos;m going to tell at least briefly , why the body is meaning .
so this particular instrument is called the auf-den-bauch-hörer .
they &apos;re schrumpfen and melt at the same time -- and some are completely gone .
this wouldn &apos;t be a big problem , because if we were in todesgefahr , we would be buried our arguments , invest everything , and find a way to get it .
this is data from the haushaltsbüro of congress , showing the realistischste forecast of what would happen if the current conditions and trends continue .
the rock is sacred , and when people circle around together , they unite together , they can trust each other , they become one .
so the bloods and the crips knowledge , for which one page to vote .
for many reasons , decades after the second world war war was an historic anormale time .
there we are as a country .
we will become a nation with two classes .
this is really a social disaster , and the liberal are very concerned about it .
but they don &apos;t exist yet . so i have to make them .
they &apos;re since urzeiten in the architecture of architecture .
you can see that schaubildern that the protocell actually move away from light and move to the dark fundamenten .
i &apos;ve been able to give me a nearly three decades away from hospitals , i &apos;m probably most proud of that .
instead , i &apos;m a ordentliche professor for law , psychology and psychiatric at usc school at law , i have a lot of good friends and a dear husband , who &apos;s here today .
i quote from my records : &quot; i had my kommilitonen and i was val my kommilitonen , and i was val at the freitagabend in the jurabibliothek verabredet , where we wanted to work on a homework assignment .
then they banden me arms and legs with ledergurten on the bed .
i never met a psychiatriepatienten meeting who would have agreed to that .
i could let them just get it out of immediately , and we could make it a little bit like , &apos; ha , ha heh .
the american prisons are full of people who are hard to have mental illness and many of them are there because they never get a proper therapy .
so we decided to build a different car car .
this is four billion hours that are going to be vergeudet alone in this country .
in short , there was plenty of water and not very many people .
the montana in montana already did much to reduce their water use , but they still use millions of water in water .
he &apos;s paid to leave the water in the stream .
i don &apos;t like to have a problem , without the anzuerkennen that work on the solution , so i want to point out here , like &quot; mad men &quot; and movies like &quot; brautalarm , &quot; whose female figures and hauptfiguren are complex and vielseitig .
his name is a matthieu .
i know , there are other businesses in the world , but google is the environment that i know , because i &apos;m about 10 years , so i &apos;m going to use google as a case .
so , it turns out google is a company with compassion , because it &apos;s a googler that compassion is fun .
there &apos;s you in the morning of work , and i have three colleagues who decide to make a hospital in india .
there are three steps .
and i hope that compassion is also for both for you for both fun and profit .
but one day , the perfect case , it was a gemüseverkäuferin that was sitting in front of her house .
i met with one of the entwicklungsbüros that was the training of staatsanwälten and richtern , which is the normal tendency in contrast to the verteidigern .
people tell me a lot , &quot; you know , that &apos;s wonderful , but it &apos;s highly idealistisch .
in the same time that you sometimes experience , if you &apos;re sitting in the new york subway and you read , this beruhigende and easy feeling .
different parts of the world have a händchen for different things .
and at the same time , the beautiful piece of takeshi ishiguro , which has made this beautiful salz- and pfefferstreuer made out of reisteig .
but the objects erstreckten , of complete minenräum-ausrüstungen of this kind of water water , it was really very wide .
even this chair you open and then you sit down to your life , and it &apos;s also the beautiful series of objects that are viewed by ana to me in barcelona .
what has image to do with it ?
instead , they developed a very interesting approach about my education , because they would send me to a school that they could &apos;t afford .
my last story , and i have to get a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit .
and he died when the krankenwagen was around to get him to the hospital .
blogging is a way to do that .
just jump the leap .
and we africans need to start to challenge our leading politicians .
my cousin couldn &apos;t afford to be able to afford the school of school , and it &apos;s very clever .
and if you don &apos;t take you , then you &apos;re not true .
it was the country that has been divided between politics and religion .
so our political problems .
veränderer and future leaders were shaped .
he helped in a birth of a birth .
she &apos;s the heart of medical care .
i &apos;m going to sell you all the clinic in the world .
now , when i got this , i was -- i &apos;m pushing the feststelltaste -- completely except for me , you know ?
now , a couple of weeks , riley will be a big girl .
and as you can see , the life expectancy was short .
life expectancy has gone up to 78.
this is the absolutely best technology for this region , entsalzung .
let &apos;s start with water .
but you have to share this with the world .
generation y seems like anzuklopfen .
there &apos;s a gewaltlosen march and an idiot , or lockspitzel , you &apos;ll pay you a rock . guess who &apos;s captured by the cameras . this guy .
and it &apos;s also about humor . humor is such a strong force that can turn the game , and he also played a very big role in poland .
now , the 1-million-dollar-frage : how will it go to the arab world ?
and she said , &quot; i saw your talk in live stream .
i said , &quot; if 500 to 1,000 or 2,000 , my life is over . &quot;
there &apos;s nothing more than that .
and i see them .
and everybody &apos;s set out of applause and said , &quot; yes . &quot;
i know , your dad was never in luxembourg , he was in the sing .
the other thing you have to know about shame is that she &apos;s organized by gender .
i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
we want to be with them and to them .
and then , when we go up and abschlagen ...
if i had an ant in rice , i couldn &apos;t see it .
this helped us create a very ethical and very strong patientenorientierte organization , and a system that you support .
we have a simple digital camera in a retinalkamera umfunktioniert , and we can make a ferndiagnose through a doctor to each patient .
our own erlöse has gotten a lot more quickly , which has made a healthy profit , and that &apos;s despite a lot of people to treat free .
that &apos;s a hard job .
for example , we can put digital content on physical masses .
wouldn &apos;t it be a way of designing cell phones ?
it was , as couldn &apos;t see me , as if i had become invisible .
and also , no one had ever heard a unterwasser-rollstuhl , and this is a piece of the creation of the creation of the vision , and his and knowledge , because now they have this concept of their head in their head .
and as bp is going to gestopft the hole , at least , but not without a tremendous price .
don &apos;t be ashamed .
and it &apos;s also the history of modern capitalism , because it was the wealth of this country that created our system of our system , a system that can &apos;t survive without any stetiges and infinite capacity of space .
the oil is not liquid .
now , you may have more headlines like this .
great show . man , that was good .
bf : ... like the left .
dh : all right , please stand here .
rw : can i hold it ?
dh : power &apos;s easy , say , &quot; you know ?
dh : then we go .
dh : the french judge , the french judge .
dh : i have it -- -- to put the keule down there with my handle .
bf : from six to seven . dh : this is world war . bf : really ? dh : for us .
he &apos;s less known as the two , because he had this idea to build mechanical rechengeräte and never built one .
but if you , you would see something that this very , very similar .
this is from a paper they &apos;re übersetzte .
there are plans .
you know the problem that we don &apos;t want to believe what we know .
we don &apos;t want to believe what we know .
second romeo and julia , sassi and panno , dodi and diana , heer and ranjha , that &apos;s love .
and then , 13 , after i &apos;m in the wheelchair seven years , i &apos;ve done more in the wheelchair with him .
we have been able to grow our children as well as millions of other species that live with us .
but it &apos;s not a normal movie .
but if i took a base on each other of the screen that screen had this screen , with the resolution of 1280 x , we would need 3,000 to 3000 and take a look at the genome .
what does this mean for medicine ?
and so he was sequenzierte the genomes of his children .
it &apos;s because there would be somebody in the audience who volunteer to stop eating .
imagine in the year of china , the leading kandidatin of the world &apos;s leading steuereinnahmen is not only their four years of tax tax , but also their personal genome .
and so i ask you to all and to join the aufzuwachen and the genomische revolution that happens around them .
and we have a flexiblen , angetriebenen katheter with a special drahtschlaufenspitze , which remains within the solid part of the ocean , and then move the konturen of the hip .
hopefully , this technology will enable us to see more of this survivor .
in the branch , what the rehearsal abstrahlt , they put a switch that we call the gas , and it dies .
so exciting . he can generate the siebenfache of the early kollisionsenergie , so we will be able to capture some new particles very soon .
the most powerful charge is the electric .
they tell us what changes are .
but this is how unified theory work .
many of them think it &apos;s the most beautiful structure in the mathematics .
the only way to get your mental health , in the midst of all of the uncertainty , to get happiness , is because of keeping balance and a perspective in life .
the patterns of dots that i showed you , actually , actually describe symmetries of this höherdimensionalen gebildes that goes on , move and dance on the erlebbaren space-time .
and we also heard about history , from the family of humanity through genetic dna-profilierung .
in the schimpansengesellschaft , we find many , many examples of compassion , for love for love and real altruism .
most important , i think , is to work with small groups of women , to give them the possibility of the recording of mikro-krediten .
and you know what i mean . i &apos;m talking about pollution .
take the ziegelmauer for all the problems that we have the planet to have , in terms of environment and social , and it &apos;s a message of hope .
and we &apos;re doing ungewollte and similar things , which young people are better from other youth than adults .
this change , this change . change , to see change is necessary when we worry about the future .
and in the way that they work with the plastic , about the first eight years , some of my pieces started to fall into smaller and smaller plastikstückchen .
recycling . each of the book about erträglichkeit ecology , with the idea of recycling .
so i &apos;m here , and i &apos;ll show our youngest and far , most successful trying to see in the midst of development .
the author of the book is juan , our vorheriger referent , by the way , by amazon , by the way .
at that time we knew that this was a political thing .
when i was 15 years old , i lost a child , a second , when i was 16 .
i know what it means to suffer , and when a crime is happening , it should be fair and bestraft . &quot;
but what if that doesn &apos;t ?
so after a few misslungenen prototypes , i finally thought this was out of this , the lifesaver-flasche .
add that . so please .
okay . the lifesaver-flasche will be used by thousands of people worldwide .
or we could use one of these .
mao mao tung described it as the european civil wars , and that &apos;s probably a more accurate description .
my view , by the way , ladies and gentlemen , is that this is probably not the gründung of the world that i can &apos;t .
they &apos;re starting to see the hervortreten world &apos;s hervortreten .
but this is not the case .
the wechselbeziehungen of nations , now we had always had it .
but now , one last thing .
but if you ask the question of the question today , what the optimal formula is for a long life , he probably wouldn &apos;t tell you this .
it reminds me of my college .
and the research shows that these years largely are largely free of chronic diseases , heart disease , cancer and diabetes .
they have what we want .
we are in half .
and for a while we looked at the prärien minnesotas around where there &apos;s a lot of 100-jährigen .
instead , they talk about the next trip in nature , exchange recipes , and yes , they pray .
it &apos;s been successful at 9 .
they tend to feed their food system .
for the small example i put in my hand , we use a berührungssensor device that responds to my skin by lighting up a little light .
so amateurs , no experts , the inventor and verbesserer of things like mountain bikes , halbleitern , computer , airplanes ...
and then computers were still big , big objects , and just scientists , and no one &apos;s dreamed of having a home at home .
you just have your eyes to get there .
i mean , he was seen .
and we did the driver of the driver of the fahrer .
and i said , i can &apos;t bring them , but i can put them into zero gs to zero .
we had four notfallärzte and two nurses on the plane .
and actually , you can now show some pictures , because i don &apos;t want to see the screen .
no life , from the smallest of life , to all of us , would be without these little mikro-maschinen .
i duschte on campingplätzen . i was going to eat a lot .
i didn &apos;t have changed . my i.q. was not down .
i was a writer .
so no one would accept family planning if you don &apos;t survive .
and then we decided to use the religion , because in the philippines , the catholic church was quite strong , and thailänder are the way .
we did our first mikrokreditprogramm in 1975 , and the women who organized it said , &quot; we only want to borrow women &apos;s planning planning .
you can call it the coca-cola approach , if you like it , it &apos;s exactly the same thing .
and then aids education in all schools , in university , started .
and then there is the american flag , &quot; don &apos;t go home . &quot;
these are things that are being created by business .
can you imagine , you can get condoms , you can get condoms ?
he can &apos;t be scary or scary .
so i take a picture now .
you can simulate this behavior in the browser , what romo is doing right now on the left .
i &apos;d like to tell you about my four minutes of the ruhms .
people like you all here in this room .
she went elegant , like a giraffe in the african savanna , the flag on their shoulder , i joggte behind -- -- on the zehenspitzen , the flag with ausgestreckten arm , so my head disappeared under the damn thing .
i &apos;ve worked my whole life with women and for women .
and it &apos;s clear that the only way to make the faulen teeth is that the only way to draw the teeth .
she causes women to plant new trees and wässern , drop in drop .
women and children , especially poor , are down .
if you sell to early on , you can make a profit , but if you wait for too long , all sell , you can take a class .
you can see the tips , but you can see .
the challenge for the uninformierten player is whether he &apos;s believes , the other one is fair or that it will be geboten to him , so he thinks that only one or two dollars of available .
now i &apos;m going to be now present to you some relatives .
we can try it . maybe we &apos;ll .
so what do we have learned today ?
about 10 calories are required to produce a food food that we consume in the west .
so how did a city like this ?
and in the middle of the city in the east , in cheapside , they &apos;re offered for selling . it &apos;s why it &apos;s called poultry .
and at that point , our relationship is completely changing , both to food and to the cities .
the word &quot; utopie &quot; thomas thomas moore .
dampfende piles of humus .
we need to understand that the world is what we eat .
it &apos;s the source of all morality , this fantasievolle act of einfühlung , to sit on the place of another one .
and i see that this requires a sharp intelligence , not just a schnulziges feeling .
in the current fertigungsindustrie , we &apos;ve got a wolkenkratzer -- a half years &#91; bauzeit &#93; , and one half to a million parts , pretty complex , new and exciting technologies from steel , concrete , glass .
the next project is asking this in question , and look at passive nature or the passive trying to make rekonfiguration programmierbar .
basically , you have a chain of elements .
when i was in beloit , i was a public talk , a public talk from a group of students in school .
often , we &apos;re looking for erregern of atemwegserkrankungen like flu .
there are unknown everywhere around us , and it &apos;s just waiting to be discovered .
could we turn off the light now to see it ?
so we &apos;re chemical ausblühungen that are different , and our kind of chemical ausblühung has a allgemeingültigkeit .
but i have to say , i have to say , and i ask for a nachsicht , richard -- that i never liked biological exkursionen , and i think we &apos;ve been able to deal with a few hundred million years .
everybody &apos;s talking about action , a reduction of abgasmengen to erzwingen every price .
he realized that it &apos;s possible to make different laws that make the economy make small profits to have so incentives to win other clients .
both are dark compared to puerto rico , which is half as many people in haiti , or the dominikanische republic .
one of those zones of hong kong is also a shenzhen .
people can come to live under the charter , but no one is forced to .
so much of those have understood the idea of the sonderzonen that people can share rules .
how would we write a abkommen ?
you thought in genomics a little bit more than 10 years ago , that you could sequence between three and five genomes in the end of this year , and it &apos;s hundreds of them .
if there &apos;s a lot of chlorophyll , they &apos;re very , very green , grünes .
the number of common genes were extended a little bit , if we were to the intrazellulären of parasites ; it was even larger when we focused on certain genes of genes , about 310 .
it adds your genome to a radiation that &apos;s broken into small pieces within 12 to 24 hours .
let me close with ethical and political studies .
of course , the waiting is to wait if you like marshmallows .
we call them &quot; zukunftsorientiert . &quot; they &apos;re focusing on what &apos;s going to be .
and it &apos;s also me , i grew as poor child in the south bronx in the south bronx , and everyone lived in the past and in the present .
let &apos;s take a place of medicine .
this is a beautiful picture of the andromedanebels , the largest spiralgalaxie in the unmittelbarer of our milky way .
it &apos;s cold , gespenstisch and neblig , maybe it &apos;s rains , and maybe you &apos;re on the bank of a michigansees randvoll mit .
i can &apos;t tell you what this was to see the first images of the spacecraft from the surface of the surface of the surface , and this was what we saw .
so here we see a film from the surface of the sun , which shows these dunes , and these dunes are 100 meters up , and they have a distance from a couple of miles and a half of miles and meilenweit and meilenweit .
so far , the earth is still the only planet , where we know that it &apos;s full of life .
they had lost 40 percent of their country and would have been umringt so that they had no free access to the rest of the west bank .
demonstrant : this is a friedlicher protestmarsch .
so we organized a performance .
and it took me only four days .
and the rest of the brain is that it &apos;s made up of neurons .
so , at the eingängen of the hippocampus , you can actually find cells that are in the same kind of hippocampus that are exactly the reagieren of the boundaries or edges of a particular distance , or for a mouse , if you &apos;re exploring the environment .
and this would be represented by the fire of the grenzortungszellen .
he wasn &apos;t the only man who suffered from a amerika america , and he wasn &apos;t the only great speaker of his time .
and why should anyone be interested in this ?
people don &apos;t buy what they do , but why they do it .
the neocortex is responsible for all of our rational and analytischen thoughts and language .
it &apos;s always the same three things , so we &apos;re looking at them .
and when you talk about what you believe , you will attract them , the belief that you believe .
the reason that people bought an iphone in the first six hours , i bought six hours in the queue , was their worldview , and their will for everybody to see . they were the first ones .
people don &apos;t buy what they do , they buy why they do it . and what they &apos;re doing is simply to prove us to prove what they believe .
and by the way , he thought , &quot; i have a dream of &quot; not the &quot; i have a plan . &quot;
i will never forget about cartoons in dauerschleife .
when this was the office for wirtschaftsförderung in washington , d.c. , the geigers clinic , they were wutentbrannt .
and we decided to use recipes .
what if we had a waiting room where you don &apos;t just want to just just simply just when you &apos;re sick , you get to get healthy .
and they leave this with the belief , the ability to do the ability and the efficiency , to make our most basic hopes in health care .
i think that ultimately , if we judge our health system , it doesn &apos;t have the sick that have been cured , it &apos;s been measured , but to be verhindert by the disease that have been verhindert .
the piraterie is now , today , is a real threat to the whole world , but this is in the indian ocean .
we caught this with this low-tech-floß . we got six tons of cocaine .
85 percent of you can &apos;t read when you &apos;re in the afghan of the afghan .
multiply that 400.000-mal. , that 400.000-mal. of the public cooperation with sicherheitskräften , as security can be done completely different .
i &apos;m going to do .
remember , this is a fun of me when the floridawahlen were , you know , count the points for the gore , count the points for bush . count again .
the circles represent countries .
some countries have already had statistics .
but we need to take the united states a whole piece of the way to find the same health that we &apos;re in the philippines today .
that changes gradually .
this looks like a happy story .
what you &apos;re making -- you &apos;re going to be in the middle of the altitude you &apos;re in your daily .
it &apos;s about having food .
it &apos;s this kind of silly concept from developing countries that zusammenwirft us , argentina and mozambique , 50 years ago , and claims that that is that there is bad for hiv .
governance . a working government -- this led california from the misere of 1850 .
and i &apos;ve shown the approach to the seemingly impossible possible .
and the enemy is pretty weak .
we are -- despite skepsis -- einmarschiert with leichtigkeit in afghanistan .
&quot; it &apos;s not an ideal world , &quot; &quot; and your government gets a closer to us . &quot;
what would this set of rules ?
what we need to do in the back is a kompetente sytemadministratur .
do you want a better system ?
and the doctor tells him he doesn &apos;t want to move .
&quot; who is angreift , risk the end of the world . &quot;
the force that &apos;s going to be rarely gelassen from his gehege .
it &apos;s going to be hierum .
luftwaffe , strategic luftbrücke beiderseits .
thomas barnett shows a new way to peace on peace .
i don &apos;t want to be too deprimieren .
here you see the pinatubo in the early 90-zigern , which a lot of sulfur in the stratosphere would have brought a kind of a kind of atombomben cloud .
this report ended up at president jonsons desk when i was two years old .
but let &apos;s say you have sunlight that hits the particles , and it &apos;s erhitzt ungleichmäßig .
i don &apos;t think that &apos;s going to happen . it &apos;s not very likely .
and so , since we continue to take ourselves on this scenario and we continue to move away from the current climate .
not just how we do it better , but what are the risks and side effects ?
you see a fish with a bright , pulsierenden eyes .
really incredible . here are two males .
and so i came to her freundliche , just two days ago from the himalayas .
but if you look at the literature in east and west , you &apos;re going to find incredibly different definitions of happiness .
well-being is a deeper sense of serenity and fulfillment , a state that actually durchdringt all the states and zugrundeliegt. and sorgen and worrying that we can .
and we know from experience that we can be in something that is called &quot; little paradise , &quot; and something that can be completely unhappy .
the mirror allows this , but the mirror doesn &apos;t look at it , and it &apos;s not going to change these images .
if you &apos;re going to do that , your tendency will always rise to the anger and to get it auflösen , and you get less lower .
of course , we do it with objects .
we &apos;re willing to be aufzuwenden for the education for 15 years .
it &apos;s really a riesenproblem for us .
it &apos;s a schätzenswerter place . it &apos;s good designed .
you can see exactly what happens at night at night by three .
not just blumenbeete , not just a cartoon of sierra nevada .
this is actually a tv set , which is the show of the show of the show , &quot; we &apos;re normal . &quot;
we &apos;re going to be -- we have a eisenbahnnetz whose bulgaren was embarrassed .
one last comment -- that &apos;s been worrying for me for years , but i think it &apos;s particularly important for this audience .
at this point we &apos;re about two days from the entrance .
this is atmungssystem kreislauf around the kreislauf .
the ice can be deep in between five and 25 miles .
the sensorstrahlen look at the same time and the back in the back , so that it can do new sondierungen , while still still behält the eye that it has already left behind .
that would be $ 10,000 dollars for the orbit .
and it says that you move around 10,000 feet a second , than you want to go back to the gas station .
and it &apos;s the right support for the right support , in seven years .
i suppose you don &apos;t want to throw me off the road , because you asked the question .
they also started a couple of businesses , where the brand doesn &apos;t work so well .
rb : no .
we have a video that shows what they &apos;re planning , and it &apos;s a virgin galactic in the air .
he wanted you to jump , or he said , &quot; i &apos;m going to go away ? &quot;
ok , that &apos;s not hard to do it .
i mean , here are a lot of wohlhabende people who have children , and we have this dilemma to be able to raise them .
rb : our kronzeuge argumentierte , that it actually , &quot; forget the priest , is the sex sex . &quot;
15 people filled our paper and said they would try it .
no , i want to live my life in all abundance .
