now why does this matter what &apos;s a role for human health ?
here &apos;s a graph of the pcb-belastung of dolphins in the sarasota bay .
and i remember sitting at my desk , and i thought , &quot; now i know it . what a great scientific discovery , &quot; but it was so terrible .
they &apos;re always closed in the world and more and more and more and more frequently and more frequently and more frequently , and i think that should be genausowenig .
i showed you how much we &apos;ve been belastet the ecosystem of monterey bay through pollution and the konservenindustrie and all the related problems .
hhhh -- hhhhhh -- hhhhhhh .
at the same time , he had asked him to ask him , &quot; do you know the book from michael morpurgo ? &quot; the schlachtross ? &quot;
we were really afraid .
craig here &apos;s moving the head .
you can see the skeleton .
we have this capacity for .
that &apos;s where our modern way of doing some benefits , but i think we should recognize what price .
clay shirky , this great chronist of all the network , has the premise that are put on the prüfstand , in such a wonderful way .
now , today , there are so many new organizations , the schenkungen and investment that bring people together together in a goal , in a larger context .
and i &apos;m hopeful because not just philanthropy are neu , too , and other big parts of social social and business labor , and they &apos;re doing fleißig business as business .
i &apos;m looking at this photo at my office . because i always felt a very mystische connection with these two men , i &apos;ve never met the two .
my research on cell phones and internettelefonie shows that 80 percent of the phone calls actually go to four people . 80 percent .
whenever they have a moment , they &apos;re paying attention .
and with modern bureaucracy , a very rationaler approach , where there was a clear separation between the private environment and public environment .
we &apos;re worried that sofortnachrichten , texting , facebook of the zwischenmenschlichen intimacy , but stefana broadbents research shows how the kommunikationstechnologien tiefer are tiefer relationships to convey love about hürden , like entfernung and arbeitsplatzregularien .
one of the things we developed in the lab -- we &apos;ve evolved multiple vehicles -- is , as we believe , the first autonomous driftauto of the world .
for example , the brain &apos;s brain tends to generate a lot of alpha-wellen .
no challenging task .
at the time , the average is about $ 60,000 to send people to jail .
their family has been living for eight generations in a city called whitesville , west virginia .
yeah .
we can create these local markets and incentives to use more expensive materials than materials for manufacturing .
and we should all invest in it .
and he won sometimes , you don &apos;t think , in a rennbahn in los angeles -- a reason to love l.a. -- back in the 1940s .
i started my company to help communities communities throughout country , using their own potential to improve the entire quality of life of life .
and before you don &apos;t have children , you won &apos;t understand what i mean . &quot;
these deaf people are discovering in their adult &quot; community . &quot;
it &apos;s always time .
true guilt is only from a straftat against a person , and someone with a syndrome is not person . &quot;
to the people , it &apos;s not far more far .
but i found out that i &apos;ve found out that i have the kids that i &apos;ve been born , so love that i don &apos;t want to imagine a life without you .
he would not reach out right .
i come from a family family . i &apos;ve been lucky .
it &apos;s about two weeks old . and they &apos;re .
this is the beginning of 2000 . my son , dimitri -- who &apos;s here today , and many of you know , dimitri -- went to cambodia , and did build up from us , just as she was connected to the internet .
remember -- because there are other people like bill gates who said , &quot; man , you &apos;ve got a real computer . &quot;
in fact , it &apos;s pretty rare in the latin . we look at a few languages .
and guess what ? we won it .
we &apos;ve made it for the case , not to integrate more , more than that we can do the prices down .
for a gemüsepflanze , my apartment is about as alien as space .
and we can take care of the issues of neuankömmlingen .
to speak to a cliff , i was told to be parteiisch , although i don &apos;t know what party supports or attacks .
wealth will be entrissen people that you don &apos;t want to call a unproduktiv .
and the issue of taxes is larger .
not one of these most important theories was a full of success .
we &apos;re afraid that the world is going to be .
and as a lot of these work , we found something , or i found something that really fascinated me , maybe you can remember it .
in fact , it &apos;s just happening here -- from light to darkness in six seconds .
i see their faces very carefully .
that &apos;s not an expression of pleasure .
this lady here has even a special assymmetrisches face , and both sides of them are beautiful .
this thing here , flackert light on this , when you move , so it gets an object , although it &apos;s silent -- just by doing how brilliant that &apos;s made by the reflection .
i had to move this part , but only about a millimeter .
and what i showed you before was a very complex one .
it &apos;s wins or lose it .
and shape the emotional band between this object and it is a elektrochemikalischer partytrick that happens before you even think about it .
i don &apos;t think we need to meet that election .
it &apos;s also a thought we &apos;ve forgotten .
i think it takes to go to the tradition of the global .
again , we don &apos;t think so .
and at the end of the end of the board , they &apos;re all standing up and say , &quot; thank you , &quot; thank you , &quot; thank you , &quot; thank you , &quot; thank you , &quot; thank you , &quot; thank you shakespeare , &quot; thank you , &quot; thank you jane . &quot;
the other thing is that art should not explain that artists should not reveal their beweggründe , because if they verrieten it , that would be the magic , and we might just find it too easy .
art would be one of the tools that we can improve our society .
we may not agree with the überein that religions want to teach us , but we can admire the institutional kind of the way they do it .
absolutely . i &apos;m meeting , like many of you , people say , &quot; is not something bigger than we all , are something else ? &quot;
because you &apos;ve all agreed to see it , because you have a similar view of so many things , and you &apos;re very careful to be honest with somebody else .
so it took me from places like chile -- the desert desert in chile -- in siberia , in underground mines , in the japanese &apos; central , north america , to antarctica and even south pole .
it &apos;s the largest seas in the world . it &apos;s 800 miles long .
and they won &apos;t believe it , but that &apos;s what the unermesslich is going to be called the unermesslich .
this hut was built by robert falcon scott and his men , when they came to antarctica , on their first expedition to the south pole .
remember , these whole verkabelung are making people in extreme cold , in unter-null temperatures .
so this is an interesting statement , i &apos;ll end up with it .
what people first are doing is a book of book that you can look inside of the book , and that &apos;s fun .
it was quite a lot of people .
but how do we scan them all ?
we &apos;ve reached the 10 cents a page when we work with big volume .
i &apos;m not sure what &apos;s going to do .
one day , about two or three bands .
with 15 dollars an hour video and about 100 to 150 dollars an hour , we can put material online online and have it online .
the question is : is the world we want to live in ?
flowers are going to get lastwagenweise .
we all know that the earth has trouble .
after the form of the spores , they verfaulen .
if you go through the landscape , it schnellt up into your shoes and try to respond with the geröll .
all of the landmassen across all the landmassen .
some of these mushrooms are very happy .
this is an extraordinarily rare fungus .
i did something nobody made differently .
the box of life -- you get a dvd from the ted conference -- they give earth to and water , and they have both mykorrhizale and endophytische fungi , as well as the spores , like the agaricon mushrooms .
i was living in biosphere 2 .
we wanted to know : is life adaptive enough ?
i kind of ate myself the dauernd myself .
and the doctor looked for us to make sure whether it was really good .
and everybody was going to me .
eritrea , early in ethiopia , is one of these places that are amazing beautiful and incredibly karg , and i have no idea how people do it , to live there .
this , this beautiful picture , this is the amazon .
this is actually a auengegend .
i had to think about how to näht and cut and cut , but also , how you choose the right person to get into a op-saal .
you put the bruch , you took blood , you put the blood , and you looked under the microscope , put it on the culture , you know , the antiserum .
but we need a boxencrew , boxencrews for patients .
and so the medicine is sometimes feeling .
we looked at baufirmen baufirmen , we looked at the luftfahrtindustrie , and we found that they have technology and education , and then they have something : they have checklisten .
and it &apos;s just a hard time .
so , these are really hugely hugely many bees , and that &apos;s very significant .
so that means that beekeepers can replace their dead peoples very well , and that would make the losses .
they take their bienenstöcke and their families back to twice the year .
bees are , but in the minority .
let &apos;s take a cave in new york with a series of 15,000 bats , now it &apos;s 1,000 . it &apos;s like san francisco in three years , in three years , to be the population of half the landkreises .
now , now , not all of us , or we have a rasen , and we can turn it into a wiese in a jar of course , of course .
and i was gepfiffen on the family of my wife .
and to defend my title -- like judoka and others that do -- i thought i &apos;m going to do this in 2005 , and i won it again .
this is very promising .
why ?
the blue whale , the largest living thing on our planet . that &apos;s wrong , totally wrong .
as the night , they roll their leaves and reduce the movement , and during the day the leaves open -- there &apos;s a lot more movement .
he wrote some very interesting letters to one of his friends , j.d. hooker , at the president of the royal society , so the largest scientific authority in britain where he spoke to a pflanzengehirn .
so far , the human being only had inspired by people or animals , if he did a robot .
she doesn &apos;t know that she &apos;s being filmed .
and when it became a shared experience , it was funny and something that they could laugh .
i was inspired by this .
again , in 2005 .
she erwischten two of my guys who had hidden cameras in reisetaschen .
it &apos;s a wonderful way to spend a wochenendnachmittag with a fussballspiel looking at a stadion .
the idea is still in the beginning , but it &apos;s looking at this .
this is ted .
and this is the bann i &apos;m going to break .
now , children who are still not mündig , are a special case .
they &apos;re a kind of ektosymbiont .
the discovery of the developments through natural selection are awesome , incredibly awesome .
that &apos;s what we &apos;ve done on this planenten .
the ant is not alone .
you &apos;ve heard this guy .
i really appreciate that .
now i don &apos;t think i think .
now maybe we should be able to be speaking .
it &apos;s the devil . &quot;
so they &apos;re actually a chord , each of them is an individual chord .
men , if you don &apos;t understand anything from this talk , trying to listen to expansivem , and you can change your relationships .
the third problem with the kopfhörern is the taubheit , lärmbedingte schwerhörigkeit .
klangheilung is a wonderful way .
i &apos;ll leave you with a weiterem vogelgezwitscher that &apos;s very good for you .
he said , &quot; i don &apos;t know it , but i can show it . &quot;
look at what &apos;s in the middle .
they &apos;re looking at this direction , so i close it here .
we &apos;re sendeten this guy .
it &apos;s actually seven billion händepaare , which are all their own passion , and all as part of a mosaiks and create this world -- in their hinterhöfen and in their own .
and yet , you can hear black holes , even if they &apos;re invisible , and the reason is that they &apos;re playing on a drum .
but our sun is not going to end as black hole .
now we &apos;ve never seen a shadow of a black black black black , but black holes can hear , even if they are invisible .
we can predict how that &apos;s sound .
it should also be a mission for space that hopefully will be starting within the next 10 years , and it &apos;s called lisa .
it &apos;s closer and closer -- 40,000 years ago , we &apos;ve still painted höhlenbilder .
trees are verkörpern .
that &apos;s what i think is movement .
we are critical to the west , the perspective of the west , which is our identity -- the image of us drawn by our women , about our politics , about our religion .
but instead , i found a country that was completely ideological and i couldn &apos;t get it to anymore .
that iran was once a weltliche society , and we had a democracy , and that democracy was stolen from the american government and the british government .
i &apos;m standing here to say that the iranian women found a new voice , and her voice gives me my voice .
and so on this self , a size , a wholeness , focus .
there is no american compassion .
maybe the swami is right .
they learn swimming by swimming . they &apos;re learning bike bike .
the fossil fossil fossil are only found in this area in south america -- a beautiful clear field here -- and in this part of africa .
you just look at these videos . if you &apos;re bored , you just go on .
but i was thrilled , and so i kept on .
the khan academy of videos are also there .
so this is shifting and reflect on .
red means that they &apos;re festhängen .
most of the efforts to do the classroom is to do the classroom in the school , &quot; students &quot; too much .
and the collaboration they had gotten in los altos , how did it happen ?
is it ready for the big toss ?
a few months ago , i got a call from a pflegeheim i work in .
but it &apos;s very silent , like a stummfilm . &quot;
she said , &quot; who &apos;s this charles ? &quot;
for example , when his enkelinnen went to him , he said , &quot; and who are these young boys men ? &quot;
and then , when they were left , the young up suddenly flew up to the top , 30 feet up , and disappeared .
these characteristics of a conversation is not in the charles-bonnet-halluzinationen .
there &apos;s a area in the anterioren part of this fusiform , which is represented in the teeth and eyes , and that part of the fusiform is active when people have the entstellten hallucinations .
&quot; frog means nothing . &quot;
sometimes i find them interesting . and i have a lot of images from my notizbüchern .
edith widder : i &apos;ve made these images with a special camera , which is the way that you feel about the darkness of the darkness .
so , for example , these crab , like sondert biolumineszierende , stoffe biolumineszierende into the water , just like a squid or a krake , is produced .
this looks like a plant , but actually , one animal .
there &apos;s something little bit that reaction to .
it should attack the predator of the kalmar .
one way to draw a picture .
if we put the double double in two strands of strands , you &apos;ll see that these things look like teeth .
it &apos;s been verpackt and aufgewickelt .
one is a würstchen of a würstchen .
again , these are all akkurate , scientific ableitungen .
hold your eyes open and your head in motion .
the ability to put concepts intuitive with images of objects and processes .
if the themenbereich is very thin , you can get the world &apos;s experts and hard work to the world .
i &apos;m here to commit to you , to support us , to change the way people and other creatures are fertigbringen .
not created by the druckpresse , but it allows collective action that comes from the creation of education .
the other great narrative of social dilemmata is the tragedy of the allmende .
toyota , instead of auszuspielen his zulieferer , they treated these like a network and trains them to make better , even though they &apos;re training to produce better for their competitors .
thank you .
thank you .
we &apos;re doing two different things here .
in fact , all of the erfrierungen and difficulties in walking and atembeschwerden -- cold , challenging conditions .
first , we &apos;ve developed a little experiment where we gave people a legosteine and they asked them to build something .
and if they said yes , we gave them a new one , and while they were doing this , we have the other thing they &apos;d just built , and then they &apos;d be apart again .
there was a very beautiful relationship between the love of lego and the number of the built lego .
and i think the ceo &apos;s basically didn &apos;t understand how important meaning .
but i should point out to that , by the way , that the people who have been cheating .
people didn &apos;t want to .
and we had two types of people .
now think of children .
and i think that the industrial revolution , adam smith , was the richtiger , as karl marx , but really , we have umgerüstet . and now we &apos;re in the knowledge .
this is normal conflict today , and it &apos;s normal , because children are very easy to send in the war .
the mother &apos;s mother &apos;s mother &apos;s mother was so bad that she was doing our story , and we had given the boys and girls new vietnamesische names .
afghanistan is one of the poorest countries in the world , and 70 percent of the population are illiterate .
they didn &apos;t want to do that . it &apos;s just happened . you lost control .
and 70 percent won their lives .
i think it has given me to have some energy .
this is the european average average average average .
the top on the right is the same energy consumption per person , in about like canada , over 300 light bulbs per person , but population density is 300 times bigger , 1,000 people per square square square square .
if you really want to get a lot from solar cells , you would have to take the traditional bayerischen landwirtschaftsmethoden , where you don &apos;t just covered the roof , but also covered the landscape with solar cells .
and a third possibility is nuclear .
i tried it . it works . some call it change in the lifestyle .
as young , i always wanted to be a musician , and thank god , i was also becoming it .
he &apos;s a young boy in caracas who did his kontrabassstunden in the juniorenorchester of the sans agustin of the sans .
it &apos;s ermutigt them to put new dreams and progress on the various opportunities to offer music .
this is a verstohlene technology that helps you in the simple task to get the right pill to the right time .
how about how we call simple , unterbrechende technologies , and that &apos;s the first of five sentences that i &apos;m going to talk about in this talk .
this is what happened . she went into the frühruhestand .
the first word &quot; doctor . &quot;
many of these generation will not press the button , even if they have a notrufsystem , because they don &apos;t want to fall on the burden , even if you paid 30 dollars a month for a long time .
the color is different rooms in the house .
i &apos;m going to show you some of the latest and fiesesten inventions of cybercriminals .
if you want your competitors to go off , you &apos;ll go .
how do you get a usb-stick to do a company ?
so let &apos;s imagine that our angreifer that we call the fun evil hacker , a little bit of fieses .
there are some other interesting things that the cybercriminals are uploaded .
now , you probably ask yourself what happened to these people .
in 761 of them , i could identify hotels in the hotels that they were recently recently , to be durchaus with punktgenauer precision in the globe .
thank you .
the alttiere can see the jungtiere , the jungtiere can see the alttiere .
and they &apos;re in something which probably are the blood vessels that go through the bone .
we all know that these bones are versteinert and when you appear to säure it , it should be no left .
the nichtvogeldinosaurier are the big , schwerfälligen , extinct .
transgenese is really cool .
a friend , a colleague , dr. hans larsson at the university of university , he also joined with atavismen .
people always say , &quot; why does it do that ?
finally , i started writing my book to put the worldwide scale of this problem . this is a aufstellung of the individual nations after the geschätzten level of food food in every country in the world .
so imagine , these nine , kekse , which i found in the trash , are the worldwide essensversorgung , okay ? at the beginning , we have nine .
this farmer has spent about pounds of pounds of the anbau of spinat , which he doesn &apos;t take a sheet of , because a little grass of grass that don &apos;t be perfect , they &apos;re not going to be perfekt to pigs .
it &apos;s a living organism , i cut a piece , put it in a bowl , and it stopped another two weeks .
and when you use these things , you don &apos;t need to do soooo .
i &apos;m going to go through a few .
left to thymiamata .
we need to change the stuff .
here &apos;s the einstein , niels bohr , the big fermatsche sentence , and i &apos;m not sure that james coburn or richard harris .
and you can see the ikosaeder disappears in the sky , and then they just verschmelzen together .
what a gutaussehende cat .
before the horse horse .
&quot; 10 milligramm , 20 milligramm . &quot;
so , i said , when i take a circle , let &apos;s see what &apos;s coming out for patterns , and boom , the red system .
they need to be exactly . it &apos;s about measurements , the erweiterungen .
then there were only two other things on the internet .
i &apos;ll go to talk later .
i mean , to put everything in &quot; off &quot; that would be like a call of your kabelanbieters , but for the world .
it could definitely be made by people here from the audience .
if we had had an opportunity of a tedxparis opportunity , for example , we had talked about the current innovations of the military , about the massive festungen of vauban , and we could have been able to predict an era of stability in the world or in europe .
now , in this environment where you don &apos;t know whether the potential enemy is ready to attack or attack the weapons , and whether the weapons was going to be an attack , this environment is what most people is designed to do a conflict .
it &apos;s a huge blue area .
so if you &apos;ve ever imagined , you &apos;ve been going to go back in time to see what a dinosaur looked like , this looks like a dinosaur looks like this .
she can &apos;t always shoot and shoot their strings ; she &apos;s got to go down the pants .
he never seems to be niederzulassen in a particular girl .
but what i did was a abenteuererzählung .
you don &apos;t have to worry about the readers fall in unglauben , because if you &apos;re already making a redenden shark , you &apos;ll have your doubt back to the front door .
you know , you know , a sense of urgency , as much as possible as possible .
my stellenbeschreibung was wonderful vage : begutachtung the wild and öffentlichkeitsarbeit .
that means that i &apos;m going to make my love to math and magic to make something i call &quot; mathemagie . &quot;
audience : 25. .
audience : 987 .
audience : seven .
good . then i try to impossible the impossible -- or at least .
audience : november . what ?
of course , i could make an answer , and they wouldn &apos;t know it . i &apos;m prepared for it .
okay , oh , ok -- you have a 10-stellen-rechner 10-stellen-rechner ?
let me explain what that is .
i would love to talk about astronomy , but i think the number of people who are in nicht-grauen atmosphären and lichtpolarisation in the upper atmosphere of jupiter is the number of people who fit into a wartehäuschen .
no , if you want to know how society will be in 20 years , they ask a kindergärtnerin .
just two weeks ago , i -- you know , i &apos;ve done little , middle middle , and i did a big show of the exhibition .
my mentor . he came up and i spent hours an hour of an hour .
i &apos;ll take mittagspausen .
right ? that &apos;s simple physics .
if you put it in the book , it &apos;s actually 343 .
and i think , oh , the square square square square is proportional to the periodendauer .
you would think , with all this extra place , we would have a lot of space for all of our stuff .
it &apos;s time i &apos;m trenne .
would i have a little bit more freedom ?
north of all of the churchill , manitoba , there are no ice on the hudson bay .
it took a lot of years of research on personenbezogenen spielgeschichten , before i really started to realize that i really didn &apos;t understand it .
frank wilson has written a book called &quot; the hand . &quot;
so what does this do to play for the brain ?
it took a long time -- i had to runterkriegen and homer homer and i had to go through the fmri and spect durchbekommen and mehrfache eegs , but when he was a stubenhocker , he &apos;s got a schrumpfhirn .
their own personal spielgeschichte is unique , and often nothing we think about .
he &apos;s charakterisiert by a feeling of energetischer fokussierung , complete vereinnahmung and success .
how do you prevent the media to interpret their jobs or interpretiert the science , which is now impliziert , like the mozartmetapher , like the mozartmetapher , like , &quot; oh , the mri show -- that play is the intelligence .
the difference between our nachos and the landläufigen nachos is that our actually is a dessert .
and then , after a short tauchbad nitrogen nitrogen to get this perfect brateffekt , we really have something that looks , tastes and behave like the original .
so , in fact , the ipcc in paris , his report on people who were doing the klimaveränderungen of the earth .
alisa miller gives us news news about the news .
it allows you to look at the negative forms that you create , as you &apos;re doing your daily verrichtungen .
so for this project , we created a kind of intelligenter simultaner .
no matter where i am -- it &apos;s an approach that tries to do my eyes .
inside , there &apos;s a 400 pounds of heavy that i &apos;ve been able to get out of a friend .
then there were thousands of people , who we believe that were infected with hiv .
: : deep in a remote region of cameroon , are two predators .
but they &apos;ll also ask them a different question .
but when we came into these laendlichen doerfer , we found that nobody had on tv , so they didn &apos;t know their face .
unnoetig to say that these viruses in the past probably have likely to be extinct in these societies societies .
you &apos;re told what you &apos;re doing with 140 signs or less and people who are interested in this .
we &apos;re building a programmierschnittstelle , which means that programmers can write software that interact with twitter .
&quot; ... give people more information and follow their intuitionen ted # ted . &quot;
because everything i read , books where people were in the same way , i felt that books , from nature had to have to contain , and they had to act by things that i couldn &apos;t identify with .
all i heard about you was like poor , so it had become impossible to see her as a poor thing as an arm .
and slowly , i realized that my american roommate during their lives , and i had to hear different versions of this single story and saw , just like this professor , which told me that my novel was not authentic afrikanisch .
now , you start the story of the north american ureinwohner with the pfeilen , and not the ankunft of the british , is a very different story .
i always had the feeling that it was impossible to engage yourself with a place or a person , if you don &apos;t engage with all the stories of this place or that person .
i give schreibkurse schreibkurse in lagos every summer , and i find it amazing how many people are einschreiben , how many people want to write about , telling stories .
in a recent recent experiment , in a group of adults , the brains were scanned brains in a scanner -- while people were listening to people .
why did my doctor , when i was doing , &quot; woman &apos;s hertz , she would pay you to get a hyperpyrexie , &quot; instead of that , he could have easy to say that i have to pay attention to get a high fever .
my dad &apos;s sick of alzheimer &apos;s disease .
and reading is not as good as impossible .
even though it &apos;s hard .
so we need to push ourselves in the physical and economic borders .
in the sense , we then put into the promise .
if you have trouble , understanding what the average consumers in the united states are in the current economy of the economy .
if you want a fish , you get a woman , and if you need a woman , you get a fish . &quot;
and if it &apos;s going to go to a long longer , you can still switch and go and go and go on to the island of rumfahren .
that &apos;s what &apos;s been about , the u.s. u.s. states of america .
in india , you don &apos;t understand where the problem is because most indians are tanken every single time , every single one of them .
all we need are 10 percent of the generating energy .
we don &apos;t put it right away . maybe we let the kids be free and keep the slave .
the arguments of what &apos;s called the &quot; id &quot; theoretiker are the same old case that are always been widerlegt and over and over and over and over the day .
the darwinsche natural selection is so amazingly elegant because she explained the problem to explain complexity , in shape of nothing else , which is simplicity .
now the next one : the president of the royal society has gewähren a strong inner belief , &quot; -- &quot; -- -- that an asteroid killed the dinosaurs . &quot;
it feels in a belagerten minority , but how do the american atheists actually get together ?
i don &apos;t have a real figures for the other fields of the other fields , or philosophy , but i would be amazed if you were different .
darwin was that the atheism is right now , and it &apos;s good for the intelligenzija , that the gewöhlichen people , i think , &quot; don &apos;t be the reif for it . &quot;
when people like stephen hawking and albert einstein , &quot; like stephen hawking and albert einstein , &quot; you know , &quot; god &quot; and then use it , of course , using it as a practical metaphor for this deep , mystischen part of physics , which we don &apos;t understand .
and the launch cost about 500 dollars in roughly the value of 10,000 today &apos;s worth .
in the early days , one person owned a license , you had to übertrug in an area and it had to be decided to be a license or property .
just because there &apos;s a certain sense , or if you have a lot of work involved , like wikipedia , ) a particular set of social relationships .
i don &apos;t have a slides , so you &apos;ll have to get me to me .
a study of the wirtschaftskomission for africa has shown that there &apos;s a clear aufwärtstrend in 28 african countries .
the state should not be involved in the creation of the goods and services , because it &apos;s inefficient and inkompetent in this area .
but what it was beseitigte , the variability that had dominated our economic development -- that means , if oil prices was high , our economy grew very quickly .
the same thing we do in the versicherungssektor .
and otherwise , i &apos;d have to have a gewünscht that you see this .
he called her , &quot; massive fatale diskontinuitäten , &quot; which means that they could kill up to 100 million people in the next 50 years .
until recently we didn &apos;t have to know how a vaccine did exactly .
the main challenge for these two viruses is that they &apos;re constantly changing .
these drugs are not cure , but they &apos;re providing a huge triumph of science because they &apos;re at least the automated death rate of a hiv-diagnose at least for those of those who access to them .
but you know , the research that has occurred on hiv has helped us to do progress with other diseases .
this was a slow , mühevoller process that had been dependent on hühnereiern , millions of living eggs .
and the radical gestiegenen production and the huge kosteneinsparungen of the e. method of the e. method that i &apos;ve just talked about -- look at the time of the gewonnene time -- that &apos;s the gerettete life .
so the challenge is full force .
the question is : why ?
believe the african union will organize this conference ?
there are some things you need to know .
the speaker who was here on me here on stage , idrim , mohammed , deutete on the way that we had hundsmiserable leaders in africa .
by stealing it from your leidenden people .
traditionally hate the african governments -- they hate tyrannei .
they decide what they do .
he doesn &apos;t get the help from the government , and he &apos;s building a second , grösseres boat .
something that would all connect to us .
scott &apos;s results were full of it .
and the challenge for self-assembly filters , these are available filters , is that they &apos;re going to be umkippen that balance because they go to everything that you click on first .
it &apos;s supposed to be heranführen up to new ideas and perspectives to new people and strangers .
and the man said , &quot; well , really nice abstieg , what ? &quot;
i know you &apos;ll wait for another bad umweltnachrichten -- i &apos;m just fun -- but now , just a short term , and then i &apos;ll show you new materials about possible solutions .
until the fillmstart of may , there &apos;s an update version of 2.0 that you can then buy your purchase from ausgleichseinheiten .
again , all the republicans here , it &apos;s not going to go to parteipolitik .
what really excites me about the people at the gulf is that they &apos;re ausgesprochene wassermenschen .
and there &apos;s no one that nobody &apos;s trying to do , except a few people who are trying to keep the beach .
we &apos;ve heard that bacteria eat oil ?
this tunfische is actually the entire ocean .
when the japanese pearl harbor harbor harbor , they at least shot .
what &apos;s the saeubern for the birds , i don &apos;t want to do a abfaelligen bemerkungen of people who are reinigen .
okay , people who call themselves a conservative , if you really wanted to be conservative and really patriotisch , you should send these korporationen to the hoelle .
it &apos;s about right and wrong .
and i developed a system to produce medical care .
all right , &quot; i &apos;m more than my genes , &quot; all in common .
i don &apos;t ask you to be skandieren because it &apos;s true , but to remember you .
it contains a molecule that we know as a neurotransmitter .
and that &apos;s just a mäusegehirn . it &apos;s a lot smaller than a human gehrin .
now , neurons , like trees , can grow new branches and lose old ones .
and we can even speak of the bewusstseinsstrom .
if you have that number , you can easily get a chance that there &apos;s a huge potential for fehlverbindungen in your brain .
perhaps , this technology will be able to know ourselves from ourselves and the very zusammensetzen of our own brain .
he &apos;s mostly working on music videos and ads with his company , the directors .
so we &apos;ve prepared a quick experiment here to show you this .
ks : no , not yet .
while he did that , he noticed an unexpected thing .
ks : so , how does this work : there &apos;s a matrix of färbemitteln .
ridiculous , right ?
and a few months ago , a friend sent me a link to this guy , eduardo .
a huge skandal of a few weeks .
but he was still doing this .
so his farm is incredible .
and then he was this wild plant , the lupine .
and then they fly in a circle .
i finally came to try to try it before i went .
no salt , no pepper , no oil , no gewürze .
what &apos;s the hell is that ?
at least , i think it &apos;s a little bit .
farmers who rely on nature to find solutions to respond to answer , rather than nature &apos;s solutions to solutions to the solutions ?
and to switch from the old fire , to change two great stories about oil and electricity , which are both given two fifth of the fossil kohlenstoffs .
our fuel for mobility is about three fifth of cars .
you can make it quiet runterfallen : it &apos;s harder than titan .
trucks and planes can use realistic hydrogen or more advanced biofuels .
even better light and büromaterial and so forth , the maximale kühllast is a third .
in about 20 , private private billige solarzellen solarzellen on their roofs and lower their own dächern .
and what we &apos;re always replacing it is , it &apos;s going to be , it &apos;s about six trillion dollars in kapitalwert -- although we buy more of what we have or new nuclear power and sogenanntes coal , or renewable clean , or renewable , that are more and less .
so , so , in outcomes , and not incentives , can be reformstau and conflict to the vereinenden solution of the energieprobleme of america .
and then later , i realized that what i was eating , was to be the whole family of his family .
these simple überlagerung show that donor donors are in areas where the least kids go to school , don &apos;t have any schools , and this is throwing new questions . do aid where they need most ?
two years ago , on april 2010 , i called my father .
i &apos;m not trying to design the toothbrush .
we remember , and can we look at that in every book of my zehnjährigen son that life emerged four billion years ago -- four billion points two ?
so much , i &apos;m not quite sure .
there &apos;s dangers , there &apos;s falling . one case : the vertical .
you have time to think , you have time to do what to do , talk about art and things like that .
you go back to the future , back , back , back .
they all come from families , where mostly one person is at home , usually the mother or grandmother , and they come to their education and their structure .
we &apos;re going to take them to turn to the right and the left , so they can follow and know the consequences when they &apos;re giving them .
let &apos;s all go online . &quot;
it &apos;s a vorherzusehen .
they said , &quot; that &apos;s enough for regierungsarbeit .
and then you can support us . that &apos;s the task of you guys . &quot;
but i have to have my heart .
you can listen and your mitreden .
for example , let &apos;s take the reiseanbieter nextpedition .
when you think about the concept of wikipedia , where everybody &apos;s at the content , and at the end , you &apos;ve created the largest encyclopedia in the world .
there are many people who have the same dream .
a website has been done .
there was no leader .
extremism has become tolerance .
the modern tools of neuroscience show us that what &apos;s happening is an incredibly complex process .
we can &apos;t keep a laute of our own language apart , but not the stranger .
we &apos;re looking at this by american babies who never heard a second language , which was the beginning of the critical period .
it looks like a haartrockner of mars .
science on one side has a very rational approach to their environment , while art on the other side , the other side of the other side has an emotional approach to its environment .
now i have a live-demonstration over here to show you this .
let me show you over here .
the dalai lama said , &quot; love and compassion are notwendigkeiten .
the stofffetzen were abgewickelt from a little girl whose body was burned burned .
she &apos;s part of every human lebewesens .
and if compassion is so good for us , why don &apos;t we choose to compassion ?
the wound of the maggots .
suppose you like to say , &quot; quadratzahlen , &quot; and you know , who don &apos;t like it ?
we start with a 1x1-quadrat , and then we &apos;ll let &apos;s think of another 1x1-quadrat .
then there was a aron kader , a palästinenser-amerikaner .
i said , &quot; he &apos;s been längst dead .
&quot; did i have a verbockt ! &quot; &quot; i don &apos;t have a memo . what &apos;s going on ? &quot;
i said , &quot; what &apos;s her right here ? &quot;
so i went into the lobby and saw this indian guy .
marco tempest : when you asked him to deception , he said , &quot; oh , magic is the only ehrbare job .
where is the queen ?
i &apos;m going to show you how closely terrorism is connected to our daily lives .
at the time i interviewed the red brigades , i also discovered that their life was not defined by ideology and politics , but of economic constraints .
i think a lot of people thought i was actually holding it for a little bit of a übergeschnappt .
but mostly , they were stiegen into serious crime with organized crime .
this money was taken in koffern and containern hinausgeschafft -- in cash , understands .
nobody wants to control his own verhältnisse and überwacht his geschäftsbeziehungen .
some of you might be thinking , &quot; wait a minute . you don &apos;t necessarily see the way a hochsee-ruderer hochsee-ruderer .
clearly , i wanted to leave my wohlfühlbereich , but what i didn &apos;t have was to do was that it &apos;s definitionsgemäß extremely awkward to leave his wohlfühlbereich .
and i really learned that the bigger the challenge , the bigger the feeling of a particular achievement , when you get to the end .
now , i thought the atlantic was big , but the pacific is really big .
but that wasn &apos;t without missgeschicke .
it &apos;s this little green disk on the horizon , which is very nervous about rising sea level .
we can start to make better , more , more sustainable , more sustainable decisions .
roz savage : why i &apos;m going to go across the pacific
this is the world trade center-baugelände on the cover .
why ? why ? why would you want to do that ?
he doesn &apos;t see the überschüssigen cost . it doesn &apos;t use any extra time .
they were able to make it .
and the end of the day is comfort , it &apos;s about feeling good at places where they hadn &apos;t felt good before .
and that &apos;s hard if you don &apos;t know who you are .
and i asked myself , how can it be so easy to give up my dreams ?
it &apos;s not so hard , you know , someone who &apos;s hereinzulegen , and one day , in the school , i said , &quot; you know , you can abschreiben my homework , &quot; and i gave him the wrong answers i wrote in the night before .
we both put in the back of the back of the class in class , so we wouldn &apos;t be able to do with the papierkügelchen .
you might have brought your prellungen and zerbrochenen teeth , but never told it , because how can you say yourself if all of you want to buried in your part ?
that &apos;s french science .
all right , go .
if you look at these trucks here ; it &apos;s the largest truck of its species on earth .
it &apos;s also one of the reasons it &apos;s the largest and the fastest growing energy of co2 in canada , and it &apos;s also the reason why canada now is the number three in terms of co2-produktion per capita .
and as a father , i can &apos;t imagine what the soul is .
by doing that , we take a large part of our biggest kohlenstoffsenke and replace it with the most greenhouse oil oil that &apos;s going on the future .
the hauptgegenstand of their work is the bindi that you can buy and put on every store and the millions of indian women put on her forehead every day , and it &apos;s a ritual that &apos;s related to the institution of marriage .
raqib shaw was born in kolkata , aufgezogen and educated in london .
i hope to convince you that complex and complicated is not always the same thing .
the eingekreiste knotenpunkt is the one we want to affect -- the public support for government .
so i proposed to my first tedtalk that we should spend as planet as a planet , 21 billion hours a week .
only only 30 minutes per day is reichten for an important improvement of mood and langfristiger increase in the joy .
why a game ?
how could such a game like such a game that could be so serious , sometimes , lebensbedrohlichen situations ?
there are four species of strength , or resilience that can contribute to the growth growth , and there &apos;s scientifically bestätigte things that you can do every day to build this resilience , you don &apos;t need a trauma .
more practice is empowered .
here &apos;s a secret for you : if you shake someone for six seconds , your blood will be strong , the oxytocin-level will be strong in your blood , the &quot; vertrauens-hormon . &quot;
and in this project , we actually have a lot of people around the world , and we do that with us . actually , thousands of people are involved in this project , in many of its different aspects .
and then a few people came from chicago , and they said , &quot; end 2007 , the slogan of the chicago world is called global warming . we have a 280 quadratmeter , and we want to fill it with your reef . &quot;
and nässe and nässe are not two concepts that fit well .
euklid said , &quot; how can i define parallel lines ? &quot;
infinitely . it &apos;s been erfasst .
so , we have , from the top , by the other , the heimische , the proof that the most famous postulat of mathematics is wrong .
and their individual ideas and their work with this mathematical method .
this particular rekursive property -- that -- i think , i think , the holy grail of neuroscience , neuroscience , and eventually we &apos;ll hopefully understand what &apos;s going on .
this person is otherwise at klarem minds and intelligent , but when he sees his mother , his wahnvorstellung and he says it &apos;s not his mother .
so when that area is damaged , they lose the ability to recognize faces .
tables and chairs and flusen -- nothing happens , just like normal people . when i show him a picture of his mother , the elektrodermale activity is low .
he knows his arm is not there . nonetheless , it &apos;s a überzeugendes , sensorisches experience .
you can also solve the phantomschmerz , the phantom of the phantom .
and my pain are disappeared . &quot;
he said , &quot; no , the last three days , i had no phantom , and so no phantomschmerzen in the elbow , no verkrampfung , no phantomschmerz in unterarm , no phantomschmerz in unterarm . all my pain disappeared .
cis is blue , fis is green , another sound could be yellow .
that &apos;s the key .
which is one , is it ? &quot; one is ?
their sexualverhalten is to menschenähnlich , which most of us don &apos;t deal with .
this is kanzi .
none of the things you &apos;re going to see in this video are antrainiert .
well done .
he learned that he &apos;s when he put both hands , with his gezielten hieben , a lot more and more powerful .
a frame means a hut in the forest .
does he look where the sound comes from ?
because we believe it &apos;s not the biology , but the culture .
and some stars die in spectacular supernova-explosionen that leave the remains .
on the right there is gravity . einstein explained that .
and beyond that , it makes new species of change .
it was too early , but he was a moral moral , an inspiration for scientist who were worried about control of the guns .
suppose we have seen alien creatures , our blassblauen point would have seen our blassblauen point from far outside the cosmos , and not only for 40 years , but the whole month of history .
martin rees asks : is this our last century ?
and it &apos;s going to worse , &quot; then i would take a picture of it and make a dozen hochglanzabzüge .
now , these are students , so they gave a lot of money to things like ohrringe and make-up .
and then we asked them how happy they are .
but tremendously different incentives .
this is verkaufs-teams in alabama .
the teams , which we gave money to spend on each other , got to other teams and dominierten in the end of the liga .
when we hear from the kriegsgefahren , from the high school , we often think that this is one of the most unlösbaren conflict in the middle east , which is the roots as the region itself .
ironically , that was a time when the hauptinteresse of iran was considered peace with washington , and not the destruction of the destruction .
this is an analogy , which is to abzielt to the diplomacy of diplomacy , is abgeschafft diplomacy , is inevitable .
you can look for certain verbrauchsarten , or you can look at the different regions and compare it .
the map of port au-prince at the end of 2009 , not as good as it could have had to be , not as good as the map of california .
the trick is that .
and then , in the explanation , she said , &quot; he was no umweltschützer . &quot;
this system wants to have the status quo , also the status quo of a government &apos;s state .
so it &apos;s not about my theme that &apos;s most important . that &apos;s not .
we can &apos;t do anything . &quot;
lawrence lessig : we , the citizens , have to get the republic of the time .
for example , some people in this room will go to sputnik with a scholarship at school .
that &apos;s on my pen . &quot;
everybody &apos;s just irre a little bit .
i don &apos;t want to say that the law &apos;s law is not true , it &apos;s true .
here in the model you see the attack of the raubtiers .
if you see in north america , the same thing as many things are active in the united states . they ignore each other .
each of your herzschläge depends on this critical region , the sinusknoten , which has the 10,000 independent cells , from which each piept has a electronic rhythm -- a high tension , a small -- to send a signal to pump the air .
they were in synchron , but they were drifteten .
so i &apos;d like to show you a couple of interviews of people who were at the bridge and describe what happened .
now , you don &apos;t normally think of a metronom , but we &apos;re all running -- we &apos;re going to go back and forth .
on the point , this is a few tons , so you &apos;re going to go right away .
it &apos;s the höchstgeschätzte scientist in his area .
i didn &apos;t say what the list was , but she was in alphabetischer order , and i told you , you should search your name , your familiennamen , or your mother &apos;s mother &apos;s mother .
it may have perhaps a weizenart , or maybe a weizenart , which is not worth economically , a widerstandskraft widerstandskraft or schädlinge or other property that is useful for climate change , and the other people don &apos;t have .
we &apos;re going to see children on television .
the idea of the brain is that it &apos;s cold , so you have natural temperature under the gefrierpunkt .
and when something happens , you can come and pick it up .
thank you .
watch your body position ! this one is not right .
maybe even a lady , a lady ? thank you .
you only try two concepts -- two in the united states , and one in the russians .
madness ! i have to talk about the innovation cycles -- the things are developing , there &apos;s a lot of activity , and then they &apos;re replaced with something different and die .
i can &apos;t tell you when it &apos;s going on , because i don &apos;t want the competition to know my own .
i mean something really interesting that &apos;s going to happen .
okay , let &apos;s talk a little bit about the commercial development of the bemannten space .
it &apos;s like the air .
after a few years , he &apos;s ready to give up , but one day he has an epiphany .
institutions are going to be naked , and if you &apos;re naked , well , the consequences have the consequences .
the fourth meaning of openness and the fourth principle is machtgewinn .
the zahnpasta is from the tube .
you know that bees and fish live in school .
all around us , a medical revolution is going to be a revolution that will help us defeat some of the worst diseases of our society , including cancer .
this is a tumor , dark gray , gray , a mass mass mass , wachsend in a brain .
and you can see that the ring of the blood supply is disappears after treatment .
but the real question is : how well do these work work ?
here &apos;s what happens when we add a erdbeer-extrakt , which is preventing angiogenesis in a very efficient way .
but more interesting , from the study , is that the men who evolved the prostata-krebs , which is that the more tomato sauce have actually been , and in the bottom , in the bottom have , have fewer blood vessels that have fed their cancer .
albert of szent-györgyi once said that &quot; discovery is to see what all of you have seen and think what nobody else has thought . &quot;
i &apos;m a rätselkolumnist magazine .
it has to be fun , unlike the ordinary problems that are honest , frankly , not a very good puzzle .
one is the background of the other .
you can &apos;t do it physically , but on a computer , it &apos;s going to go . it &apos;s going to the computer .
i wanted to do a sequel .
what are the direction that you &apos;re going to fall ?
so there &apos;s games like &quot; brain &quot; to come to the nintendo , a riesenhit .
looks like a black character . where is that ?
i really believe that a girl is so powerful that we all had to train to be not to be that .
i remember , for example , my father , who was very , very violent , i was struck .
we &apos;re so used to berauben girls from the anspruchs , protagonistinnen their own life , that we actually did to make objects and turned them into .
and she looked into her eyes of her baby and she said , &quot; of course i love my baby . how could i not love my baby ?
when we were there , she did a ritual where they were girls who are weggelaufen with their families .
and i will be in your side for the rest of your life . &quot;
i love that i don &apos;t take things easy .
why should they want me to abdrehen , zusperren ?
so , in the actual process , all six teenagers said , and bezeugten the identifizierungen they did with the array of the array .
but the incident happened in the middle of january , in the northern hemisphere , at 7 a.m.
this is 10 feet away .
and what &apos;s this example -- what is important to keep in mind ?
he was a very religious man .
i got a fullbright-stipendium and i went through africa , and i was a year from africa where i asked people why they built fractal , which is a great job if you can get it .
and that &apos;s in some villages , and the smallest level .
it &apos;s not really mathematical knowledge .
he said , &quot; if i lived in the middle of the jungle , i would just spend a long time , because it &apos;s very fast , and it &apos;s very cheap .
just and odd gives odd .
we have a pilotprogramm in ghana .
the bad news is that .
instead of taking friends of friends or relatives , they looked at the same work .
now , agile development will be applied to a hundred countries and go up to the chefetagen .
fear of radfahren lose .
we put some rules on and keep them on .
the conversation is going to be better . &quot;
just when i was coming to come here tonight , one of my daughters started to come back .
and we evolved 10 .
i was a teenager when i first read &quot; anna karenina &quot; and the famous first set of sentence : &quot; all happy families are equal to each other .
i want to show you how something that can be so beautiful to look at .
when i put this into the water , you see a silberne beschichtung , and this beschichtung is the luftschicht that keeps the water from the benetzen of the ice shelf . it &apos;s dry .
and plato , all the young boys in his cave . sweeney : uuuuh ...
i &apos;ll show you .
but success success was not long .
one thing i want to make a clear is that not all the neurochirurgen are wearing cowboystiefel .
we can hoch- them or herunterschalten or herunterschalten or turn on .
he &apos;s one of five children .
i showed you that we can apply it into the circuits of the mood of depression .
we &apos;re understanding what these circuits are and what areas of the clinical signs of the clinical are responsible in the disease .
evolution actually works more like a tüftler than an engineer .
that &apos;s enough .
what we &apos;ve discovered is whether you look at the leg of a person like richard , or a cockroach or a crab or a kängurus , the relative beinsteifheit of that spring to all of the time we &apos;ve seen before .
okay . the point is , it &apos;s really hard to say , right ? it &apos;s amazing , students tried it , and they couldn &apos;t tell it .
it does this with a druckempfindlichen glue .
what we do is we take the hair as a model , and put it together with a different colleagues from berkeley .
showed that the verheirateten gehobenen , two thirds of the most young men children have children , but only one third of the verheirateten women .
on monday , i left san francisco , my heimatort , and flew at this conference .
and we go out at the end , look at us and say , &quot; how did it run ? &quot;
there &apos;s a famous study at harvard business school about a woman named heidi roizen .
and i runtergenommen my hand back and i fell on all other women , and then you &apos;ve taken more questions , only by men . &quot;
one woman got me on this , and i looked at her -- she looked a little bit young .
thank you .
they don &apos;t do it as much as they should , but they do .
so fear was the bestimmende factor .
but it &apos;s true of black .
so i want to talk to the following now about how we spread in this country , how we get to information .
so , this is why you &apos;re in verständlicher , klarer language .
we tell you that everything is fine ; it &apos;s fine .
this patient is about 50 , so we can pretty much tell the exact exactly how big your risk is to get prostate cancer .
they don &apos;t need the educational of the audience in this room .
and this bee has certainly assumed , &quot; i &apos;m schnapp myself this apfelbaum , which is that flower , i get the nectar , and i get off . &quot;
and when you talk about nature that &apos;s a writer , my favorite subject is , how is the idea of the aldo-leopold-test ?
all right , we &apos;re all equally hochentwickelt .
the only technology here is the cheap elektrozaun : it &apos;s pretty neu , a autobatterie , and i could do it for a koppel of 10 minutes in 15 minutes .
when a wiederkäuer grast , the grass of this altitude is going to be on this gekürzt , and it &apos;s going to happen something interesting .
and now i &apos;m saying i want to build a game layer on top of the world , but it &apos;s not quite true , because it &apos;s already in development ; it &apos;s happening .
if not , it &apos;s a bad thing . there &apos;s nothing you can do .
they come to a certain time , you get your drinks for half a price .
and then you can do a really good thing in different ways .
and it &apos;s powerful .
digg is a very dynamic dynamic that &apos;s trying to find the best news , the most exciting stories .
we &apos;ve been talking about this last time ago .
you see , if i rotate this around -- hopefully i don &apos;t even get the world too much .
you can see , here it started .
this is one of our engineers .
mendel , who actually should have been teaching students to teach students , i found the law of vererbung , just as a hobby .
raise your hands .
it makes it a place where it &apos;s fun to work .
and so what we &apos;re working on is , and we &apos;ve even got people who are excited about this and crazy enough that they &apos;re working on it , that &apos;s really their goal .
thank you .
what brunel , as he said for his passengers , was to see the experience of the landscape .
what makes life easier , more pleasant ?
and so part of it , they &apos;re doing this , by building a great new facility , using the basement of one of their hospitals .
today , the industrial systems have been brunels and has become part of the current problem .
and as we can do , we can do that , by doing systems , a major effect .
my beharrlichkeit überrascht beriet the kellner with his boss .
mark lipper and i &apos;ve tried to answer this question in a series of studies .
yet , it &apos;s exactly what the american paradigm demands .
but for the osteuropäer , the plötzliche availability of all these konsumprodukten in the market like a sintflut .
the americans themselves discover that the unbegrenzte choice in theory seem more attractive than in practice .
französiche parents would be more like , like , &quot; noah was just for the short time , but he taught us so much .
robert frost once said this , &quot; it &apos;s poetry that goes into translation . &quot;
&quot; well , it &apos;s a very elegant nuance of pink . &quot;
the three problems have one in common : they &apos;re menschgemachte problems that are controlled by natural forces .
so thank you .
it &apos;s been to replace competition with collaboration .
and then we build a sechs-meter-version , which we can test the maximale of machines , and we can become very , very quickly .
girl 5 : no .
and so i realized that the techwelt is not being understood as a geschäftszyklus , but as a heilbringende movement .
the atombombe enters the stage .
and then the 92 nuclear power industry that would provide the energy to auffüllen the rest of los angeles .
and then you take it and it puts it on the screen of your television , and it &apos;s reibt from within the outside , right .
if you replace the word of the blogosphäre or the internet , it &apos;s very , very well that his idea is very aufschlussreich , and let &apos;s hear it in a way .
i think it was the exchange that led to computer .
ph : i hope you understand how subversiv it is .
ultimately , the race has won the future of momentum as the phone company .
mm : because it has given the audience to do something .
they produce things for 1,500 and 800 dollars per minute .
and where television has a abgekriegt , which is built , which is built , is a very exciting new kind of communication , and we have the zusammenschluss of two industries and a new way of thinking to see it .
this is an spanish architect and designers .
color can be beleben , simple materials : when i go through new york , i &apos;m holding .
it gave me the feedback -- maybe there &apos;s a yellow day in san francisco , and we all speak down and build a few installations .
the use of the city of public space is significantly , almost an international model .
even the parts of the airplane had french names .
he said , &quot; so one , there &apos;s more girls there . &quot;
and it was finally , like i , after some hochs and tiefs , and the design of the chair that i &apos;m going to show you right now .
he said she has one of the new , better chairs .
or they &apos;re pulling them up in the position .
i knew about experience , and when i put myself into the offices , where there was bürostühle , where there was no idea , no anyone would come to the idea , zurückzugreifen , to spin a knauf and to fit the kopfstütze to make them position .
and the dengue-fieber is spread in windeseile .
two days ago , or yesterday , i can &apos;t remember exactly what i &apos;ve read in a reuters-meldung , that madeira has the first dengue-erkrankungen vermeldet , about 52 registrierte cases , with about 400 times .
we need something that was really drosselt , so that it doesn &apos;t spread the disease .
here &apos;s a typical situation : males hits females , every lot of them .
so frachtkosten are not our biggest problem .
&quot; why now ? &quot; &quot; why here ? &quot;
and most of the time i &apos;m not taking away from that , although i &apos;m a weitgereister weltenbummler .
look at the available data .
now , our mobile phones can now build a story of our wohnorte .
bill davenhall : your health depends on where you live .
that &apos;s my grandfather .
and in the simple reason , nobody &apos;s talking about it .
as the beginning of the way , the plants are pulling phosphorus from water .
here &apos;s the title of a remarkable article from a 2009-ausgabe of &quot; nature &quot; that lostrat the discussion about the phosphorus crisis .
80 percent of them are lost .
and instead of a dose of 100 percent , we &apos;ll take one percent of 25 percent .
we have a working technology and one that &apos;s going to be mildern by using korrekter , and we &apos;re mildern by the druckpunkte of the world .
and he was a sogenannter teratologist : he looked at all the missgestalten and mutations to find rules and laws rather than looking at the norms .
and in this example , you see the individual steps , but they &apos;re wiederholen , but they &apos;re wiederholen .
as an architect , i think only relationships between the pieces and all of the world , but in terms of design design , it &apos;s always going to be a matter of companies .
we were näherten at the level of the building of the building where we could build the five separate towers , but they should all be verschmelzen on the 60 floor to a single monolithischen mass .
come back again , a few years later , in 2003 , and we &apos;ll see that this landscape actually looks like schleswig-holstein as a rainforest .
the difference is in bewässerungsanlagen in desert desert , or maybe golfplätze in scottsdale , whatever you want .
there &apos;s a lot of toxic waste , a lot of things that were made of illegal and now they &apos;re in the air .
we &apos;ve doubled the amount of nitrogen and phosphorus in the world , just by the fertilizer , the huge problems of water water , and rivers , lakes and even oceans , and it &apos;s also the most important einzelfaktor for artensterben .
but we can , and we can get it in the way .
irrigation is the biggest wasserverbraucherin in the paneten .
work together .
so , what is that system system system designed ?
we want to see our products in the store . &quot;
all the system system doesn &apos;t pay taxes .
we are interacting with the world through our hands .
what do you do ?
we use biological verstärker to enhance this nervensignale -- muscle .
this is what it looks like .
here we deinnervierten , or schnitten the nerve , from little bits of the muskels and we had other unberührt that gave us our hoch-runter -- signal . two other others that we would give us our hands -- gave us a signal .
ak : it works well .
but i can &apos;t put an electrode in and say , &quot; there . &quot;
and that &apos;s our goal to have something more clinically to the bear .
that &apos;s jesse and he press a schaumspielzeug .
so thank you .
sub-saharan africa has been largely erfüllt this condition , because there are 22 million people living in hiv , that &apos;s the geschätzte 70 percent of 30 million people who are infected worldwide .
governments in front of the places have to do some more effective for ethical aspects in clinical trials that are approved in the various developing countries , and they are established in the government and the finanzierern of the trial .
the fundamental problems we face are , so , are a high consumption and too many people .
so they &apos;re doing all the criteria that people would do .
so you can see this current , which goes to north -- the humboldt-strom in this case -- that &apos;s all the way to the galapagos , and this tiefenwasserstrom , the cromwell-strom that &apos;s coming up in the galapagos .
we also know that not only is galápagos-pinguine , but the same thing and the other people .
i &apos;d like to show you that penguins are drawn into mitleidenschaft .
turbo has angewöhnt , he klopfen his schnabel . we &apos;ll let him go in and it comes in .
and then there &apos;s another one that &apos;s coming to the very comfortable .
now , here &apos;s a fundamental problem that we don &apos;t have solved : our fundamental political geographie .
the two parts of one share a fairly long border .
again , in the case of china , china &apos;s not erobert russia . it &apos;s least .
for ärmere countries , china reduced its zölle , so that laos and cambodia could be sold cheaper and depending on exporten to china .
what i want to imagine here is i call a staatenbildung day , day .
these two arrows forming an bow , a bow of pendelzügen and other infrastructure that connects the west bank with the gaza streifen .
most of them .
so what &apos;s next ? what is the future of the european union ?
53 countries and the most of the verdächtigen lines lines on the map .
this dream exists .
does it mean bad ? it doesn &apos;t seem like that .
okay .
and the hormone &apos;s igf-1 is increasing growth .
so how can a hormone then cut the speed of aging ?
we think insulin and igf-1 hormones are actually active in particular conditions in circumstances -- in good times -- when food is available to the food , and not a lot of stress in the environment .
we don &apos;t know the details about how it works , but we know that foxo genes have an impact on the lifespan of human life .
and basically , you could change the genes .
so it &apos;s possible that the process that i &apos;ve been talking about , which is going to do a very quick , a different normal sollwert , like a bird , so the bird can live much longer .
you will never see a kind of ad , because nike wants to buy their shoes .
they all show heroes , who were auserwählt .
it &apos;s like trying to run a backsteinwand .
and this is what shaped by a lot of ausgestellte medikamentenrezepte , like prozac , are essentially changing the chemistry of the brain than whether the brain was the jar of chemical soup .
and my namensgebender colleague , seymour benzer , believes this .
and what we found was that the mutant , a long time , needed a long time to abzuregen back to the luftstößen , and when we were prüften the genes that were in the mutation , we could discover a dopaminrezeptor .
that question has been given people for a long time , but in flies , we can actually test it .
so , mosquitoes are finding us in the dark by erschnüffeln us . they smell us .
just so you can see it &apos;s cheese .
people actually told me that they &apos;re now being gestochen by mosquitos .
in großbrittannien .
and every time i felt the schaurigen eyes of the eyes &apos;s eyes was a prisoner &apos;s dilemma behind me .
and as herrausstellte , fat is one of the best sources for adult stem cells .
while we speak , about a 117 clinical trials , studying stem cells to leberkrankheiten .
we &apos;re very happy because we have the opportunity to have these angels in the world , not only in our country , venezuela . in our entire world .
so what happens when that &apos;s not what happens ?
but here you see what &apos;s going on .
i can &apos;t tell you about that because i stopped the headline .
jenna mccarthy : what you don &apos;t know about before marriage ?
but how ?
it &apos;s even better . it seems to be able to make these receiver with help from the material that dna is programmed .
the animal jumps , it &apos;s going to take its wings out , it &apos;s vibriert , but it doesn &apos;t really take off , because the fly &apos;s zwischen stuck between two glasscheiben .
for an intelligent creature like our fly , it &apos;s not a rule gemeißelt in stone , but it &apos;s changing while the animal learns through experience .
through many of these experiments , we were able to einzugrenzen the identity of the kritikers and 12 cells .
there are some ideas in the computerwissenschaft and artificial intelligence , how to do that , but we still have not solved one example , how smart behavior from the physical interaction is überspringt to live matter .
here &apos;s a libby , or actually a ultraschallbild of a libby .
ed : all right . tb : okay . a little bit , a little bit , a little bit to the middle .
from the own experience , i know that hospitals for young people can be a very dangerous place .
here &apos;s a picture of my abschlussteam from the legacy .
one of the pflegeanpassung that i tell you , which is all of , from their goals to their genes , will be the bahnbrechendste transformation that we &apos;re going to see in our lifetime in the health care system .
they don &apos;t stick to a stick or a stick or glue .
here we have the robot .
marc raibert built the hüpfroboter uniroo .
what would happen if you were to climb up the bottom of the blattes , and it would come up a böe , or we would shake the sheet ? &quot;
and so , wirs have done , and he does this .
of course , in a naturfilm , of course , when you saw it in a naturfilm .
we &apos;re going to look at rising sea level .
and i would say people are working in the ocean and think about the goals , we think you should be much lower .
this is the ship i was on the last three months of antarctica .
when this ice is melting up , sea sea level rise up to six meters .
what was the cause ?
in both cases , the bad news is the coral &apos;s coral .
you have the wassertemperatur .
but then , at the end , you see the black black black .
we have a very interesting way of the co2-gehalt million years of the atmosphere , and we &apos;ve done this only by eisbohrkernen , but in this case , we go back 20 million years .
and this is the task that einstein has been asked : to figure out how gravity works .
einstein had already had room and time , verzerrungen and curves around gravity .
but deep in the structure of the space , the idea , could give it more dimensions than we see there .
and as the strings of a cello , you can schwingen the same strings and also schwingen the same strings .
not yet .
is this just an interesting mathematical construction that may be able to explain some einstmals unverstandene properties of the world , or can we actually show these extra dimensions ?
so we &apos;ve got two plates with colored dots .
now , can irgenjemand see the predator , which is to attack it ?
and what &apos;s true for sensory information is generally true of information .
and we &apos;re looking at about 30 seconds to what &apos;s a very good hammer in a 18 minutes long talk .
why ? because if the kachel in this shadow would be in the shadow and the same amount of light on your eye , like the outside of the shadow , would have to reflect more -- simply according to laws of physics .
where do you know that ?
and it comes in the hive , and you find a blank honigtopf and you get it -- and that &apos;s honey .
he finds him . madness , right ?
voices ? yes ?
there &apos;s no right here , right there &apos;s not a real thing .
in 2010 in new york , not so much .
we are also a species of storyteller .
now some things : understanding of security , the risks , the dangers of the gegenmaßnahmen , the way they work .
but in a modern and complex world , they need models to understand the many risks we face .
think of cancer , flu flu , flu , sars .
there was no new insights , but less fear .
and there &apos;s another cognitive bias : i call it bestätigungsfehler , by accept the data that we have to do with our glaubensatz and abzulehnen the data that we disagree with our glaubensatz .
i met another group , and i found out my airplane was safe to fly .
these are people who are ängstigte .
and he was found here in the near stanford .
they had good people with their teachers , students .
let me ask you some questions to figure out that this is a good choice . &quot;
i took out there to be a guy in the room to get them to get them or save me as a volunteer , but i found nobody did something .
we opened the first stage in 2009 .
robert hammond : building a park in sky .
and groups were very often called the terrorists .
they need a einschließenden process , which is the core of which the very complicated society can deal with its problems .
it &apos;s about that we probably have the first time in the history of the arab world a revolution on the ground , a volksrevolution revolution .
paradox of this is that the most vorletzte decade was so much so vielversprechend , and that &apos;s from a main reason .
so , at once , the ngos of the workers don &apos;t call their slogans anymore , but they took them into the negotiations , and they were in the course because they were vertraten the victims of these weapons .
thank you very much .
but i don &apos;t think the monsteret is a good thing .
so this was a completely smooth .
it &apos;s a little bit crazy to work on a new nuklearreaktor .
and i &apos;m trying to use a very scientific approach .
they said , &quot; well , you know , this strange , strange , man , man in the movie ?
it &apos;s a big tooth . &quot;
and the last day , the sun comes out , the orcas come , they come right on the boat . it &apos;s fantastic .
i &apos;m going to give you a little bit nervous because i &apos;m going to tell you a couple of radical things about how we &apos;re thinking differently about cancer , to an audience that many people have , who are over cancer , which is doing that .
the part of the genome we can read is the list of the ingredient .
it &apos;s a huge amount of information in genetics , by comparing the genetic evidence .
and i &apos;m like , &quot; okay . at least this guy is good . &quot;
so basically , we &apos;re essentially measuring each of the brain as a one .
if you have malaria , we give them chinin , or some of the derivate .
where we really need to get to the process that &apos;s just going on , and that is at the level of the proteomischen activity on the level of the why the body doesn &apos;t cure itself , how does it normally do it ?
danny danny : cancer , understanding cancer .
they are all members of tribes .
it &apos;s not enough to give these people .
because , in stage three , most of us are .
this is their lobby .
there was no plan . never before , someone did this .
in fact , martin luther king &apos;s king &apos;s sentence was three .
so i &apos;m sitting there in this chair , and do nothing . &quot;
and suddenly they got the papierzettel out and tried to figure out , &quot; how do we ask the population of sub-saharan africa ? &quot;
automatically , we &apos;re going to take the little bits of plastic .
these ein- or zweistöckigen konstrukte that were designed to make so much , to get the control of the ground on the ground , and they were not as permanent buildings .
it duchschauen the stability and security that the lap of a state can offer , which is the wackeligen nichte of a neurotischen nichte .
but from my perspective , compassion has a problem .
and it &apos;s the most erbauendste form of sofortiger .
i can &apos;t really explain it , and he doesn &apos;t .
stories like these , signs like this , are practical , in a world that sehnt to be able to bring compassion , the übermäßigen of suffering that we could otherwise otherwise .
gandhi was a really fehlerhafter person .
and the first day our gruppenleiterin were antreten us , and we taught us our slogan , which we had to spend every day for the rest of the summer to make the gemeinschaftssinn .
this is one of two or three of them .
here are some examples .
it turns out we can &apos;t be part of a group , without feeling a instinctively , to mimic the other .
so this is the world we live in today .
and so i &apos;m trying to learn from my own my own way of my grandfather .
okay , number two : go to the wild .
and imagine that , you know , an inner picture : i was born in a very small village in mexico , in , unfortunately , very , very ärmlichen , and my parents had no higher school .
and so we believe that through all the changes that are happening , we have incredible opportunities today .
it &apos;s an initiative that &apos;s been gerichtet on simple , erreichbare , and menschzentrierte solutions .
we now have 30 different technologists in 18 different countries , and we were able to connect millions of people , in the effort to continue to learn what this particular needs needs .
and my dad came to me and said , &quot; you know , i remember that every generation has to do better than the previous one .
i know a lot of people who are very smart and yet say , &quot; why can &apos;t i solve my problem ? &quot;
i started with another family in 1980 .
don &apos;t believe that we have the responsibility to take the environment seriously ? &quot;
i still drive the same four years old ford as well as before .
but that &apos;s not a good life .
that &apos;s what he &apos;s praying .
believe it or not , don &apos;t make any difference for me .
so he said , &quot; what &apos;s your hand in your hand ? &quot;
what &apos;s this in your hand ? &quot; i said , &quot; it &apos;s a basketball , and that basketball is your identity , what you are .
when my kids were little , i was always going to go in her room , i sat down on her bed and i looked at my children sleep .
it &apos;s less than i had vorausberechnet -- i &apos;m rechnete three to 10 million -- but yet it &apos;s a very significant number .
in a village , we have a hundred laptops , each with a different collection of 100 books , so that the village suddenly got 10,000 books .
right , the famous chinese character for rastplatz .
they answer the question : how does it feel to be able to determine that you &apos;re irrt ?
we really learn that really bad lesson .
think for a moment of what it is to feel in the right .
and unlike all other animals , we are obsessed with this , trying to figure out .
and i have to tell you that i thought i write this incredibly nerdige book about a subject that everybody hate , for an audience that would never be .
the effect of this is not only wogender wheat wheat , but mountains of grains .
in 1986 , she came from vietnam to america .
the answer to that was lapidar : &quot; that &apos;s even worse . &quot;
our personalfluktuation fell down to a third of the durchschnitts in our industry , and in the five years of the dotcom , our betriebsgröße verdreifacht .
and bhutan , for those who don &apos;t know , is the youngest democracy of the world , only two years old .
it &apos;s actually , in the west , we &apos;re often hunt by happiness , as if we were to be able to capture something that we had to capture , a thing , or maybe several things that we need to get .
and we ask 10 simple questions -- this is the simplicity .
what we need to really learn as leaders is that we can change the production of production by creating the right conditions so our employees can live their calling .
bl : okay . one , two , three .
under the deck you &apos;ll tell you the innenohr , you move you . but the eyes are moving in the boat with the boat , and say , &quot; i &apos;m standing still . &quot;
amy , come up , you know ?
the method : what did you do ? the result : what did you see ?
i &apos;m just reading one .
real scientific education should give people a voice and give them to express them , so amy should have the last word in this short story .
poor people have not been able to have this opportunity .
we were zurückgeworfen into the &apos; 70s .
and to get there , we have to recognize that the principle of a wegwerfkultur principle is not only the kind of schadet we &apos;ve been talking about , but we also verdirbt our society .
today 60 years later , i can tell you why it &apos;s possible .
i &apos;m sure you &apos;ve already asked you , &quot; yes , great stuff up there -- but how do i get up there ?
i was a professor at the u.c. davis system and got a lot of attention . that allowed me to fund the launch of the program .
we have eight motors in this vehicle .
thank you .
they fall apart , they fall apart and they end up .
i mean , people ask whether cell phones are safe .
you have a spule .
because , remember , you remember the original idea of dr. soljacic : the piepende cell phone in his wife .
and for those who can &apos;t read it : it says , &quot; it seems like it &apos;s a kind of kabelloser technology . &quot;
green or natural bestattungen , which are not einbalsamiert , are a step in the right direction , but they don &apos;t care about the existenten of our bodies .
first , a beerdigungsanzug , angereichert with pilzsporen , the &quot; mushroom death . &quot;
it &apos;s only months later i learned who he was really .
i &apos;m looking for a heilmethode .
i say , &quot; hold it on life if you can . &quot;
even with this eindeutigen paper in our hands , we have a neu hope .
it &apos;s a feature .
suddenly he knows that he had been beaten .
to give you this , we need to put it back on the wheel .
we beflogen the area , we photographierten it , we sent people into it , we photographierten the buildings from inside , the katastrophengebiete , and we helped the first einsätzen , and we &apos;re going to get the suche .
when i do this , i don &apos;t lose the original details , and the contrary , i could write history .
you &apos;re going to be zurückgehalten from public opinion .
it &apos;s not very good .
and which is a democracy .
here &apos;s the question : which country is doing better , china , china , or india ?
because the indian man has an advantage of two years to the indian woman .
and what political change is , they have introduced dorfwahlen .
china , i think , has some really interesting , ungeschliffene principles -- especially in terms of social capital , public health , a sense of equality that you don &apos;t have in india .
it was a place where people with verschiedenster heritage and various wissensgebieten zusammenkamen and austauschten .
and now they have the problem that they &apos;ve spent all the money to do help with this fortschrittlichen electronics in these countries , and now everything &apos;s unbrauchbar .
a little bit of a strange environment where there &apos;s probably a lot of ideas where people have been more like , interesting , interesting , unvorhersehbare , unvorhersehbare , people are different from .
about a decade or two decades ago , a wonderful stipendiat named howard gruber &apos;s name , and i was las darwin &apos;s notebook .
they erkundigen with their peers , but everybody said , &quot; no , i didn &apos;t think about it .
does that go on the other way ?
in the 1970s , the one percent of the national income in the united states was doing the same .
many of these political factors are roughly in between capitalism , political , umbrüche , who help a group of good insidern , but actually , really , good good for the rest of us .
while you can just see how globalization and technology revolution create global rule of money , it &apos;s much more difficult to rate .
so they invest in the beispiellose amount of time and tools to train their children .
we &apos;ve created the modern sozialstaat .
that &apos;s his little hand .
one of them will die .
and this was a huge enttäuschung for us , because we had a new development .
i think , even places like oregon , where you can take a ärztliche sterbehilfe and you can eat a giftige dose , only half a percent people have ever done .
so long , long , short sense , they came to canada .
but i heard of cancer as most of the most gefürchteten diseases of our time , how do the good thing and the bad news were ?
some articles even go to say that skelettmuskelgewebe is resistant to cancer , and beyond that , not only against cancer , but against it , it &apos;s going to get into skeletal muscle .
16 percent -- that means that there were these nadelspitzengroßen tumors in skeletal muscle muscle , but only 16 percent of the actual get -- what might be able to control muscle angiogenesis , can control the tumors that can be einspannen for the tumor .
it &apos;s a very long hergeholte idea , but i really believe that it &apos;s possible .
and then my translator left me .
she was the girl who aussuchte the other for her team .
and then , in the same , i wrote a letter to my best friends in atlanta , georgia , who had a 11 year-old son .
&quot; what did he say ? &quot;
so the two came to lunch , and we were thrown out of the restaurant .
he had children living in korea , and he found families for them .
they &apos;ve been gekauert over the dictionary .
so i open the window out , looking out , and see how fire the seite of the hotel shoot into the height . the hotel burns .
so we ran into the bathroom , and we took it , and we kept it against our faces and the children .
until the adoption is through . a year ! what does that need ?
this is their kochlehrerin .
this is sydney , who &apos;s going to be three years old .
but there was no evidence .
there &apos;s a little planets , there &apos;s bigger planets , there &apos;s big planets .
but there &apos;s still a lot more to do .
so the question is : is this chemical phenomenon universal , or is it something that depends on the planet ?
and this deeper , gründende , zugrunde point of the point that science is , the way we know it is to redefine new .
okay , we say this is the size of the universe , with all the galaxies , with all the stars , all right here .
thank you very much .
you see , in uganda absinkt and zimbabwe absinkt , russia has gone up to one percent .
they find the highest hiv rates of the world in african countries , and yet they find in senegal , here , the same rate as in the united states .
look at kenya here .
it might be something else , which is a common case of common transmission .
we know that about 106 billion people have ever lived .
it wasn &apos;t just an economic story .
and the result is even more divergence in a more shorter period than it was in germany .
it &apos;s the same way that it &apos;s with institutions .
you just have to eat me . &quot;
he was wrong .
now , i want to end with three questions of the future billion , shortly before , when the united states are losing its place as number one economy in china .
no , we &apos;ll be durchhalten , despite the vast schuldenlast that we &apos;ve been angehäuft , regardless of the evidence that we &apos;ve lost our work and other parts of our historical elans .
niall , thank you .
there are many types of spider spider .
spider silk is almost entirely of protein .
the fibers that can make a single spider are quite diverse .
also , there &apos;s a real potential for the ability to raketenabwehr .
what i want to pay attention is not the meerjungfrauparade , as beautiful as it may be , but to the photos .
you have to have a physical structure .
there are more photos . there are more photographers .
this sounds fremd into our ears , but what &apos;s going on is that 80 percent of the mitwirkenden unterdurchschnittlich has contributed a lot .
the first thing that happens when you &apos;re a problem is that the first goal of the institution , immediately , is where the goal is always changing .
the inventor doesn &apos;t know what the invention is .
there are people in the states , the krampfhaft are trying to figure out , whether they &apos;re journalists journalists or not .
it was made by using their kommunikationsmuster , the use of many of these tools , and no doubt the world intelligence agencies do the same work for the attacks in the last week .
you have kleie , which is probably the gesündeste part of the bread , or the fibers , because it &apos;s just full of fibers , because it &apos;s made out of fibers .
everything is on its place . first plane .
we call it &quot; gare . &quot;
but let &apos;s take the different steps back , under the gesichtspunkt of the possible compounds to a deeper plane -- my search , you know , is going to be a ausschliesslich to ask the answer to the question , &quot; what &apos;s so special about bread ? &quot;
this is transformation , two different things .
and when they &apos;re shaped , they go back to prove they &apos;re alive and they &apos;re developing character .
if you make this bread , you can use any kind of a grain from every beer .
it &apos;s going to be a kind of refrain , as we &apos;re going to work through this talk .
it takes very long time to write these scores , and at the time i &apos;m working on a piece that &apos;s 180 pages long , and that &apos;s a big part of my life , and i &apos;m raufe the hair .
it &apos;s shown by brian mcwhorter , who is an extraordinary artist .
so , that &apos;s a little vorgeschmack of the piece .
what we did -- i had a betty rapacholi , one of my students , and i -- we gave the babies two schüsseln with food : a bowl with rohem broccoli , and a dish with leckeren goldfisch-kräcker .
i mean , in the end of the end , when we look at the babies , they seem quite useless .
and our babies and children are much longer depending on us than the babies of the babies .
the befund is what makes them to change the hypothesis .
now there are two things that are really interesting about it .
boy : that &apos;s why .
so , our consciousness of this thing is extremely bright and vivid , and everything else is going to be dark .
&quot; babies and young children are like the research and the entwicklungsabteilung of the human species , &quot; says the psychologin alison alison alison -- and research on how babies do a lot of information , and make decisions .
if i could just borrow a little demonstration to just a little demonstration , to show the difference -- because it &apos;s actually quite a bit of trivial .
then you repeated this process over and over and over and over and over and over , and it &apos;s going to be coming out there -- in this case , the character is like me , straight .
what we really wanted was the whole human body .
you can &apos;t do that .
here &apos;s a couple of simple scenes that he &apos;s going to come back .
i &apos;m not sure why , but we still did it .
some of the people already use our software to do that , and we &apos;ll soon get some of our stuntmännern to see some big filmproduktionen .
we thought he was just going to balance the balance .
here &apos;s what you learn to go to the töpfchen -- like most of you hope .
but i have to say , i &apos;ll never forget what happened when i was 13 years old .
i &apos;m convinced art and creativity is absolutely crucial to developing empathy .
if you are the lonely , you &apos;re going to be able to be a new york times , then you get hundreds of email . most of what i &apos;m doing today , the berichtet of frustration .
some stories are just classic , but it &apos;s so nachvollziehbar .
it versank . nobody has ever bought it .
there &apos;s a border that we don &apos;t want to cross . what is the solution ?
this is microsoft word , ok . if you want to make a new , you want to make a blank document in word -- that could happen .
but i think there are actually two microsofts .
the other products have been supported by microsoft with an open standard , rather than apple &apos;s apples standard .
and genause , when someone write a hassbrief -- what happens on every day -- i say , &quot; oh , &quot; i started . &quot;
but when i looked at the mächtigeren technologies , nanotechnology , gentechnologie and others in the begriffene world of digital technologies , i made very big worried about the missbrauchspotenzial .
and to put the danger of these new things , we ultimately need to limit the ability to the individuals that basically make the access to the power of power .
i think the challenge we are standing -- i &apos;m very sure that this will happen -- the challenge is , are we going to get these bildungsmaterialien with the background that will be made out of this device ?
and if you build a three-dimensional structure , for example , you have all sorts of incredible properties .
and to give you a sense of the last of a small fund fund -- he belief on 400 million dollars , so that &apos;s quite remarkable .
and if you do the concept of pharmaceutical companies , you can use a much more mächtigere resource -- the resource of market -- use to deliver feedback .
12 years ago , caves began to me , and i was moving my research into this direction .
so wonderful and düstere things .
there &apos;s ice below the surface .
so they &apos;re a langsamere form of life .
it &apos;s actually so much energy in biology in this cave , that there &apos;s actually a large number of höhlenfische .
we can see them .
we realized a few years ago that caves have been a lot of properties that were used to be used by humans and other organisms .
whenever you &apos;re going to be a goal , to its set , to be , you know , certain steps , some struggle , you go .
and so it &apos;s also in archimedes , the great greek mathematician .
fälschungen were painted on it , and it was under starkem schimmelbefall .
so before we could start to digitize the archimdes , we had to take the book apart .
and this is what it looks like .
but by flying electrons around the speed of light , they &apos;ll give it up .
that was a bad idea , because philipp of mazedonien had a son named alexander the great , and she lost the battle of chaironeia .
because at the moment , they &apos;re schränken ihre with urheberrechtsbeschränkungen and so forth .
the original eigentümer of the bottle was one of the most enthusiastischen weinliebhaber weinliebhaber in the 18th century .
i asked myself , 160 dollars for what ?
she has four balconies .
a wiederkehrendes scheme is that many of these things came from japan -- they &apos;ll notice .
i mean , a freihändig , klopapier-freie toilet .
there was an object i couldn &apos;t get in the finger , and that was the 1947er of the cheval .
and i can &apos;t -- call my taste of a banausens -- so it &apos;s not necessarily relevant that i was not impressed , but i wasn &apos;t the only one in that reaction .
at the beginning of this year , a virtual asteroid was sold for the 330.000 real dollar .
the really interesting thing about what is really is that you can measure it .
now , i could develop a game called piecraft by getting a million pies , or a thousand pies .
if it &apos;s real boxes , we can &apos;t do a lot , but in a game we say , &quot; okay . &quot;
and this is absolutely crucial and what &apos;s really is amazing .
and i want to tell you a short story , in 1999 -- there was a video game called everquest .
it &apos;s about how individuelles engagement can be transformed through the psychological and neurological insights that we get when we &apos;re watching people playing .
it &apos;s a kind of versteinerter zahnbelag that &apos;s officially called the zahnstein .
i &apos;m a ellen , and i &apos;m totally obsessed with diet .
there &apos;s hunger in the world , 49 million people and nearly 16.7 million children .
and their farms are big .
it &apos;s the 30 anniversary of genverändertem grain and the big gulp , von mcnuggets , hochkonzentriertem fruktosehaltigem maissirup , the landwirtschaftskrise landwirtschaftskrise in america and the change in the way we were international about agriculture .
this is a bauhelm that i received two years ago . that was one of the most important projects i &apos;ve ever been involved in .
but i &apos;m going to limit to the beginning of the process to three very pedantische .
if we are so good at what we do , we should not be able to create an architectural manifestation that will be gleitet to the kunden- and projektseitigen of the engpässe ?
the architectural practice was , ehlich , was simple .
and this is the actual value of the effort .
the second technology we were using , we use things that you know about the seitenbühnen of a opera .
here you see the ebenerdige configuration .
i &apos;m going to talk about how you get stories , in a little bit of a bit .
one of these projects is about a year and a half .
these are the images that automatically are made .
as long as i wake up , i had the camera around the neck .
you can see a time that shows you the exciting moments of history .
it &apos;s bartenwal . well , it &apos;s going .
a 28-jähriger inhaber of a handy-geschäfts .
a 80-jähriger , umherziehender farmer .
what if you found the truth after one year , what would she do the next 35 years of your life ?
&quot; money deserve and open a business &quot; was the indian straßenarbeiter .
and while he was in the day , he told them he wanted to be , and he had given me a about a zweiprozentige chance .
don &apos;t understand me wrong , and i don &apos;t have the benefits .
with the hand , it &apos;s almost impossible , except in steno , and then communication is limited .
very funny people , if lol means that .
you don &apos;t do that .
if someone had seen a black board from 1993 , the slang would have been a little different since the time of love , but he would have understood what was there .
i &apos;m about the zeitlimit , i wanted to say , if you &apos;re in new york , you can look at the next week at the whitney of the whitney , and also in the bitforms gallerie .
afghanistan is not an existential threat to global security .
and the same thing is true in the troops .
instead , there was a litanei of erstaunlichem optimism .
the diplomats are verschanzen in botschaftsgeländen .
and finally , we have to understand that the secret of what we did in bosnia and kosovo , the secret of our success of our success -- in the very careful , herantastenden kind of our engagements .
rory , you &apos;ve just started to conclude .
so here you see two examples .
this is an example of the same system , on a finger to show you a fundamental way it looks like it looks .
there are also teststreifen , which are eingetaucht , but when they &apos;re betrachen these teststreifen , these are used to be used for a different kind of urinanalyse .
the selektionsproblem . it &apos;s a hard problem i &apos;m not going to be erleutern .
there &apos;s another interesting connection here , and this is that what you want to do is to keep valuable information on a more leiten , which is a bad telefonsystem .
so , i think it &apos;s the minimale food that we probably can do to make things .
and we &apos;ve decided that we should not think about that as much as we should think about the cost , but in terms of simplicity .
there &apos;s a book , which is , &quot; what &apos;s the matter with kansas ? &quot;
so we have to ask ourselves why .
but nonetheless , you don &apos;t interact with people who are not as you are .
so we can think of things like the straßenverlauf .
i &apos;m kidding , but only half , when i say that you will not believe in the hospital if you arrive with a missing limb , without previous cat-scan , mri and orthopädische .
then bell turns out to his students .
within a few years in the late 19th and early 20th century , the doctor who tried to do a diagnosis , the barbier .
so , between the perception of the patient and the physicians in terms of the best medical care , a real contradiction is a real contradiction .
another experience i did in texas , before i went to stanford , influenced me .
the bad news : the exact cause is not that we know . see ? you can do that , we can do that . &quot;
i remember so many large , ausgehölte , verfolgte eyes that are aufschauten to me in this ritual .
some call us entlarver , a rather more unfreundliche term .
in this case , we have this .
to you , in the back , here &apos;s a miracle , &quot; then a miracle happened . &quot;
and there was no way to 1655 .
religious ikonographie .
harder to move the dead to an answer .
my friend simon singh , a teilchenphysiker , nunmehr dozent , wrote the book &quot; the big bang &quot; and so forth .
and now open your eyes .
you can completely open it , and it &apos;s wasserundurchlässig .
but it &apos;s been inspired to me , to think about that , that these guys , at least most , are the most people , what they do for a living .
and everybody was holding it .
you can create a lot of change . you can build roads .
and that &apos;s something that people want to do .
you don &apos;t need any one .
hugo chavez didn &apos;t invent the unzufriedene arbeiter- and middle class in venezuela . he only has it .
and so it &apos;s all going on .
they connect people together .
the reason ? modern medicine is using a 60 years old method .
there &apos;s still a catch .
this is doing this 168 times , over 26 times cheaper , and over 400 times more than our current standardtest for pancreatic cancer .
my experience with the islamic world are quite different .
there &apos;s a character on the spot .
and why does sex have babies to babies , and why babies mean a erotic disaster in relationships ?
because in that , the secret of the erotik is .
so especially important to this description of the other or my self -- this is the same thing -- particularly interesting , is that there &apos;s no bedürftigkeit in the desire .
that &apos;s her dreh- and angelpunkt , that &apos;s biology , the natural instinct .
so , it starts to demand . this is a study of curiosity , entdeckerdrang .
you know there &apos;s a erotischen space that you heard of .
other places in the country have similar rooms .
in a gothischen cathedral , this kind of music is perfect .
ok .
it &apos;s mostly played in some smaller rooms .
so early hip-hop-gruppen have some place .
so i asked myself , ok , is this a model for design , these adaptation that we do ?
thank you very much .
and then he turned to me and said , &quot; that &apos;s on me .
how do we solve the following three problems that i want to do here ?
albert einstein -- i &apos;m just going to talk to someone when i was a talk in princeton , and i met mr. einstein .
what &apos;s life about ? why am i here ?
i &apos;m never reading a speech or a lecture or a lecture .
and it was about 300 people .
he talked about his personal experience .
a french historian said two centuries later : &quot; rarely has a powerful mind with such a great humility of the authority of jesus christ . &quot;
or he was the behauptete .
i &apos;m not going to go through the ermordeten about the selbstmörder .
but for that , you have to sit down about 10 minutes and take a woman into the arm that &apos;s not there .
i never had in .
harvest baby-zähne .
i said , with tears in the eyes , i said , &quot; no . &quot;
2010 : a young woman stands in front of president sirleaf and says , like she and her brothers , her parents died in the war .
we go to rural areas and everything we do , how it &apos;s happening in this room , we create a space .
i failed .
i &apos;d like to look back for 20 years and see that there &apos;s a more girl girl , a ghanaisches , nigerianisches , äthiopisches girl on this ted stage .
lg : happy .
and so , you know , licklider , computers can do the necessary routinearbeit to make insight and decisions .
each interaction will be recorded from all more sensors : your phone , your credit , your computer . it &apos;s a lot of data , and we get the opportunity to understand our own .
this records were human bezugsformate .
by being introduced by a verbesserter process , what would be a job for 40 people over three months , and it became a simple job for three people in 40 hours . all of these are siege .
we should stop looking outside .
for dinner with my wife and the children .
because people say , &quot; shit man , i don &apos;t have a time to be fit ; you want to go to fit .
she became a much more complex dog than i thought .
that impact affects us .
the boom of the national autobahnbaus system gesellte to our problems .
think about fahrradläden , getränkestände .
in the era of katrina , we have more common .
and you &apos;ve all probably done it , and if you don &apos;t , you &apos;ll have to do it .
help me make green to the new black black . help me make sustainability sexy .
so i thought this would be an opportunity to use scratch to do a interactive map for my mother .
but i &apos;m skeptical of the terminus .
in this case , you take a bewegungsblock , put it on a pile , and the pile of blöcken , they put the behavior of the different characters in a game or a story , in this case , the big fish .
when you learn to code , you can code to learn .
when children are creating the victor projects like this , they learn important concepts like variables , but that &apos;s just the beginning .
what i want to talk about today to give you a background is the idea that cars are art .
i want to talk about that .
and i think that this thought that the great car is a soul , very useful . you all know that . you see a car with the first sight . you know how strong it is .
this is one of my favorite lieblingsgemälde that really describes our relationship with the cars .
right ? and they decided it would be cheaper , instead of a studio and six or seven apartments , elizabeth ehemaliges house in malibu .
there was a lot of dialogue .
i think we felt very close to each other day , and we cut apart from the day , and we schmiedeten the concept for the real nature of true teamarbeit and creativity .
we didn &apos;t bring him to boston .
so i &apos;m just a little lab .
now , we have clinical trials in four maus-modellen of this disease .
we don &apos;t have a team of verkaufs- and marketingpersonal that we can actually get to the market .
100 billion is the only number you need to know .
what you need to remember is that we have to do it with a universe with a hundred billion galaxies , with the 100 billion stars .
and what he didn &apos;t explained was why the entropy was ever low .
in contrast to the low entropy of the early universe , although we don &apos;t know the answer to that , we have a good theory that can explain this , if this theory is true , and that the theory of the dark energy .
and so , although the universe will be forever , and it &apos;s gewöhnliche , and ordinary matter and radiation , there &apos;s always a certain amount of radiation , some thermal fluctuations , even in empty space .
but we also give a big fluctuations .
it keeps kühlt .
it &apos;s a rücksichtslose fact of the universe that you accept and not question .
i had never been using a computer .
it was a future i could not accept .
now i want to go out to all of those people , like me , say to the african and the poor who are struggling with their dreams .
no matter what moving i was doing in my real world , i was able to take it through my little device in the digital world , eight years ago .
i took this very literally , i took my fahrradhelm , and i put it a little bit of schieff , which is fine daraufpasste .
the camera is not only the movement of my movements , but it &apos;s also able to understand what things i think is in my hand .
and why just comuter ? we can just play with paper .
all the work you saw in india is about my learning in india .
this is juan carlos , king of spain .
this is going to be the third park in rio , june this year .
again , you don &apos;t have to go deep under the earth to build a stop like this .
let me give you a quick example .
almost every year we have these awful erdrutsche .
we &apos;re under average in terms of the verkehrsstörungen in the city .
a city of the future is a city that nobody has to be a little bit of the ausschließt of this great community , which are cities .
the best answer is to try to reconstruct a darwin model of our artistic and aesthetic preferences .
so the trick of evolution is to make them beautiful , so they ausstrahlen a kind of attraction , so it makes you feel so it just to look at it .
and some of them are too large to use it for the battles .
our powerful reaction to pictures , for the expression of emotions in art , to the beauty of music before the night sky , will be our offspring as the human race exists .
now , it &apos;s a fairly complicated system , but let me try to explain it , and maybe i can simplify it .
so , you can see here , you can see the computer here , and since you can &apos;t see the vibration , we actually actually statten the driver with red leds so that he really can see what &apos;s going on .
let &apos;s see if mark can avoid it .
or for blind people , in everyday devices in household , in education and in the office .
a subtle konditionierungsprozess had started . the implikation that ordinary people don &apos;t hear voices and i heard it , but i heard something that i could not agree with .
my mental gesundheitszustand was a katalysator for diskriminierungen , beschimpfungen and sexuelle übergriffe , and i was said , &quot; eleanor , with cancer , would be better , because cancer is easier to heal than schizophrenia . &quot;
to paraphrasieren chavez , when social change starts , he can &apos;t be more aufgehalten .
and that &apos;s what we &apos;re going through right now .
so what i &apos;m suggesting is that where we should look for life , more than mars , but mars , of course , is a very much more interesting and more interesting place .
and the usual astronomers were full of contempt .
because it bedeuete the way of life that you can live out there , it has tremendous benefits compared to the planet on a planet .
there was another object , this highly aufragende piece of creatures and wasserspeiern and nackten -- pretty much more gruselige things for a little kid .
the first projects were bescheiden , but they took technology and they were turning them into things that people would use in a new way , and perhaps find a new function .
the other thing , the humanistisch is to jawbone , is that we decided to wegzulassen all the mechanical spielereien , this whole nerdzeug , and trying to do it as beautiful as possible .
so we called it y water . so this is another example that &apos;s going to happen in a room with everything in a room : three-dimensional design , the ideas , the design of the brand , it &apos;s all very closely intertwined .
this is my neffe anthony , in switzerland , he had the laptop for a afternoon , i had to take it back again . that was hard .
yves behar : the design of objects , telling stories .
thank you .
my aunt , an incredibly wortgewandte and brilliant woman , was a witwe .
she was the entschlossenste fürsprecherin for women &apos;s rights women i &apos;ve ever heard .
look at these young girls who go to school after säure into their faces &apos;s faces . &quot;
the world that was given to the layma was a world in war .
then the situation will be angespannt .
you have to negotiate .
it &apos;s the people who are growing up in a world where everything is papierlos , and where some of our best conversations have occurred on a screen .
and ultimately , it could mean that they could print their own medicine .
and if you &apos;ve been wondering why that &apos;s interesting , you have to look at the rest of saudi arabia , because it &apos;s a country that &apos;s the middle between the geschlechtern .
maybe some things are bad traditions and they need change .
let me give you an example : in turkey , where i come from which one is a very über-sekuläre republic , we had something that i call a säkularismuspolizei , which is what i call the universities , against verhüllte students .
now , if i was the only person who thinks that &apos;s like that , we would have a problem .
in the 19th century , as muslims europe saw as an example , they were independent , selbstsicherer .
so the e.u. process , the efforts of turkey , the union to join the union , within turkey to support turkey to be a few nichtreligiöse nations in the world .
there &apos;s a very big nose that doesn &apos;t seem to be able to be connected to something .
if scientists are now , a century later , neurons , and then let them light up from the inside , rather than the verdunkeln .
carl schoonover : a way into the inner brain of our brain
but this trend is less clearly .
but for many parts of africa , it &apos;s been formuliert a colleague of mine , &quot; the waffenstillstand on the evening of the morning was on the right time , so the genocide could start on the mittwochmorgen . &quot;
and instead of putting this possibility , local and international leaders were coming to zurückgezogen and ablenken from the second intifada , the events of the 09 , september 2001 , and the wars in afghanitsan and iraq .
institutionelles design requires a strong focus on the problemfragen , innovatives thinking and umsetzung and kapitalkräftige .
the stromatoliten are the hero of my story .
in flat seas , life is early on , and it turned into more complex things .
flamingos moved across continents . the great journey began .
some of the mammals of the mammals go back into water .
every man should have a luxury of anzuhäufen .
but there was nothing for that purpose , so we married schnurrbartwachsen with prostate cancer , and we created our slogan , which is , &quot; the face of the health of the man . &quot;
mo bros from canada , from the united states , and from england mailten and we call us up and said , &quot; hey , there &apos;s nothing for prostate cancer .
and i said , &quot; last year , we &apos;ve been lucky enough to have 450 promi-botschafter . &quot;
this kind of entertainment , men to engage in each age is so crucial and important , and i think that much more important than the funds we collect .
he could see what happened his forest , his environment , because his grandfather took him under his fittiche when he was just two years old , and he started teaching him about the forest and the way of life to teach his people .
when i was thinking about it , i wonder what our grandchildren and our urenkel would answer when they ask the same question .
we need new models to be a leader and human being .
she &apos;s working with people like murali krishna .
a life of all , through all the cultural revolution and everything that came after that , and he collected this way that he has now about eight million pieces in his museum , documenting the contemporary chinese history .
it &apos;s just happening .
my world is subjective .
or maybe he was just a yogi sitting on a rock and anstarrte the sky and the sun and the moon .
and if you lived an extraordinary life , you will get to the elysium , or what the french call it : &quot; the champs-élysées &quot; -- -- the sky of heroen .
and so it comes to these great rituals , where big bildnisse of muttergottheiten are built and angebetet for 10 days .
see , what is business , because other than a result , the behavior of the market and the behavior of the organization ?
look , this is india today . the grundauffassung of reality is based on a zyklischen view .
you know , he &apos;s built the biggest kaufhauskette , she &apos;s called &quot; big bazaar . &quot;
&quot; why i chose this path why i don &apos;t care about the procedures , just get me , please . &quot;
devdutt pattanaik , the eyes opens up the eyes of a new view of the myths of india and the west -- and shows why these grundverschiedenen systems of the gottesglaubens , the umgangs of the death , and the jenseitsvorstellung of the world &apos;s jenseitsvorstellung help us konsequent ourselves .
but you know what ? it &apos;s almost 2012 and the world , &quot; i &apos;m absolutely and absolutely competent , &quot; means to vernichten myself with the schwächsten .
their interest is compared to what ?
their friends and family will be versammeln to the friedhof , and there , on your grave , is a grabstein standing on which says , &quot; here &apos;s an excellent engineer who invented a klettverschluss . &quot;
they &apos;re happy . this is the conversation that mothers and fathers want to hear because their kid is good at math and you know what &apos;s next .
that &apos;s because they -- they know what they are .
i have no patents , and i &apos;ve never got money from a medical school , and i don &apos;t have a point of that they choose .
so how do you know that your breast is a high density ?
ultrasound has more biopsien that lead to the consequence that are unnötig in relation to other technologies , and it &apos;s not very common .
if you find a tumor , as long as it &apos;s a centimeter , the average rate is about 90 percent , but it &apos;s going to have a lot of time in the increase .
the picture of the mbi shows this tumor a lot more , and as a second tumor that has a lot of the patient &apos;s surgical possibilities .
it costs a radiologen of a radiologen years of training to be a subject in which a normal anatomisches detail from a besorgniserregenden .
some women who get breast cancer , a lot of years later , and fortunately , most of them survive .
and there &apos;s been dum da da da da da da da da da da da da there da there &apos;s because there &apos;s a lot of power .
we are starting to gather these physicists into los alamos to see what they &apos;re building .
mill .
they &apos;ve slept in this schulstunde .
that &apos;s a umwerfende vision .
it &apos;s a question of consequences .
so let &apos;s get to the point .
what did i do ? have i heard my belly ?
that &apos;s interesting . this is a different way of thinking .
the homunculus is basically a visualization of a human being , where every body is proportional to the surface , which is in the brain .
that &apos;s white noise .
and it &apos;s probably going to be in your direction .
i did that just to make money .
thank you .
and he told me after a long silence , &quot; i wonder , mathieu , whether people don &apos;t find your bänke fascinating than my videos . &quot;
this is the reason i edward david with david , a scientist of harvard , a object made an object that could be able to capture the toxic elements with these plants .
no , no potatoes , but tomatoes , kräuter and so on .
the other people &apos;s tragedy , you can take easier than your own and i want to just give the beschwingten mind of the conference .
loud malcolm malcolm was &#91; the &#93; kokain-derivat kokain-derivat , crack the gehaltvollere version of tomatensuppe &apos;s downtown .
he was a really interesting sight .
he went back to the second floor and he said , &quot; hey boys .
like mcdonald &apos;s .
think about the comparison to other people &apos;s lebenssituationen , where you can expect a very high risk .
the second reason was that the gang were brilliant in marketing and was betrug .
economists talk about game theory -- that every game for two people has a nash-gleichgewicht .
skysurfing is skydiving with a board on the feet .
extremsport at the same level as here is only possible , if you take step for step , if you really physically physically and work with you .
ue : no . that &apos;s just smoke .
i &apos;m at a while , and i meet scientists .
so i had hope that by einfügte some natural elements , a little bit of fog , i could make the space tangible .
it &apos;s called verhandelbar , that it makes a difference whether you do something or not .
the big mountains in the distance are moving less .
how do we create an idea which is both tolerant to the sensitive and also to kollektivität , without the two in two different directions ?
i spoke about new species of ozeanerforschung , one , which is anzieht to animals , rather than verscheuchen them .
but even more incredible , the material was the most important thing .
take them from the dead and take them from the dead . &quot;
at that time he taught the classic in the trinity college in dublin .
natalie merchant singing old poetry of life .
fremdartiger than a dolphin is barely .
as an adult , when i &apos;m patterson and koko and koko , sue savage-rumbaugh with kanzi and panbanisha , irene pepperberg and alex , the papagei , the papagei , i got excited about it .
vint cerf : ng : how to do this .
we are at the national aquarium , we engage us in the great world , for research and maintain .
we found very quickly , that we created a system that connects people together .
today . this is the first time you talk about this topic .
this is a picture of me and my daughter that we hold on a israeli flag .
&quot; because it works , make a poster with me . &quot;
they came and it was so many , one day i remember michal spoke with a journalist and asked him , &quot; who &apos;s going to see this ? &quot; and he said , &quot; everybody . &quot;
it &apos;s not the israel-liebt-iran-seite . it &apos;s not my side .
and sometimes war is unumgänglich , but sometimes , with a little bit of effort , we can avoid it .
and what we want to do with &quot; yes is more , &quot; to try to question that the architectural avantgarde almost always defined negative , and by who or what we are .
and we saw this guy , haibao , haibao .
and slowly , you start to think that sustainable lives is less fun than normal life .
so let &apos;s go to the expo for the danish hall , and you get a dänisches wheel , and you go on to the other ständen .
it was interesting because she had the morning of nine to 11 to the rettungsplan , and how many billion they should invest in the rescue of the economy .
this is a standardprodukt in switzerland . switzerland there &apos;s a national need for diagonalen aufzügen .
we often do little films often .
what i &apos;d like to talk about is the biggest problems in the world .
but it &apos;s obviously a problem when you &apos;re asking people to focus on problems .
so what i &apos;m really beabsichtige is , really , that we have had a situation for a very long time , where we &apos;ve had a number of choice .
and then you ask , why economists ?
but it &apos;s saying that what we can do about it is very little , too high .
the neuerkrankungen of malaria is belaufen to a few million infected per year .
what &apos;s happening here is we think about our priorities .
it &apos;s a good movie in terms of what i &apos;m going to see , right , but it &apos;s right , but don &apos;t wait to be emmerich in his next movie to casten brad , like he &apos;s gräbt gräbt and something like that .
they had all the same stuff , but they were very much , they could leave the frame of the discussion , and they made it safe to make their own lists .
it makes sense , wealth and greater freedom , is unübertroffen . &quot;
secondly , china has been able to reduce the ungleiche income of income reduction without changing the political framework .
and so , as a result of the other house house , that even though 50 percent of all countries today are democratic , 70 percent of them are repressiv , in terms of what people don &apos;t have rede- or reisefreiheit .
because finally , the question that we can do is to ask us and seven billion other people on this planet is : how can we create wealth ?
the serife is not so right in your place .
we &apos;re going to be interested in what we really care .
it was published six months ago , and you &apos;ve got incredible attention in germany .
you have to make an optimal temperature for growth .
i think it &apos;s easy to human skin , which fascinated me .
but i think it could be a fairly smarte and sustainable ergänzung to our rarer .
chinese workers are not going to be put in factories because of our unersättlichen demand for ipods .
because one person has to spend their time to do a piece of something called it doesn &apos;t mean it &apos;s going to be a piece of something .
and he &apos;s mins sister , and he said , &quot; some understand that . you don &apos;t understand anything . &quot;
this is the coach-portemonnaie that &apos;s min to me on my family &apos;s home to her family .
the taliban are doing a lot of their own schools .
if any kid gets caught up with these rules , it &apos;s going to be punished hard .
if i look at suicide bombers , as i am , or at my age , i feel so inspired by her anschlägen .
and this is going to be there , and there are on enceladus , von , waiting for the hope of the middle future , especially to be ausgestattet to this question .
is the internet actually a place you can go to visit ?
and the landscape is changing . three years ago , when i started to deal with this , there was only a cords along the african west coast , represented here in this map of steve song as a thin black line .
and that &apos;s not really true .
this data , layer upon layer on the device , starting with the base of the product , and that &apos;s layer upon layer upon layer by the new materialschicht process in a additiven process at the old layer .
it was made by ablagerung of layers of about four mikrometern .
a abstoßung is likely .
you can just make it directly in front of the place .
this is what the product is made .
without doubt , i believe that this technology is creating a revolution in production and the produktionslandschaften as we know it .
he was worried that when he called her name , especially outside , in the public , you might think he would be a little bit of a thought of jihad .
they use his rhethorik .
the good news is it doesn &apos;t have to be that way .
but many of these factors that were played in a role are even more stronger than half the work .
i was with my friend susan meiselas , the fotografin , in the valley of valley .
she said , &quot; you know , the poverty was not the bad . it was the erniedrigung and the peinlichkeit of the whole thing . &quot;
think , i &apos;m going to miss the violence or the drugs ? the lack of privacy ?
first , instead of months and forgotten , the time is very much more einprägsamer .
but it &apos;s less likely that they &apos;re still .
and during my first year , i kept my company on .
it &apos;s actually going to say that more energy is required to make a solar cell , when they &apos;re going to get into their entire water .
solar cells collect , but for four hours and a half hours .
and also , they &apos;re under great pressure and so dangerous .
this is a wärmekraftmaschine .
it &apos;s just a little cylinder down here , which has the generator and all the kabelage in it , and this is the hot kappe , the hot cylinder on the top -- that part gets hot , that &apos;s cold , and it &apos;s electricity .
you don &apos;t have to use the hot water , it can also cool .
so here we have a map of the united states .
and we don &apos;t have a geburtsrecht , using this energy as fast as we do at the moment .
we bubbles it and we &apos;ll look at the parts .
it &apos;s a flying laboratory with which we did the measurements in the region of this molecule .
but i continued to write bad poetry and he never gejagt the mathegebäude into the air , but he went to cuba .
so , from unverständnis , great things can emerge -- -- i &apos;m going to draw a picture that &apos;s going to be on my piece .
i &apos;m working for the new york and i &apos;m doing titelseiten , and then the 9 / 11 was , and that was , um , a völliges end of the world as we knew it .
and then , &quot; let &apos;s make you clear . it &apos;s ungebärdig with the tongue , but so we understand it . &quot;
and he decided that his topleute had to be extinct . &quot;
this man is angry because someone verteilt zwiebeln all over his staircase and basically -- you know , zwiebeln seem to be a subject .
and she &apos;s also running out with george gershwin , so i don &apos;t think it &apos;s .
td : since my recent childhood and after , i had a lot of different pflichten , and when i was young , it was always so that my way of vorgezeichnet was already .
it &apos;s beautiful , but we should remember that an interesting process should be going on an inner level .
td : so , you know , lakshmi worked incredibly hard , even for my invitation , not one of the other things that she has been doing so that this happened and i &apos;ve been pretty much a resistent , and i was very nervous during this whole week .
in these two examples , we &apos;ve seen machines that have learned in the simulation , and others that have learned it .
when i say , &quot; we , &quot; i mean the advice for aussenbeziehungen .
but nobody believes that it &apos;s actually going to be very effective if there &apos;s a real outbreak .
the biggest part of the spending in the bush administration is actually more connected with the anthrax and the threat of biowaffen .
we know that the virus will be done , it will be a different virus .
but in the scientific community there &apos;s a hitzige debate about what percentage of the grippeübertragung between people and husten and husten is happening and how much about the hands .
some of the poorest countries that have most experienced in the most experience have lager , lager of the drugs that have already gone .
and i think even our leaders , in this case , would say we have a lot to do .
i &apos;m very happy to answer their questions .
our centers for krankheitskontrolle have developed one of them developed tests -- as fast as a rapid diagnostikum .
and in the world &apos;s population , there were similar bacterial infections that are not a problem either .
not only do you look at how much fun it has , but also how the gewonnene beweglichkeit completely changed the way to interact with a city like san francisco .
please put me a schweigeminute .
i &apos;m going to take a young and a young year-old from a force , and he willigt to sell me three clubs .
i &apos;ve been playing with seilen and climbing , and i &apos;m climbing , so i &apos;m done . i &apos;m 16 ; i &apos;m going to be a drahtseilkünstler .
manhattan is not going to be an infinite .
so , i &apos;m not supposed to straßenjonglieren here , right ?
i &apos;m going to sit in the middle .
she became one , pushed me to the triumph .
because of the überhängenden leaves and the branches , it &apos;s very dark and very quiet .
i and my colleagues of the baumkronenforschung are interested in the dynamics of the baumkronen-pflanzen that live in the forest .
we &apos;re beraten with the media on baumkronen-fragen ; we have a baumkronen-newsletter ; we have mailinglisten .
and then the students have come into our aufnahmestudio , and they recorded their own rapsongs with their own beats .
and our new project is that the inmates and we learn to grow the frog of the rana growing market , which is a highly endangered amphibie amphibie in the states of washington and oregon .
he said , &quot; look what you &apos;ve hidden from you . &quot;
so we look at a rising demand for informationszugang , and that &apos;s why that &apos;s why we look at informationszugang .
they &apos;re not a magician . they &apos;re not our parents .
you have to believe me . trust me . &quot;
and that day , i learned two really important things .
the deeper we go under water , the more the pressure is the pressure .
so i started about 15 years ago .
the air comes out in the air room , when it comes to breathe , the air comes out of the air .
each of these computer can do the entire system , so if two of them are aussteigen , there are still reserves .
but this is what it looks like , and this is a habitat continue to go on and over a lot of miles .
so sharks are not quite dangerous , as most people are going to show them .
when we found it , we weren &apos;t even sure to which family heard , so we called it dr.-seuss-fisch &#91; nach &#93; because he looked like this , as an alien , from one of his books .
the oxygen oxygen caused a krampf and it ertrank .
this means that every one of them is at least one kid who &apos;s suffering from a entwicklungsstörung .
and his communication and social interaction have been so markant to go to a normal school , and even a karate-superstar .
it &apos;s something like life : once you &apos;re only in it , you can &apos;t be out again .
i know you &apos;ve never heard of him . but you know , you know , one day , one day you &apos;ll hear you hear from him because he &apos;s an amazing man . &quot;
nk : no , he died 25 years ago .
he had a lot of love , he loved everybody .
we all of us , what happens when a ursuppe is hydrogen and helium , so long as long as it starts to ask yourself about their origins .
these extremophilen evidence that life can exist in many other environments .
so you have to learn the diversity , the incredible scale of life on the first step , to be able to connect to a contact with life in all of the time .
so , silicon becomes so important as aluminium , and we will expand it into the future by expanding it to 350 feet so it &apos;s sensitive and to have the moore &apos;s law of increasing power power .
and then we &apos;d like to look for the automatisierte search for human denkstrukturen .
a lot of people say it &apos;s the best place in the world to study the development of climate change .
each cylinder is a parfait of time .
while you hantieren with the ice , you &apos;ll take a extra pair of gloves into an oven so that you can wear a new pair of wear when your arbeitshandschuhe gefrieren and your fingers are steif .
i think that &apos;s a little bit of wirtschaftsgeschichte .
and our soldiers are not going to be happy to schieben pipelines in the weitwegistan watch when they actually have to be gemeldet to service to beschuetzen american buerger .
you can still push that , and efficiency almost verdreifachen the efficiency with some funktionstechnischen improvements and that the major size of the big oil industry .
we could build up the bigger cars , which would be made to security , but easily should be .
but instead , they sell it to china and japan because we have handelschranken to protect our maisbauern and the other .
and that is by taking the step into the guenstigen of these materials , or in this case , to make ultraleichten stahlsorten , as good stuetztechnologie , the militaer , the same thing that it can do the same as the internet internet has been gewandelt .
it can &apos;t just be a giant sexistische conspiracy .
there were two kinds of negative feedback that we get .
let &apos;s hope it &apos;s really stable .
hoppla , i &apos;m wrong .
and he ended up with a kunsthändler , a dutch kunsthändler named gordon van , who sold a wonderful vermeer , who would be a prize , which is now about 10 million dollars today .
according to his biographen , he looked like he had discovered the first time there &apos;s bad in the world . &quot;
&quot; it comes on . what is it ? &quot; is a good answer .
but how attractive they find them how much they are sexually or romantic , depending on what they think they &apos;re looking at .
but each one of these three objects has value beyond what it brings you , because of its story .
but i don &apos;t want a copy , even if i can &apos;t see the difference .
so he took joshua bell to take his millionen-dollar-geige on a subway station in washington d.c. , to put it in a corner and see how much money he will take .
the second shock of shock is less than a little bit of it .
and if you &apos;re weiterlesen , you can see that there &apos;s perhaps a kind of political wertigkeit .
they were prahlt by the fact that she &apos;s a zertifiziertes , professionelles member of the american verbandes of ernährungsberatern , which sounds very glamorous and exciting .
and what you find is , of course , people who eat vegetables and olive oil they have less hautfalten .
the placeboeffekt is one of the most amazing things in the world of medicine .
it &apos;s a vorgefasster ending when you give a drug in such a high dose of side , that it &apos;s going to be more side effects , and you &apos;ll look at your new drug .
the great trials are closer to the real answer .
that &apos;s a problem that there &apos;s currently not a solution .
and very soon they started to start this coal , 2,000 people around 2,000 , zugwagon around zugwagon , bootsladung around bootsladung , back to china and all over the world .
can you imagine what you would feel when you were in my position ?
it &apos;s all about oil ; you know that , all of you know .
there &apos;s this thing , the militarisierung of the world , and that &apos;s right from the middle of the united states .
and what do you see ? they &apos;re christians .
man , the americans , are kind of like , &quot; oh , kreuzzug .
these christians are bekloppt .
it &apos;s a verallgemeinern . it &apos;s wrong .
and the soldiers are chinese , and everybody else are chinese .
can you imagine , maybe one of them , you know , and maybe you get off to his kid , and she got a umarmt and said , &quot; honey , i &apos;m back to go back .
everything has changed .
and all of this has had tremendous impact in the world .
i think thomas jefferson did really well in words .
so for the hollywood-menschen in the audience , you can explain to explain why action-filme a greater budget have as a komödien . it &apos;s because action-filme lighter in other languages and cultures , so the market is bigger for these films .
but it will happen within this century .
this is not the u.s. health of the united states , which is going to be about a million , but gdp per capita -- 200,000 dollars .
also , as anyone here knows -- it &apos;s about energy , not oil .
my choice is the peak of a life obligation that started with the growing alabamas on the florida-halbinsel .
a lot of our actions on this planet that are related to our living environment is that &apos;s just motivated by faith and a raten .
one has been for thousands or millions of years .
we need to calm down before we ruin the planet .
e. wilson : saving lives on earth , on earth .
another schlüsselart is the famous european auerochse .
the passenger pigeon has 1.3 billion base cells .
the way the path was going to fall into that category .
real falcon , from lightly , frisierten .
there &apos;s a program that &apos;s a program that &apos;s just brilliant .
this is an emotional topic . some people have stood up .
my grandmother was a hausfrau .
i also made my own comic books , and that was another way to tell stories , by words and through images .
and we sat around and sat around , and in silence , and he said to me , &quot; you &apos;re really talented . &quot;
use your own style . draw , how you tell you .
&quot; rather , i &apos;d like to get your postkarte .
i &apos;m going to publish a book book called &quot; platypus &apos;s police squad : the frog who croaked . &quot;
sound is constantly affecting us to be constantly , psychological , cognitively and verhaltensbezogen .
this is a 32 million pounds of expensive , bedeutendes universitätsgebaude , which was built in england recently , designed by a british stararchitekten .
but it &apos;s not only children who are affected by this .
people who are saying , don &apos;t sit the team next to this team because the noise like the noise and the other ruhe .
&quot; upwake , &quot; a story tells you about zero , a contemporary man , who &apos;s his life in a suitcase , and the zwischen and realität reality , and not able to enträtseln them .
344 frames and four and a half years later , what was a solo-show began to act a gemeinschaftsarbeit of neunzehn talented .
i know theater connects us .
now , the time we can use the diversity of our talents to create an intelligent , important and extraordinary piece , and übertreffen .
if you look around in the bathroom , you &apos;ll see some products more , like shampoo , spülung , anti-falten-creme , anti-falten-creme , körpercreme , but also zahnpasta .
injizierbares collagen -- or , since the &apos; 70s , collagen of pigs -- it &apos;s used to inject it in fold .
in total , i &apos;ve found a lot of 185 products .
and i said , &quot; my love , i &apos;m afraid you &apos;ve got a long and a half year before you . &quot;
i told you , you should be like this : &quot; i &apos;m somebody .
they gave me the feeling to be someone , in a time i felt like a nobody .
they &apos;re just working on the ninth copy , so she started in a 1930 , and now she reached the letter .
hundreds of verbs can behave .
you can see that as the language of thought , or &quot; mentalese . &quot;
so the puzzle is why is the bestechungen , the höfliche requests , ersuche and drohungen so often ?
you can try to imagine what would be if language could only be used in literally .
and the other puzzle is that i don &apos;t have a problem with this .
here &apos;s my argument . is it sustainable ? is it good ?
it makes it gegnerisch . it &apos;s polarisierend .
what realization they won &apos;t come to convince me ?
all these different roles , can you imagine a argument that you &apos;re going to be in , but you &apos;re sitting in the audience and watching you &apos;re over the course ?
or -- and this is the most part of the thing for me : we want it to hinausführen us into the world of nature . we bring a design-herausforderung and find the master of the adaptation in nature that could inspire us .
that changed everything . from there , these engineers were not zurückzubringen into the boat .
here &apos;s the opposite -- here &apos;s how we make things .
this is the sandia national laboratory .
that would be hochinteressant for fuel cells if you could go without a platin .
it &apos;s not easy , because life is just using a teilmenge of the elements in the periodensystem .
feeling and respond to feedback is very important .
what you don &apos;t see is not counting .
my first business was a schneiderei . i started under the taliban .
in south korea and indonesia , nearly half a million companies are in the middle of the country .
because , as the weltwirschaftsforum , smaller geschlechterkluften are wirtschaftlicher to the verbesserter of economic wettbewerbsfähigkeit .
and the world are not exceptions in all the world .
the people jubelten whether this entzückung and this is a wonder .
i &apos;ve got a klecks bio-joghurt , selbst cows on my arbeitsfläche , and i &apos;d like to use a paper towel to make it aufzuwischen .
first , we were abgerissen .
what does that mean ?
and when i started to engage me with them , i found that they have incredibly good adapted .
but the researchers had a problem .
until they finally went out and leaving the campus -- and certainly happy to come there -- some time later came back and found that the crows still remembered .
we &apos;ve found that they &apos;re really smart and they can teach them .
and for example , a squirrel would come out , go for the erdnuss and go again .
but there were three problems , three mysteries i couldn &apos;t solve , and i want to talk about that , but more importantly , i found a lösungsvorschlag .
who would ever hire me ? &quot;
and imagine what could happen , because every region has something to offer .
let me make it connection .
you know , there &apos;s the future in the future , and you need to understand that .
that &apos;s a lot of vereinfachend .
oh yeah , i &apos;m going to be the johnny appleseed of the notes .
at about 10 million phagen .
and over here , we see the words of the israeli israel meisner , &quot; how the hand ergreift the penis in a way that reminds of masturbationsbewegungen . &quot;
and she said , &quot; yeah , but i &apos;d rather be eating by the end , if you don &apos;t have anything against it . &quot;
i said , &quot; you should do an experiment .
he had a line in his book that he was supposed to be out of the habsburg-monarchie . there was a kaiserin maria theresia that had trouble in the pitch .
so now , you have an evolutionary excuse .
she said -- i have to read you what she said , because i find it so beautiful .
i think that &apos;s very unfortunate . not because i want to use it . i wanted to see him .
and that &apos;s actually the beginning of our story .
now i would have thought to this moment , that at age 50 , one of the skills i really had , was to bind my shoes .
first of all , i have to tell you that i &apos;m not here .
yes . the artist doesn &apos;t seem to know the right so it &apos;s to be hinmalen the different colors .
but i can see in their faces , they &apos;re still a little bit skeptical .
it &apos;s called &quot; unbenannt , &quot; and i think that &apos;s appropriate .
after a while i decided to have a little bit fun , and before i left the room in the morning , i would go back a few things in the room .
and now they &apos;re all in here .
my dad was one , my youth was so much interesting .
that song as a mere fact .
and i &apos;m looking at it , &quot; wait a good moment , i &apos;ll just put the wheels . &quot; from the reinem of the protest , i bought the auffälligen wheels , and i built them and -- watch them . could i have my sonderbeleuchtung ?
it sounds simple , but i think we have a riesenproblem in general in our society and culture .
he had designed the sonden themselves , and he was really proud of it .
human , i love that thing .
the consequences of a planet that &apos;s already seven billion people .
and he was very proud of the bequemen seat , the real seat seat he had given his triumphwagen to his triumphwagen , and the beautiful stofffransen around the seat .
intent -- life with intent -- consciously living , the original thing to do something better .
i saw the healthy mass of a left deltamuskels , and i was trauerte , trauerte all of the time i hadn &apos;t done , but not possible .
then i started asking how many times before my life would have been different , if this man had not injured me , if my genes had a different part of experience .
i was , but i was now despite a gehbehinderung myself and i , so i suspect , i was making myself myself .
i had a lot of einfacheres to take this türkische dessert against four words and make me back to my way .
he spent six months in prison , lost his lkw-führerschein for a decade .
yes , contrast .
we &apos;re working with the machine perception laboratory at the university of california , san diego .
first , the perception of people , and second , a natural interface , a natural form of the control , so that interaction will be intuitive to the robot for them .
and yet , i made this idea .
after i &apos;ve seen these economic danger , i thought we have to find a solution to this problem .
some people have even referenzen to the speakers , like in nathan myhrvolds &apos;s way , or the one of tim &apos;s who &apos;s been looking at the times as a single day .
i don &apos;t know a tedtalk that involves this .
this time i paid 25 cents because i found the job was a little bit more difficult .
and yet , there was one thing that all were safe , the expansion had to slow down .
keep the mystery of the dark energy in the back of the back of the back , because i &apos;m going to call them three schlüsselfakten of string theory .
the kandidatenliste went up to about 10 .
and he worked for decades to explain this number , but he didn &apos;t succeed , and we know why .
each of these universes has additional dimensions .
because the astronomers of today , by turning powerful telescopes to the sky , discovering a handful of hochinformativer photons -- a sort of kosmisches telegramm , billions of years .
now , i want to be honest with you , and tell you that most of it is just a trick , but a trick that actually works .
remember , it &apos;s the first time you meet it . we want to really engage and do it more and more .
he said , &quot; go , milo . she &apos;s zertritt . &quot;
pm : that &apos;s dimitri &apos;s right now .
we don &apos;t know anybody .
the next moment the phone doesn &apos;t work anymore , the tv is , the bewaffnete men are straßensperren .
it was a very düsteres meeting who had been working on the war , the staff of philanthropy , and of course the brave , people of the sarajevo themselves .
when i asked why i &apos;m going to keep doing the story why i &apos;m going to stay in it , that &apos;s the reason .
but it &apos;s my profession this statement of abzulegen , and that &apos;s the krux , the core of the thing , for us .
even before a goal seems to be mit , cursor cursor soll. , the aurora versucht to find the goal , no matter where it is .
basically , we trainierten the animals , so they learned to control these avatare and study objects in the virtual world .
in an experiment we did some years ago , we went to the limit .
so , we start in china .
so , dai manju finished the unterstufe .
please raise your hand .
the last reason has to do with that women are part of the solution , not the problem .
in the niger , in the average , one of seven women in the birth of a child dies .
it became part of the solution , not the problem .
larry summers , when he fungierte to the world &apos;s bank bank , once said , &quot; it can be good for investment in education in the developing world &apos;s highest rentabilität . &quot;
this is bill easterly &apos;s book .
and that was the spring of a bird .
this whole wirbel to one of our wesensmerkmale tells us that there &apos;s a klärungsbedarf .
and even this picture makes the idea of being zurechtgebastelt , and it &apos;s been zurechtgebastelt -- like something from the barnum &amp; amp ; bailey .
one of these ways we could have gotten away in small familiengruppen .
they put their pfeilspitzen and say , &quot; i want to share this pfeilspitzen with the last arrows , and we share 50 to 50 . &quot;
there are places on this island where you can meet all three or four miles on a new language .
if 27 individuals put themselves on a table , they put their 23 languages , and they just tell you a simple economics that they need an army of 253 übersetzern to be prepared for all the paarweisen possibilities .
but it doesn &apos;t tell us that she also had language .
and what i &apos;m most interested is the invisible space between a text and the same picture , and how the image is changed through the text and the text through the picture .
these are transatlantische unterwasser-kommunikationskabel , which are running across the bottom of the atlantic ocean and connecting north america .
they turn the negative .
but by the impression of phantombildern , polaroids , fahndungsfotos and gegenüberstellungen , the zeugenaussagen can change .
larry youngblood was eight years of a 10 year-old -jährigen sentence in arizona , for entführung and wiederholten boys in a jahrmarkt boy .
before that people are left themselves .
and they brought them to texas for us here .
and now , you &apos;re going to go with the iss where you &apos;re in this moment .
it &apos;s just the long of the space that makes it look like this , when it &apos;s not a time .
so something called addicted to a feeling : the pursuit of happiness and human design .
it &apos;s partly the legacy of freuds , the pessimisten , which is hard for happiness for vergebliche , and it &apos;s been pushed by infantilen aspects of the individual and could be found in reality .
a hauptpunkt in science of happiness is happiness and unglück are not a endpunkte in a closed continent .
it starts in the ventralen world .
here &apos;s a three weeks old baby .
in the animal kingdom , there &apos;s only one way to increase status , that &apos;s a dominance .
i want to conclude with some of the people .
why should you choose rats ?
once the rat got that , we make a little bit .
you can actually cure yourself , even in people who are hiv hiv-positive .
and with the knowledge that a patient who &apos;s going to be able to get microscopic to 15 people -- 15 healthy people -- a year , they can be safe that we &apos;ve already saved a lot of lives .
here we see neurons .
so this is important for imitation and emulation .
now the question is , if i just watch another person touches , why am i not confused , and i literally saw this berührungsgefühl of your naked watching , how someone &apos;s touched ?
thank you . i have two of these things here today .
i &apos;m actually not going to go to the pflanzenvermehrung , but the pollen itself .
all these images were taken by a rasterelektronenmikroskop photograph in the lab of kew laboratories .
even every single one of us has a story of telling us the pollenfingerabdruck .
we need to be as good as the breast cancer campaign to address this crisis .
right at the time of the 1980s , when we kept on and death to women and death from heart disease , they wrote an article for the new england journal of medicine and called the yentl-syndrom .
our colleagues in washington , d.c.
we decided , &quot; let &apos;s look at this . &quot;
unlike computertomographie , röntgen , thallium , for women , their busen behindert . every time we anordnen something that includes a small amount of radiation , we ask , &quot; is this test really necessary ? &quot;
okay , here we started .
they &apos;ve done what they said they were fürsprache , and they &apos;ve been kampagnen .
the cells have something like heimweh , and in a shell , they don &apos;t touch it .
what does that mean ?
in the course of three years , we took eight hours to 10 hours , collected about a viertelmillion hours of mehrspuriges ton- and bildmaterial .
this is one of the first fazits that came out of a year ago , which was really surprising to us .
and so , the end of my son is just playing in a gehhilfe .
three of the most important people in this project philip decamp , rony kubat and brandon roy , are here .
and there &apos;s a fascinating dynamic in play .
this is the first time our son made more than two steps on one time -- captured in the movie .
and that &apos;s an important question , because the better we can understand how the brain is generating , the better we can communicate , and i think the better we can think and work together .
it &apos;s a kind of center where you see a picture and think , &quot; oh ! i have a strong or emotional response to the person . &quot;
what we literally do is , our teams , anzuweisen the entire strategieplan to a big wall .
this is the first house i built .
it &apos;s not just about sanitation , but it &apos;s also the possibility of being entspannung .
so , they don &apos;t build it .
if you translate that into the industry industry , if you have a fensterwand and you have a window , we &apos;ll say , &quot; oh no , that &apos;s broken , that &apos;s got to be fixed .
that &apos;s the difference .
so we &apos;ve got to go .
are we just stupid ?
you can see it in two years when you read eight hours a day .
so you can hereinstolzieren in september and say , &quot; i &apos;m important today .
why don &apos;t you do that , and why don &apos;t you do that ? &quot;
and the police are waiting for the eintreffen of the fire fire to cut the vehicle in pieces to get the body of the driver .
and that &apos;s enough to the presence of the dollarschein in the united states , where an eye of the divine fügung .
all this leads us to -- computersucht , just to give this one : what we &apos;re doing most is using digital devices .
this is the consequence of the destruction of more than a third of the brain on the right side of the stroke .
that &apos;s a very , very low level to be released from the healthcare system .
he then held my jaw in the right position while he was kieferorthopädisch my teeth .
alfred man is a brilliant physicist and an innovator , who is fascinated to conclude the gaps in mind , whether he &apos;s hearing a deaf hearing , or a blind that can see , or a paralyzed .
now i had to go in the dark years , and find out what i stayed when everything that made that special was gone .
and it works . it works .
lp : so if you have the opportunity , you spend time with simon .
and these were the developing world : they had large families and relatively short life .
and these are on this side . a large überlappung of africa and the one that &apos;s a big überlappung of africa .
and then deng xiaoping came and brought money to china , and brought the country back to a middle .
a search search that we can copy the data into a durchsuchbares format and then published the world , and what do we hear when we look around ?
but this is what hypotheses .
you know , darwin &apos;s explaining life after it came out , what was the essence of life ?
and there i learned francis crick .
but there were some of the things in literature .
we weren &apos;t the best chemists in the room .
i was chosen , i was unhappy ; my girl didn &apos;t get married .
so you can basically take dna of dna and compare to the dna of the segmente .
and so i &apos;ll leave it by telling you that we &apos;ve looked at 20 people with schizophrenia .
in fact , defense , in fact , is the defense of the case of two million dollars , and it takes 18 months when they win .
one , fighting the only thing against the patent but against the verstoß .
my solution : give me this patent , and i will leave you with a trollbeschwerden .
&quot; why not ? &quot; they asked girls .
the fathers were in a place where they move their daughters to play , and they could herausrücken their chairs and reach their hand to the dance .
that &apos;s a great technology .
it &apos;s not very much left left in the world .
it can &apos;t survive for a long time in humans .
you can &apos;t see the enemy , and we had a different way of trying to eradicate polio than we did it with smallpox .
it helped control , pandemische grippen , sars for example .
the reality of polio today is something very different .
and yet , the impossible is happening .
bill gates : well bruce , where are the most difficult places in your mind ?
bruce aylward : how we are endgültig polio to death
dj : we found this individualismus now in all sorts of animals , especially in the cats .
and to our surprise , it became a kultfilm .
for us , this elephant in many ways has become a symbol of inspiration , a symbol of this hope that we &apos;ve been accompanied with our work .
it was incredibly amazing when she took it to security to protect it from the hyena .
and of course , when i look at these löwentatze , which was gehäutet , they reminds me of a human hand , and that &apos;s ironic because it &apos;s in our hands .
we need it . we respect and celebrate each other as a man and woman , as a community and as part of this planet , and we need to go on .
it seems obvious to be obvious that the earth is large and bewegungslos , the sun and beweglich , but it &apos;s worth remembering what wittgenstein is anmerkte .
and that &apos;s because there &apos;s always the luftwiderstand .
nature &apos;s so much of this model depends on what kind of animal we are .
because there &apos;s so many of them , and because between you don &apos;t have any consensus on your favorite bewegungsrichtung , verharrt of the marmor , as we see it in middle world , unbeweglich and fest .
people as machines might be able to treat the scientific and philosophisch , but it &apos;s a hinderliche time of time when you want to guess what the next person is going to do next .
i was tetraplegiker at night , at the stummen age of 40 years .
over a mauszeiger , i &apos;m going to be able to see these satellite data , i allow these satellite to see video from the robot and send them to send back to the buttons in a web-browser .
with the help of people like you can do this dream .
in the suburbs , for example , a regelrechtes lexikon of the delphinsprache is actually developed by the radarstrahlen that are using the dolphins .
i think together , we can form a global community .
this is a hot trending topic .
now there are some -- there are some lessons that you can learn from it .
but we don &apos;t normally do this .
i think we tend to look at this : the infrastructure of globalization .
that &apos;s down to 12 to 15 percent .
this is a problem we need to solve .
i also take most of you , too , chinese -- what &apos;s really sad , when you think that this is the most common language in the internet .
what look at you ? maybe we should do that .
if you look at this image , you might think , &quot; why should i care at all ? &quot;
but there are all these different techniques that allow you to go out and look at the world and find its place in it .
they would make wealth and security , overcome violence and make sure that states will never gewährten the terrorists again .
and part of this activity is honesty .
what is that ?
i love this dish .
and the war that auslöste 20 million people living in life -- until the world &apos;s civil war in the world .
lem sen , who is this guy , &quot; i would have made all of this money , but i spent all these time looking for the american man who had stolen my prescription .
chinese restaurants did largely the same thing , i would argue , with the menü and the dekor -- even the restaurant name -- but without a central headquarters .
in contrast , we have general tso chicken that started in new york city in the early 1970s when i was in the early &apos; 70s , and i was starting to start in the early &apos; 70s .
so what we see in the 17th century 18th century is the fortgeführte search for medicine &apos;s abseits of kampfer that creates the same thing .
so people would have a really big anfall .
when the überweisungen began to become less , i was clearly depressiver , and i was clearly depressiver , until i thought my god , i can &apos;t work anymore .
do you remember having a child to go to each line ?
at 18 and 19 , i slept the night .
again , i &apos;ll get a little depressed and a little bit of obsessiv .
so many of us are clear that it &apos;s a lot to do in the next few years , and we &apos;re building a better world .
he goes around : &quot; how does it feel to be free ? &quot;
you know . where did the world work together the treatment of the problems that were caused by the potential of earthquake and climate change ?
if you do the impossible , you can do it .
but we &apos;ve reached an agreement to climate change .
and it was crying .
the seideraupe does something remarkable : it uses two ingredients , proteins and water that are in their spinndrüse to create a material that &apos;s extraordinarily hard , like a technical fibers like the kevlar .
or you know , beautiful things like this , if the camera can capture it .
here you see how it &apos;s taken from the tissue .
so with my new project , marilyn monrobot , i &apos;d like to use art for creating technology .
there &apos;s also a microphone that the united will say and the round of applause and the buh-rufe -- hopefully not -- to help him make some of the next decisions .
what do i do ? &quot;
in the frame of the unprecedented , heather knight , a roboter-bühnenkomiker roboter-bühnenkomiker , who can go far more than einzeiler herunterzuleiern -- he &apos;s collecting the feedback of his audience , and he &apos;s like his behavior the answers to the amount of things . working this thing ?
stanley milgram , inventor of the known as six degrees of separation , vermutete in the 60-er and 70-ern , that there was only one connection between two people who have a connection between only five to seven steps .
how does our view changes the relationship with all the verstreuten groups ?
there was a vorkommnis that i &apos;m going to tell you and where he might have to put this one in the ear .
um ... my dad , a geheimagent ?
it was his father , who decided they needed false papers .
that sense of the life of the life , despite his young age of 17 years , and also his fault , his fault , his fault , because he was out of a camp while his friends were left , he kept his whole life .
and while my halbschwester and my halbbruder , in my life , i would say , sort of , waisen , my father fertigte .
i asked him , given the victims he had brought to whether he ever had ever been bereut .
we &apos;re growing by a few million people on the seven billion people we &apos;re in .
the arctic , a beautiful system , a regulierendes biom , at a klimawandelschlag level , which is a klimawandelschlag after the next einsteckt , which seems to be a good state .
if you go down the forests , the border on the landnutzung line , you have the capacity of the klimasystems , stable .
with the realization of tourbetreibern , fishermen , the australian great barrier of reef and scientists , the great barrier of reef is verdammt under the current state of the current .
but the drama is , of course , that clearly that kleinschrittiger is not an option .
and that leads me to another reason why i &apos;m here today , because i really like media media .
this is a überrest of a race of a long developed unterhaltern .
first he uses an ancient way to make the relief and connected this with a three-dimensional perspective , which was a new technology at that time .
and through the course of sugar in black paper , i made portraits of them .
it became very big images , and i took them with a very big camera on a camera camera .
my interest in schauspielerei , particularly bad enough , is enough .
and then , on the back , there &apos;s a sequence that happens to chimpanzees .
we can ask : is there a more common difference between africans and nichtafrikanern ?
and then you can compare it to the genome from now living people .
we can then ask ourselves the same questions , like neanderthals : have you mix with ancestors of people who are now mixed with people ?
there are a lot of people who designed their own vision , for example , this vision of the beginning of the 20th century .
and after my belief , the plane of the future has its own consciousness .
imagine , imagine , growing in 3d printer , and they &apos;re embedded in a kunststoffmatrix , and the forces that occur in their components .
they didn &apos;t speak . but they were extraordinary isolated from the world around you , from your environment and from the people .
they would be zurückweichen . they would call the police .
now , we know that it &apos;s about one of a hundred .
you see a video of a video .
you feel that the research that you &apos;ve been dealing with is actually able to have a effect on reality , that you can actually prevent those experience that i started with my way in this area .
you pick up .
zuallerst , you verkrampfst yourself in a stare of body körperhaltung -- chin auf on the brustbein , arms gelegt on your reservefallschirm .
they did everything in the same way we taught them .
and after the battle , they put this mobile in the day and do what you call &quot; nachbesprechung , &quot; to teach you what you did wrong .
and people also have changed .
i said , &quot; where &apos;s it ? &quot;
that &apos;s not a kinderspiel .
and she showed the left piece to say , how problematic this image was , it was zusammenhing for them to the idea of black represented .
it &apos;s really in this sense of enteckung that i have a new set of questions that i &apos;m doing .
now , that &apos;s kind of an obvious statement .
and the kids said , &quot; how should we do that . &quot;
i think they &apos;re trying to multiply numbers .
so i said , &quot; how long did you deal with this before you decided that you didn &apos;t understand anything ? &quot;
their punktezahl increased up on 50 , which is what fine feine schools do to neu , mit , using a ausgebildteten biotechnology .
it was 76 percent . when you test , two months later , the result was 76 percent .
after eight ted talks , he wanted to be leondardo .
this is a 10-jährige .
suddenly i looked out of the darkness , in the gegenüberliegenden side of the space , a glitzern of mirror that were bestrahlt off the moon .
if i had to reduce the whole story of a picture , what would it be ?
now , i &apos;m going to show you some of the time from my other big project in this year , &quot; the tempest &quot; -- the storm .
and our little life ends up in a sleep .
bono : they &apos;re mythologien .
i know you understand that .
so blue , blue , everything was blue .
i want to tell you two stories . both of them are playing in africa .
it &apos;s another one that &apos;s going to be acting on the interface of health and business .
let &apos;s use the markets as the empfindlichste spürgerät that we have , and we find out what price people would pay for that , so they would have the election .
thank you .
the faustregel , if my mother couldn &apos;t understand it , then we couldn &apos;t use it in the video .
we destroyed two klaviere and 10 tv .
the little neigte of the little neigte , and then remove it from its tracks , and that was a problem .
this is all good . it &apos;s getting slowly .
i &apos;d like to show you a video of a few of the models i work with .
tissue of berechenbarer density and behavior is the second part , and that &apos;s actually going to be the key to using these models for wirkstoffforschung .
thank you .
trying to fly you just as an attempt to shoot an arrow to the gefederten end , and it was hard work , and it was hard work , and young , boy , i learned a lot of respect for nature .
now let &apos;s look at the other side .
we &apos;re working on projects -- even more flügelschlagenden developments , such as schwärmer -- with darpa , the california institute of technology and the university of los angeles .
be careful , just like wood , or something like that .
now i didn &apos;t try to be besserwisserisch .
they go forever .
these are two billion .
it requires him for about three years of sonntagen .
don &apos;t forget that one of the day .
but for me , it &apos;s great because it &apos;s a metaphor for the time we live in the human mind and machines can be able to win .
i clearly got mass . where does it come from ?
it &apos;s too afraid that the way in the wild world could go extinct in 20 to 30 years .
all the evidence is deuteten to it that this cancer is being carried from a virus .
i took the opportunity to come and i took some samples from jonas &apos; tumor and some samples from other parts .
she brought him to the tierarzt and this discovered something ekelhaftes .
ultimately cancer is a unvermeidbare consequence of our cells to share and adapt to their environment .
and i &apos;m not alone .
and this is a global phenomenon .
they would be draufzahlen to wait for it .
and that &apos;s the third reason for why a low expectation doesn &apos;t make us happy .
but they didn &apos;t feel that the numbers they were zutrafen .
i &apos;m going to show you the durchschnittswerte of the optimism bias .
but the good news is our illusion is not going to break if we &apos;re aware of this hangs .
but what we &apos;re going to see in the 21st century is asia , the gradually back to harbor over half of the world &apos;s population and do the half of the global performance .
you could look at this as the privatisierung of the kriegs .
after july the last sputnik had hochschossen sputnik , it said , &quot; this is the end of america . &quot;
when you live in japan or new delhi or hanoi , your point of china &apos;s going to be a little different than if you &apos;re in beijing in beijing .
and when we have strategies , we will bring this into a wider historical context , we will be able to do this process .
how define our national interests , so it &apos;s not just a nullsumme ergibt. , but the positive sum of the sum .
this is the conventional approach .
it typically has the responsibility to entsenden the responsibility to guarantee a stable sicherheitslage .
they depend on the long .
jobs for who ? especially young men .
after most of the time , the law system has collapsed , you can &apos;t even get access to it .
that would be the way that we would care about the conflict , government , government .
this is the silhouette of my hometown new orleans .
the military has it , they call climate change a gefahrenfaktor , the security and stability , as governments debate in the world , as respond to respond .
it allows you to make more productive , so that you can actually afford the insurance .
these are certainly inspiring examples of possible solutions , if we feel in the position to plan a ändernde world .
listen to how chinese english students are learning english by screaming .
teacher : perfect ! student : perfect .
and that includes things like the concrete world with klassifikationen auszukleiden , abstraktionen , which we try to make logical consistent , and we take the hypothetical seriously , and we &apos;re also asking questions about what might be like what &apos;s going on .
and the luria looked at people before they eintraten into the scientific age , and he found that these people were resistant to a klassifizierung of the concrete world .
and then , &quot; luria said , &quot; the north pole is always snow .
they chose albany instead of new york .
it was not just the distribution of cognitively anspruchsvollen .
would you have been being killed ? &quot;
you could say , a halbkreis .
it feels like i landed in a colony of the angels . &quot;
and they were flehten to make a degree in something .
he &apos;s still in the red numbers , but chris made a personal sacrifice , and that film .
i &apos;m one of your lehrergesten .
there &apos;s a prime minister , aussenminister , verteidigungsminister and a finanzchef , or president of the rechnungshofes .
boy : &quot; the weltfrieden-spiel is serious .
we all the sauer on them , &quot; why do you do that ?
that &apos;s going to be much more true when you read it . &quot;
we &apos;ve been playing the game for weeks , about seven weeks , and we &apos;ve essentially gemeistert all the 50 ineinander crises .
and we have 600 billion dollars .
a lot of people announced well paying jobs and schlossen the nationalbewegung .
it &apos;s like its own little connection .
if i put all three legs in , in the three peaks of the triangle , i would get a tetraeder .
so everything you &apos;re doing -- it &apos;s a very provokante proposition -- this old plastik , and this old plastic , that füllventil is very easy to do in an old fahrradschlauch .
this is possible , if you have a whole piece of paper , din a4 paper -- you can be in a kommunalen school or in a state school -- a leaf , a ruler and a pen , no glue , no glue .
what we do is a very simple elektromotor .
this is a little strohhalm , which you do , is these two corners of abzuzwicken here , it &apos;s going to be a babykrokodilmaul .
here are two magnets .
it was very many passengers on the ship , and they got boring , so the captain was invited to be a deck .
at the ink conference , arvind gupta gupta and yet complete plans to turn waste into really unterhaltende , gut toys that can build kids themselves -- while they learn basic principles of science and design .
it was a big challenge , and it was actually examples of biology that provided a lot of evidence .
and there &apos;s a couple of examples of projects that are conscious to mimic ecosystems .
and with a little planning , we can put a place of traffic to turn into a turn that open space for people , which people are bringing people back to food and transform waste into the opportunities .
this is a photograph that was done on the day of the day , and only one year later , it looked like this .
when you &apos;re verdampft seawater , the first thing that &apos;s calciumcarbonat is calcium carbonate .
no , you have to have seelen seelen entflammen with visions to explore . &quot;
i looked for somebody who &apos;s jewish because i &apos;m jewish , and i &apos;m very important .
but the real reinfall was that there were a lot of men who wanted to go out of me .
very few of us have the ability to be absolutely honest with yourself .
he likes to travel as long as it &apos;s not on a kreuzfahrtschiff .
i was trying to basically be like smileygirl1978 .
because they remember my punktesystem : you have to reach a mindestpunktezahl of 700 points and nobody did .
most of you . gamer are 33 years old , not eight years , and when we look at the hochgerechnete demografie of the computerspielens , the gamer of tomorrow is older adults .
imagine your vision is very , very good .
and these gamer have even many other benefits in terms of attention , and a aspect of attention that is also improved is improved , is our ability to pursue objects in our environment .
so i want to ask you to remember this outcome and put it in the context of another group of technologienutzern , a group that actually looked up in our society , which is made of people who are doing the multimedia-tasking .
so let me explain that step to a task called mental illness .
it &apos;s the idea of computation .
let &apos;s just let &apos;s just make all possible programs of the particular case we look at .
so it was a big , very complex project that i wasn &apos;t even sure that it works at all .
so wolfram alpha knows about many and many things .
on the one hand , we have mathematica , with its kind of präziser , formaler language and a large network of sorgfälltig developed capacity , able to do a lot of lines .
so with physical materialuntersuchungen , we &apos;re sort of used to go to the world and see that certain materials make sense for certain technology and so forth .
a few years ago , i was quite excited , and i was very excited , that there are candidate universes with incredibly simple rules that reproduzieren a special theory of relativity and also give general relativity and gravity and at least clues to quantum mechanics .
sw : i think .
and during that time , i actually lost more of these relatives , and teachers who ausbildeten me , hiv / aids .
they jump up . they wear red clothes .
because my mother was a woman , she didn &apos;t have a law on a property , and it &apos;s automatically owned all my family , anyway , my dad , so he had the right .
and the day before the actual ceremony were , we were , excited , and they didn &apos;t sleep all night .
he carried a sneakers and this in a village that had not even gepflasterte roads . it was very attractive .
i promised him to be a braves girl , i would go back and do everything that would ask me for that .
when it was pregnant before the marriage , the mother was responsible for it and punished .
as we speak here , 125 girls will never be verstümmelt again .
consumers who represent 72 percent of american gdp , actually , exactly how banks and companies are paying attention to their fremdkapital , their fremdkapital , to free themselves from taking themselves and risks that we face when we move forward .
and what you see here is the whole phenomenon of the fact that we actually vortreten , and the principle of future education that future children are fremdfinanzieren .
sterilisationen are up by 48 percent by the study of the study .
we also see a trend on a little bit of bescheidenerem tourism . right ?
one of them is the erstarken of community and neighborhood , and more and more women &apos;s neighbors .
we also see a big heimwerker-bewegung .
the trend of the handwerken is immense .
then we &apos;ll take the phenomenon of kogi .
and then i got the question , i am the only one that &apos;s doing this ?
you could exploit it .
that &apos;s what i do in my life -- stories tell me , novels , and i want to share with you a couple of stories about the art of storytelling and also some of the kind of creatures that are dschinns .
our vorstellungkraft could be schrumpfen . our hearts could be verkümmern . and our menschlichkeiten could be verdorren if we were in our cultural kokons .
and i came across the first time of what i call it , &quot; repräsentativen . &quot;
i &apos;m not a immigrantin , no refugee or a exilantin . i &apos;m going to ask why i do this . but the pendeln between languages enabled me to reinvent myself .
he wanted to see a manifestation of my identity .
my tiny story was a huge , because i was strafrechtlich .
literature has to lead us to the other side .
i could schreiben. a novel about a muslim woman and maybe that will be a happy story , and in my next book , i could write about a gutaussehenden professor , schwulen professor in norway .
so you &apos;re remixt , you &apos;re already taking your existing songs , cut them into little bits , and it &apos;s sort of , you know , it &apos;s a little bit of pieces , and you mix them together , and you get a new song , but this new song is made sure of old songs .
instead , these laws and laws are the more likely to the property .
it &apos;s a 28-seitiges software-patent , but i &apos;m going to summarize it . spoiler alarm : the entriegeln of the phone , by putting a symbol with your finger .
our creativity comes from the outside , not from within .
and then they say , &quot; okay , but how do you see your address ? &quot;
in fact , it &apos;s not my fault ; it &apos;s from the guardian in the guardian .
which is beautiful , you can probably see this limb there , a sort of undeutlicher rauchfahne , which is aufsteigt from the limb .
our exploration of solar system taught us that the solar system is beautiful .
now , that led to an understanding of the atomaren structure , because it &apos;s going to be so erkärt that atoms have a single nucleus with elektonen that circle it .
this picture shows a galaxy , a allerweltsgalaxie , with , you know , 100 billion stars like our sun .
i think she can ultimately , ultimately , to freilegen the tiefstgreifenden ideas for us , about our place in the universe and really the value of our planet .
this is here . this is home . we &apos;re .
and with every click and every touch of the screen , we &apos;re going to let &apos;s lassen the wie and gretel brotkrumen of our personal information all over our way through the digital forests .
when our daughter sat down in the frühstückstisch , i asked her , &quot; is going to be on your school a lot of value on musical competence ? &quot;
we can &apos;t herumsitzen the same thing .
now , i want to take you on this journey .
and because i was so diskutierte and i said , i decided to speak to my 27. birthday , that i couldn &apos;t speak for a day for a day -- a day .
and they don &apos;t talk ?
and i explained with the help of a friend that i understood that i was john francis , that i was going through life , that i didn &apos;t know , and that this would be the last time that someone would translate my language language .
well , i schulterte my rucksack .
i started talking again because i had been studying umweltwissenschaften .
but the unterscheid was that i was thinking about my silence on every birthday , but never about my decision , just to use my feet .
born and grew up in north korea .
i sometimes found small jobs in the exchange for food .
i was constantly worried that i would give back and back to back .
i felt so powerless because i had so much to eat in america , but my father had died of starvation .
but i believe that your gesture of love and care can save the lives of another joseph , and change thousands of other people who still have hope to survive .
it &apos;s very complicated to test new materials for building , but this was a lot more stronger than i expected to do it and make it easy to make a wasserdicht , and as an industrial werkstoff to do hitzebeständig .
but then i was very disappointed with my career as an architect because we don &apos;t help , we don &apos;t work for society , but for the privilegierte people , rich , the government , the government .
and then the following year , 1995 , there was a big earthquake in japan in japan .
so i wonder what &apos;s a permanentes , and what a temporäres building ?
but that &apos;s really needed .
so we &apos;re learning some of the most important things in our lives before we &apos;re born , still in the womb .
so what fetuses are learning even is the specific language that &apos;s spoken in the world where they &apos;re born in .
it &apos;s a mixture of the einflüssen that are so individually and curious about how the woman itself .
why should malnutrition lead to the mutterleib disease ?
you can also see ptsd , but also looking at other eyes .
so this trust in the fiktive is essential to any kind of theatralik .
the audience will be hingeleitet , which are all the logical , but not with the übereinstimmen what &apos;s happening in front of their eyes . &quot;
and if it &apos;s a good story , it might be even a smile .
you may remember that as the aol-time warner-fusion , okay . that &apos;s when the greatest of all the time .
if you &apos;re a very high animal on the ground and you say , &quot; what &apos;s it going to do for the beseitigung of the hunger in the world ? &quot;
they said , &quot; can we start an ad campaign ?
this is actually a strategy , and i don &apos;t argue that strategy plays a role .
for me , all the music was music .
now , when i use my software , the camera is the infrarotpunkt , and it &apos;s registriert the site of the kamerapixel in relation to the projektorpixeln . and you &apos;ve got a whiteboard .
i remember the poor needed something materielles -- food , clothing , shelter -- what they didn &apos;t have .
i even felt a anflug of shame .
now , i heard him speak , i was excited for a variety of reasons .
i was not asked to ask a donation , which was normally my kind of art .
it &apos;s about the wiedererzählen of the story of the poor , and it &apos;s about to be a chance to engage what their dignity would confirm , a partnership doesn &apos;t have a partnership which is a partnership that is based on a traditional kind of donation , that can be verrücktes .
it &apos;s a very bedeutungsvollere combination , a very strong combination .
right now , profounder is at the beginning , and it &apos;s so much for me to be , very clear that it &apos;s only a vehicle , only one tool .
what does the future of humankind look like ?
now , i &apos;m turning to the second big question : are we alone , or are there other life in the universe ?
the answers to these big questions show that we &apos;ve done remarkable progress in the last hundred years .
you see here .
here are photos of myself .
the rate of the rate is doubling every 18 months and every single member of the digerati , that &apos;s the most mooresche law .
but what about them ? what will it do with you ?
she segeln into her untertassen , and you know , and you know , you &apos;re entführen people for experiments that their parents would not agree .
so we &apos;re interested in these things .
and so , in the course of the course , these experiments have never been able to do these experiments .
and what i found was that the first technology showed up in the form of steinwerkzeugen million years ago .
we can learn a lot of them .
and i look at sorgenvoll and try to protect my child , because with a child you don &apos;t leave you alone , even a minister of no one .
and second , she tells us that she had a aufrechten gang , but some of the anpassungen for the erklettern of trees .
until now , our knowledge of our ancestors , in principle of adults , are the fossils , the fossils , the baby-fossilien , the fehlten .
the paläoanthropologe zeresenay alemseged explores the origin of humankind in the long of ethiopia . he talks about how he found the oldest skeleton of a humanoiden child , and what we can learn about our human being .
and if all of you have to keep the rules , you need an effective system for the überprüfung and rechtsdurchsetzung. , because we &apos;ve found , in fact , we have vertrauen .
she &apos;s considered high seas because the continent is ausgenommen from territorialen ansprüchen .
we need to work local , but also übergreifend all the water .
we need to create a new paradigm of caution and respect .
carol coletta says , &quot; i would pay to do what i do . &quot;
and that was a pretty good idea .
to say it &apos;s a journalist , i &apos;m a journalist , not a technologist , so i want to create a sketch of what the present and the future will be .
and finally , i think we have to think about whether we want that our reality -- and when it means for our idea of life , and for everything that &apos;s coming .
it looks like oil oil .
the symptoms of complex are that you have the strong and the most fundamental way to have the right solution , no matter how hard the problem is .
and i was going to go to the new york times and explain it to be a paper , and how it works .
of course , we can .
and make a lot of money .
it &apos;s higher than the ausfallquote of the american americans .
we &apos;ll try this . we &apos;re probably going to go wrong .
brich immediately . &quot;
taniyama was always trying to do it , but he could never prove the idea .
i &apos;m saying that our approach is easy to do .
china wants to have achieved this in 20 years .
we don &apos;t even slow down .
the future is naturally ungewiss .
yes , it &apos;s going to be ugly , and yes , it &apos;s going to happen soon -- with security in our lifespan -- but we &apos;re more capable of overcome everything that &apos;s coming on .
and here &apos;s where they come into play .
and what we need to think about is : when you &apos;re dancing in the fire , what &apos;s next ?
and we thought we can take this debt to our children , but it &apos;s just going to show you before .
everything else is verplant .
that &apos;s the financial crisis .
students wanted to know what the cell is going to do .
it should be absolutely amazing or ?
all we get is roomba .
you &apos;ll be able to focus your hearing , maybe increase the brain , or erniedrigen , can do a range of things that we can &apos;t do .
that &apos;s not 1,000 years in the distance .
we should ban these cheap , simple heilmöglichkeit , and we don &apos;t let them use it for their children . &quot;
and here we can see that one .
we can &apos;t be able to lose the trust of the customer .
he has only gotten 500 and have gotten up to 1,000 . &quot;
and he had a huge jar of placebo-pillen that they got , and he said , &quot; come back in a week when you &apos;re sick . &quot;
the internet , as we know it , the kind of web -- the things we all talk about -- is a little less than 5,000 days old .
of course , the internet has been since more than 5,000 days -- the web only 5,000 days .
so if we say , the machine that we &apos;re kreierten is now a hb , a human brain , when we look at the rate that this is growing , there &apos;s six billion hbs .
now , it &apos;s not like -- if you do a table and you do things in work , a word document , you &apos;re not part of the web but you will be it . you &apos;ll be part of the machine .
i say , &quot; people will be the extended senses of the machine . &quot; in a sense .
it will be on the level of the parts or ideas or words , if they want to be aufgelöst .
the last point i wanted to talk about is the idea that we &apos;ll be co-abhängig .
third , it &apos;s going to be more ubiquitous , it will fill our entire environment , and we &apos;re in the middle .
and within a week , i was convinced that the second wiederaufstehung of jesus christ had occurred that it was sun myung moon , and that i had been auserwählt and prepared for god , and prepared to become his jüngerin .
these are the dead of jonestown .
and it allows everything . it makes everything logical .
i &apos;m going to start with some simple ideas about how we line things .
this is a project that we &apos;ve just done in penang for a huge stadtprojekt that came right from this process , it &apos;s the result of a variety of forces that are developing .
and that led directly to another project .
it &apos;s actually a wrong attitude , because the hybrid is probably more interesting .
i &apos;m interested in how these ideas are doing the other young people .
and finally , the end of the most interesting projects -- a gerichtsgebäude .
each of you are about to your neighbor .
that &apos;s how we have to pay for school .
so we have a big brain , a huge advantage , because we can affect our environment .
my story is the two brains . it may surprise you , our gut has a brain system .
this muskelkontrolle is very , very important , because there &apos;s a reflexe .
we &apos;ve learned to talk to the big brain , taste and reward , as they know .
he said , &quot; you know , at some point , we all were like animals and then no longer . &quot;
these are men and women who are still able to name 250 stars in the sky sky .
of course , the tibetischen monks have said that .
the intiwatana , the pfosten that the sun is on , is actually a obelisk obelisk , which is constantly reflected the light , which seems to be the sacred apu of machu picchu , the zuckerhutberg , called huayna picchu .
if you ask for the dead , you &apos;re going to do these gestures with which you are up to the sky , up to the sky .
here &apos;s the place where the great mother gesandt the spindel in the world , which are aufgetürmt and creating the world , which they call the heart of the world .
it &apos;s unique facetten of human imagination .
this material you all know is styropur , but i &apos;m more like a white white stuff .
i &apos;m going to go inside , you fit in there , because in a hundred years , my body can go back to the earth again .
it &apos;s a abfallprodukt .
you want to apply it anywhere in the world and you don &apos;t have to take care of the world , and you have to take care of the world , because you &apos;ve got many different alternatives .
first , they start atoms in a special bottle .
i started a competition four years ago called &quot; the dance of the ph.d. . &quot;
my country is verschuldet with 15 trillion dollars .
and that &apos;s -- -- that &apos;s a lot more than the speakers before i come to me and all those who are coming to me .
and she thought about my work for mathematical models , which should be encouraging a understanding of evolution and modern genetics .
the other half of the audience likes to see , for the deep cultural reasons , they hold it for boring -- and find a different pattern of interesting -- kopf-zahl-kopf .
you can think about two ways .
if you toss a coin , you get a sequence of your head and number .
back to more than the weltlichen angelenheiten , because of you who are dealing with uncertainty .
and only one percent is wrong .
he postulierte , &quot; i take that after one sudden death rate in a family remains the likelihood of one another . &quot;
not as unlikely as one in 73 million , but still quite unlikely .
the whole quality of the quality that has the weitreichende impact on the industrial is being carried by statistics .
the rauchmelder may have maybe saved hundreds of thousands of life .
and a smart electric doesn &apos;t prevent injury because the current is always , until a intelligenter anschlussstecker gets recognized .
but , on the other hand , china is a sick-land . a term from facebooks börsengang .
you &apos;ve got facebook , we have renren .
yet , the chinanet itself can create a very strong force , which is never in the story of china .
so chinese , chinese , in fact , look at this mikrobloggen as a real medium , not just as just a mere .
like a big ted , not ?
so , in the last three years , in the last three years , bürgerbewegungen has really changed the lokalregierungen of lokalregierungen , and they made more and more transparent because they don &apos;t have access to the data .
more chinese , chinese , freie and human rights as their geburtsrecht , rather than one of america &apos;s privilege .
many of you know that the beethoven &apos;s symphony was a symphony .
i &apos;m not saying that she can &apos;t live a wonderful life .
girl : well , my sister can be pretty nerves .
the acoustics of music is much more complicated than the language .
this is a violin .
and it seems like his schläfenbeine had been removed from trying to establish the cause of death , which is where sound was eingepasst and his skull has been ausbuchtungen .
cl : joseph is phenomenal . he &apos;s brilliant .
when i &apos;m umsehe in this tedxamsterdam , i see an extraordinary audience .
in many countries , it &apos;s a different thing .
at this point in the dutch story , my dad was on the bank of the river river near nijmegen .
the rate of civil wars and oppression is down since the end of the cold war .
my soldiers use their guns as a tool of peace .
peter van uhm : why i took a gun
this program gets a shape and then spuckt 250 of dna .
this is a spannungsaufstieg in tuolumne meadows , in the middle of the country .
you can &apos;t let you go . &quot;
i &apos;m very interested in both .
and i &apos;m going to give you a little example of this , but there &apos;s actually a theoretical argument that technology developed in a exponenzieller way .
now , the evolution of our species took hundreds of years , and because of this interaction , evolution actually used the technology of erschaffende species to create the next stage , which was the first step in technology evolution .
we live in a three-dimensional world ; so we can use the third dimension .
over the last 50 years , we &apos;ve been 28 percent of the informations-technologie growth in the year per year .
another big revolution is the kommunikations-revolution .
in order to go back to our own exponentielles growth of power , 1,000 dollars in computing are at the time of a insect or a mouse .
and in 2029 , we &apos;re going to reach the full of these trends , and they have to be würdigen , how often the schraube schraube shot in the form of technology -- faster and faster , when we get to that point .
you can bring the blessing and tücken .
they &apos;re harder .
they were removed from the genpool .
because there &apos;s nothing in it . well , it &apos;s not supposed to be here .
dopamine is apparently the stuff that &apos;s related to musterverwaltung .
and that &apos;s what we call schizophrenia .
and he was so freundlich to post and give us the resolution .
i mentioned in our little thought experiment earlier , they &apos;re a hominid in the african flachland .
the 9 / 11 has a verschwörungstheorie . it &apos;s a conspiracy .
and we have our own lippenbalsam , and we have a führendes product .
i wasn &apos;t as good as he was , but we could do it , youssou n n , sting , tracy and bruce springsteen to put a welttournee for the amnesty , and that was a great experience .
they kept saying , &quot; tell us the truth and we beat us .
musician and activist peter gabriel , he &apos;s talking personal motivation with the überwachungsgruppe witness.org of human rights , and shares stories of active bürgerjournalisten .
next , we &apos;ve asked ourselves how to do that ?
he sees the problem and he knows how to deal with it , the dance is his übergangsverhalten that allows him to orientieren .
the beetle are climbing a lot of rare on the pill if they &apos;re stiefel , when they don &apos;t wear .
here &apos;s our durchtriebener experimenter .
let &apos;s play a 550-hertz-frequenz and see what happens .
this is the universe of stephen hawking .
thank you .
mallorys argument that it &apos;s fun to fall in these great adventures , is not quite a überein with my experience .
or , &quot; nice . you know , my grandmother &apos;s going to do a kreuzfahrt in antarctica next year .
so the whole purpose of the presentation of the presentation to convince the kapitalgeber is that they are the entrepreneurs that are investing in and make a lot of money .
and to the experience of being an enterprise , or to lead something -- that doesn &apos;t have to be a company .
there &apos;s no financial unterstützte company where there &apos;s no trouble .
and from that , they take them with -- on a solid , a good path to the top , right from the beginning .
if i happen to know somebody who &apos;s made this device .
no , they &apos;re not .
and then you &apos;ll give me a quick geschäfts-überblick .
even when the competition works to an old pattern .
so , hopefully , it was all positive , positive , positive , positive .
when you follow my , you &apos;ll have a spärliche , very zen-artige presentation , that &apos;s great to get to vemitteln who you are and emotionally engage in .
i didn &apos;t know that that &apos;s pretty cool .
statistically , one of them is a beetle .
if you do something , you might have a effect on it .
and if you have enough , you can click on one link .
we &apos;re at the end of the table , on the last place as the culture that innovation doesn &apos;t value .
as we think and behave , our verhaltenssystem is broken .
we have a serious meme to be serious .
but forgive me , the problems today are not the problems of the industrial revolution .
and you know what ?
and who are the largest neoteniesten ?
it &apos;s very trostlos .
our thinking is backwards .
through a change change , change , like transparency , change , like selbststeuerung , and collaboration and collaboration and collaboration , and not autokratie , these things are focused on outcomes .
because only the challenge is the only way that things are always done , the only way to get the old trott get rid of the old trott , and find new creative solutions to the problems of today .
because we can &apos;t do it alone . we should make it together . and if we do that , and if we do that , and we share the ideas of play , we can transform bulgaria into something better .
the magazine magazine magazine called , i think , innovation .
and my master took me on the ofenbauen , because the ofenbau was owned by the time .
after i had gewischt her with a gesture of beiseite , she was very -- i was accepted and i worked for about six months .
nine days ago , i had a fire .
you know , all of the stuff .
my children , davey and henry .
we were abonnierten , etliche , we did our homework , but where we were looking , we were surrounded by images like this .
this picture literally came in seconds after the baby was put into the arms and i brought it across .
rg : oh .
av : taboo number three : how fehlgeburt you don &apos;t talk -- but i &apos;m going to talk about my talk today .
the common opinion is that every aspect of my life has become better , since i was teilhabe to the wonder of birth and family .
but you &apos;re finding that you can lose yourself in a wonderful way , which is , as we think , is a very much sense , and what &apos;s extremely is really a befriedigend .
rg + av : thank you .
i &apos;m going to start with glenn gould .
i started with the experience .
there &apos;s such a consequence of &quot; star trek . &quot;
we all saw this &quot; star &quot; in the holodeck-folgen .
imagine , imagine , you know , verstorbene klaverspieler today , like you would play yourself in the person . john q. walker shows how footage can be analyzed on the exact anschläge and pedalbewegungen , to abzuspielen them on a computergesteuerten wing .
now , since we &apos;ve experienced a time of the remarkable economic experience , the longest building in the history of this country .
but now , a few months later , as well politicians are always going to be in the sauren apple without verziehen the mine , as you say , your uncertainty of uncertainty can &apos;t hide them .
now , i didn &apos;t really understand that until i met this guy , one of the back of the back of the back , lightly messy man who was ernährte and bügeln for completely überbewertet .
but interestingly , it also also , the future , in which society abschaut some kniffe from capitalism , which is how you put dna from andauernder innovation into society , using things , and then those who work , ausbaut and normiert .
i want to show you a fascinating new hypothesis , and some surprising new insights that i &apos;ve been working on , the relationship between the structure of the language that they talk , and their slope to save .
and if i want to talk right , i &apos;m always talking about to think about that .
now , this is a phantasievolle theory .
and please push this device so you can see it with your dominanten hand , so i can measure your greifkraft .
it &apos;s the present pleasure in the exchange of the future pain .
i don &apos;t have to tell you how important the ability is to communicate across generations .
we english teacher english .
but i &apos;m about to use it as a hürde .
but they didn &apos;t get the results they wanted .
at the same time i was on the field of wettermodifikation , although i was a ph.d. in aeronautik .
people and bisamratten and giraffen and birds and all the , the red line is up . these are people , livestock and pets .
we focused on more serious about the future and produced products for the company .
let &apos;s see the next video .
this flew last night at the party , and -- you can see it just herumfliegt , and you can see everybody else you want to do .
and he was a little bit of a unzufrieden of how people were doing the buddhist religion in india .
and he &apos;s coming back as a gebrochener man back to the village .
and he has to close his eyes , it &apos;s so disgusting , the gestank and everything .
the animals are in one of their human lives . people are people .
we &apos;re looking out . we take the feeling of memory of a mother and we just go on all of these creatures in this meditation .
and you think of how lieblich are the things when they &apos;re happy when they &apos;re happy .
and of course they &apos;re cruel and skrupellos towards others .
although the change in your mindset does something for other living creatures , they feel that new quality of you in you , and it helps you and it &apos;s a model .
so the coffee cup , or the cup of a cup , is a von of society , using tools to get public health .
interestingly , complexity is very highly developed .
we &apos;ve heard recently by bill gates .
so it &apos;s very , very simple , when you know how to read it .
well , let me close with four generellen &apos;s , one example and two .
and i don &apos;t want to stop it with the details , but in the lower right corner , you &apos;ll see an example of what we have .
did you start doing that ?
and the hieraus , the bedürfniss , which is going to be talked about , which jimmy talked about , which is our new kind of organization , or better expressed : how do we organize ourselves without organizations ?
the inventor of things are always going to be less , and it &apos;s going to be only in the use of working with the anwendern .
let &apos;s take astronomy , which is what i said , about the case ?
there &apos;s also been ausgiebige , professional arguments .
so there &apos;s no auseinandersetzung of two camp , but between those camps , there are all kinds of interesting positions which are taken from people .
that costs about 100 dollars .
and then people started to dedicate their people to someone , and actually a team did it : between new zealand and spain .
and the first thing i thought was to thank him for this .
but the truth is that life is happening right here .
so people call people and they leave news like this .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m dressed to the batman to really true my anonymity . &quot;
and the one that didn &apos;t have any data , which was , in which he turned out , she was just moved in a different town and had taken a new job .
and in the last 35 years , i study human behavior on the basis of everything , started from genes to brain , dopamine and the ähnlichem , to the zielanalyse .
some of you also have it . and it &apos;s dependent on gender .
this was one of these cases , because there was no violence under their ancestors , but my father .
they &apos;re similar to each other as one .
and by the way , i &apos;ve got an email in the way that i have that we &apos;ve finished the last part of atlas .
and these guys are the weak force , which may be the least known .
so if you want to know , why the sky is blue or why the atomkerne is holding up , you should basically , with a computer computer -- why dna has the shape that you &apos;ve once now has .
the comparison is that people in this room are the higgs particles .
but it &apos;s really like that theory that seems to be able to make the physical grundkräfte at the time of the big bang . and a perfectly wonderful prediction , the model didn &apos;t make the goal that it happens , but it seems to do it .
they made this civilization , this wonderful picture of being transformed into light , and it allows the civilization to see the civilization from all of this .
another big insight came from a study of the state state university in 2010 , which is baseball karten of the major player of league spieler .
in a similar study in germany , researchers used to measure the forscher bildgebungs-technologie bildgebungs-technologie to measure gerhirnaktivität and after they were gespritzt to unterdrücken the lächeln .
&quot; because the colors they ordered , not the european standard , he said .
&quot; safer ? why ? were there more policemen ? &quot;
we built the bright empfangshalle people , people who were people to think that they were to go abroad , if they were eintraten to vorzubringen their cause .
president roosevelt said , &quot; believe you can do something , and you &apos;ve been half it . &quot;
all in the city , entrepreneurs came out and offered the ladestationen stations .
a veranschaulichung for the transformative power of technology is going to happen in kibera .
by 2015 , it will be three billion of the world &apos;s mobile phone .
in the stores of the environment were taschenlampen , batteries and bread .
this river of time is embedded in everything : the erosion of a sandkorns , in the knospe , the rose to rose .
read a writer with a writer ?
and also , when i look at the great bears , i remember as a kid on his head to be rutschen by his shoulders , and i feel like this kid .
we &apos;ve always seen how creative technology can be and in our lives and our lives can choose those solutions , innovations and moments that aren &apos;t zersplittern the flow of time , but make it again .
my mother was engländerin .
in every single camp camp , they had to abwimmeln soldiers , who was my older brother of mark , who was nine , take a child soldiers .
and i should do it alone .
take something you want to have , from the suitcase .
and then i ended up in einzelhaft , because i don &apos;t zurückhielt my feelings .
thank you .
almost all life on earth is going to be wiped about five times .
svante paabo has the answer .
why should this play ?
so , in theory , we can grow any organ from any cell .
here &apos;s the rise in less than 10 years .
here &apos;s the conclusion .
if the rotoren rotate at the same speed , the robot will be around .
and you see how robust control is .
and he does this while he &apos;s hindernissen obstacles .
they &apos;re going to be true .
this shows that we can double the roboterkraft , verdreifachen , and we can make it a teams , and we can make them form teams as you can see here .
but the robot can also figure out where he wants to go .
i can feel that . but there &apos;s so much , and i want to expand your horizon to open consciousness and change your perspective on a honigbienen .
this has been a huge problem for many years now , in principle since the late &apos; 80s with the erscheinen of the varroamilbe that many different viruses , bacteria and pilzkrankheiten .
they don &apos;t experience that .
they take the food cooking for their dishes , and the honey -- there &apos;s live-veranstaltungen -- they &apos;re using the honey on their bars .
the bee dies . and it &apos;s a honigbienen of a lot of dying when they stick , so they didn &apos;t want to do it .
okay , now , you know , the question is : why is this ?
of course , we have it , especially in the last decade , done the world with a dense chain of supermärkten , with a chain global trade .
and never before , so many people have not been aware of this fact .
in fact , many of you don &apos;t know that our bread is not the european invention of course .
and especially the fleischkonsum in südost-asien and china drives the getreide-preis .
agrarwissenschaft has been for most people , and there are not many farmers under them to be bad , to be bad , to verschmutzen the environment , to be large scale , to destroy the environment .
everything is hanging .
and while i finished my bread , and i have it gebacken . and i try to burn the hands .
and also , for a long time , it has to be able to keep the tools that they have available tools and materials and kenntnissen .
you take somebody like me , a scientist , analyzed and test and entwickelt and developed a new technology , and you know , the quantitative leistungssteigerung .
because i hope you take this from here today , a new connection with nature .
this was a couple of days ago .
and what do we do ? what is our answer ?
this is last year .
but poolan devi was one of them . and shekhar shekhar made a movie about her , bandit queen , you should see .
but i think the most important thing is that we can do it .
but this is grubenottern as a spezialität .
this is a repräsentativer patient who was 73 in the back -- he would have a bypass , but he decided to do it .
i like this slide because you can talk about what people are really motivated to change , and what doesn &apos;t .
if you eat a fettreiche meal , how do you feel ?
it &apos;s a halbwahrheit . americans eat more fat , and even more kohlehydrate , so the percentage is lower , but the actual number of higher , the goal is to reduce both .
one of the atkins-zentrum studies study found that 70 percent of people were missing , 65 percent of people had bad breath , they had headaches , they had a healthy diet .
on the other side , everything is intimacy , heilkräftig .
i hope it doesn &apos;t stay on .
the film is based on a kurzgeschichte of f. scott fitzgerald fitzgerald .
two filmstudios were involved in the project : warner brothers and paramount .
and we had a lot of passion to do this and technology .
so we &apos;re so verabschiedeten by moving capture .
the number seemed to be infinite .
and that &apos;s the data we get from it , and then it &apos;s used for the model .
and this is what the finished picture was made .
this was a very , very early sample .
and we found this , in the middle of the state .
and has a telefonzelle .
people from the kalandar are going to overcome these cruel , barbarische past that they lived in their lives .
we were too viert -- two beduinen as a driver -- and imagine that a long time is a ocean from sand , 40 degrees fahrenheit , a water bottle .
i think that camel is the best designte animal in the world . &quot;
and they &apos;re using them as much as we see our zweiäugiges .
we weigh our animals .
so i &apos;ll show you another movie .
i don &apos;t schwitze to my body temperature 40 degrees fahrenheit -- enough to get a egg .
ricky , thank you for the invitation .
start a meeting with a poem . that &apos;s an idea .
but how would you like to know , how do you know what the next day you would like to do the world , like a living god , your shoulders in the clouds , or if you sit down there in the bottom of the tapete , just straight starrend around your little plastikgesicht ?
who could be quiet in this night ?
but did you know that judy garland was 150,000 dollars a movie that jeanne d arc had führte d arc to victory and blaise pascal had been up to the room -- no wait , i mean he had invented the calculator ?
at the end , they sat in a tree and one streckt the hand .
and the human brain is more than that , but if you were to remove those two columns , you would probably be much more .
and also , we have the problem with elephants that you can &apos;t build construction that would be too hard for an individual elephants .
one component of that is understanding . here &apos;s a standard-definition , &quot; the ability to understand and share the feelings of others . &quot;
so now we &apos;re looking at more complex terms . here &apos;s comfort .
the test is not going to run out for you .
there &apos;s a very simple task that you have to do .
a philosopher , even , was impossible that , in fact , that , if you had a sense of äffchen , that was a sense of äffchen , because fairness was invented in the french revolution .
now it &apos;s not a einsamer crazy , it &apos;s not two crazy , three is a lot and a lot of power .
the last decade i spent myself and i was going to have to go to my pain and i hope , hopefully for a good thing , the selbstvervollkommnung .
and i have to say thank god .
so i heard , in a way , it was a success .
over the years , the serious kreislaufbeschwerden can cause .
a.j. jacobs : how healthy life to me almost kill me the life of life .
and i think a lot of wissenschaftlerinnen share this view .
it &apos;s a really cool thing .
now these studies are scientifically , and they were reproduziert , but they &apos;re not the whole story .
ask about the part of the story that &apos;s not told .
... a priest ?
but finally , one group , who believes the indus people are the ancestors of people in the world today .
right on the left , how many ? okay .
it can be useful in the entzifferung useful to produce more data that they are analysierbar .
this sign is the most common script of the indus script , and only in that text is twice .
it turns out there &apos;s been a long tradition in india , names on the basis of sternbildern at the time .
space , we all know what it looks like .
this wire übertrug übertrug the telefonsignale , which would make the name of bell famous .
and the jansky of the historical discovery was made that the things can also be able to be able to make radio waves as well as well .
actually all the young people in the city .
someone sitting next to you -- that &apos;s okay in a veranstaltungssaal , if you would sit on a parkbank , and someone would close to them next to you , you would austicken .
the dalai lama says to -- he says , if you can create the idea of the mitfühlens idea , because you realize you can even be , you know , and your pain and your pleasure , you know , you know , you know , a little playground for your intelligence .
but take this wonderful thing that chiho us showed us , and it &apos;s afraid of the lava-mann .
a man in front of a tank was an image that became a symbol of resistance for the world .
but what would you not have done anything , if you had the modern communications to make a sense that against the wrong thing that was going on , and immediately had to be done ?
combine the power of global ethic with power of our ability to communicate on global scale and organizing global global challenges that we are now to be now and largely global nature .
in the museum of the kids in rwanda , there &apos;s a photo of a zehnjährigen boy -- and the museum of the children who were left to be left when the völkermords of rwanda had died a million people .
here &apos;s the task : help me build a dynamisches , parameterisiertes kontaktmodell in 3d .
they can move on very different untergründen -- they vary in the kontaktwahrscheinlichkeit , the movement of the surface and the gegebenen .
this is tarnt as a floating algae .
boy : stachelig .
slow down to the spines in action .
mark at stanford , one of my partners , one of my partners , is an extraordinary engineer , who developed a technology called shape deposition manufacturing , where he can use claws to actually take a artificial foot .
they look like aliens from aliens , and the secret , which they stick , are their haarigen toes .
here we pull the back .
these filigranen structures allow the spines to polstern the spines , the hafthärchen , and the hafthärchen , to the very herausfordernden , difficult surfaces .
so , bartenwale long beautiful songs that are serving as a paarungsrufe , and males as females as females will allow each other to find and choose a mate .
so when dolphins are less than 20 feet apart , they need to be less than half of the time that they have .
if we think of marine marine areas for animals like dolphins , we have to be the following of our surgeries , which we thought was quite safe .
after the mauerfall , the marine marine systems made these systems accessible to the systeme to experience what the scientists were hearing .
they just hear the low frequencies .
when males and females use this signal to find a mate and they are scattered , they imagine what impact the recovery of the world &apos;s recovery species would have been .
how ships geräuscharmer can be made , they found that with a better durchdachten propellerentwurf of that noise , it can be reduced 90 percent .
they &apos;re verringerten the speed by 50 percent .
we see strangers , we see strangers , 300 people , and they &apos;re going to be more and more and more . and they &apos;re not like us .
you &apos;ve got all available on the available .
we &apos;re seeing a constant growth of the men .
and obviously , there &apos;s one that &apos;s a hundred .
with initiatives like the $ 100 laptop laptop , it &apos;s the idea of that we &apos;re using a new generation of people in the old maus-windows-klick computer .
thank you .
i think there &apos;s nothing about that .
our daily life is , but we &apos;re saying , gelinde , in a remarkable state , say , in a ausnahmezustand .
usually it &apos;s one or two per year .
and there &apos;s been there .
but we &apos;re a lot of zahlreicher .
part of the challenge was to try to verstehen. rhythm and space by juggling -- juggling is a lot of handorientiert -- but the rhythm of my body and the feet , and the balls to control the balls with my feet .
and then they &apos;re going to play crazy .
ok , because you don &apos;t understand what &apos;s a fünf-ball-muster , i give you a little clue .
now , and -- finger , finger , finger , finger , finger , finger , finger , finger . open .
you have somebody up here , which is the most fundamental principle , which is to do all of his life , ok ?
puff -- and then it &apos;s quiet . just one small number over the time .
in a way , in a way , in a way , in a way .
and then niveaus .
in this year -- if you could , you know , you would have to show me the slides -- in this year , we &apos;re wearing the treo with us , a project that we helped have been doing with design .
we can call this on a touchscreen-monitor , which allows you to put more information on the clothes of the clothes , while you &apos;re doing this .
( scott adams : i realized i &apos;m on the way to become the leading expert in the arbeitsplatzdesign .
and we also give a new product to the tonight , and it &apos;s the first time that it &apos;s been speaking publicly .
now the farmers can only harvest the only one in the season and not in the nebensaison .
electrons are disappearing in a kind of wuselei , and then it &apos;s still energy , and energy can &apos;t be seen .
that &apos;s what he thought he was .
potatoes , potatoes have 48 chromosomes . have you known that ?
all right . atoms , you can &apos;t see it .
and somebody said to him , &quot; well , what &apos;s the sense of this , heinrich ?
we &apos;ve been gegrübelt about that for about four years .
when google is digitized a book , they bring it into a very nice format .
i &apos;ll give you an example .
suddenly , in the middle of the &apos; 40s , everybody was excited .
but imagine it &apos;s not going to be interested in .
but also , a lot of the right , which seems to be benefits from propaganda .
when you go to the zeh , it means &quot; argh &quot; with a a. &quot;
if i run this pink sound for longer than a few minutes , you would literally stop hearing it .
many people get out of kopfhörern , but these are big , public spaces like this , shared klanglandschaften , in millions of tiny , tiny personal klangblasen .
you can do that in a beautiful place , like in a lake .
and finally , an akronym .
and i said , &quot; this is my job . &quot;
thank you for being here . we &apos;re all grateful . &quot;
and so they went away .
because they weren &apos;t at the gehweg and couldn &apos;t see the exchange between me and my crowd , a exchange that we were fair to , but fremd from them .
now , i &apos;ll tell you , in the weltveränderungsgeschäft , there &apos;s a lot of competition in the last year , because the arab spring is still going to go out , the eurozone is kollabiert ... what &apos;s still ?
this photo actually was aufgeklebt in a police station and on the ground , you see the personalausweise of the people who were tracking by the police .
the kids just make photos in a class , the teacher gets them , they &apos;re plakatieren them on the schulmauern .
in the talk today , it &apos;s about the brain and , juhu , somewhere out there &apos;s a gehirnfan .
this is something that we can work in our lives . i believe i could make a difference , and so i tried to get out of the computergeschäft to get into the gehirngeschäft .
but sometimes science has some other properties that they really really do interesting .
what are we going to get there ?
there &apos;s something we think it &apos;s obvious , but it &apos;s not wrong .
it &apos;s like intelligence is defined by prediction .
but we don &apos;t look at the alligator as very intelligent , not in a human way .
in humans , we &apos;ve developed the frontalen part of the neocortexes named the anteriorer part of the neocortex , and nature has been doing this little trick .
it &apos;s not that you &apos;re looking at it and say , &quot; what are i seeing ?
not like a computerspeicher . not in the least of a computerspeicher .
these are the things that are first going to come first .
we need a police , we need a military , but only to defend .
you can see it on your turn . &quot;
they traveled because they were to the time of the election outside of the country .
this is rigoberta menchu .
and then when she closed the door , she said , &quot; no , no , no , no .
you wash it like hand .
this group uses three , everybody .
it &apos;s real .
she did it in english and learn it as a foreign language .
the computer already , and it &apos;s in one of three .
if yes , you think differently than the u.s. health industry , who actually were part of our experimentes , because exactly what we did .
we went through the experiment with the same groups , but a constant a constant from the enlightenment to deal with the data , and the actual beginning of the fragebogens .
the price of that is the vertreibung of paradise .
and they moved up and they rieben themselves , and they would let their arms up and they were auf- .
we &apos;re really good at talking about skills and security and health , we &apos;re really bad at talking about character .
then you &apos;ll imagine personal coach , the cialis , like pfefferminz , gegen gegen .
i don &apos;t feel really comfortable with emotions .
the first gift , or talent , is gedankeneinsicht -- the ability to go into the minds of other people and find what they offer .
they own epistemologische humility .
that &apos;s what the unconscious is looking for .
we found it between bahngleisen , raped by many , many men , i don &apos;t know how many .
where does your journey start ?
and that it &apos;s not normal to live in a home .
what was my challenge ?
you need your empathy .
lexikografie : the process of building .
well , i first admit the queen , because it &apos;s funny .
online , you have to be different .
the bad words -- you see , when someone thinks to a place and then find it on the map , he thinks , &quot; this map is beschissen ! &quot;
you think , &quot; ok , if we think words are tools that we use to give our thoughts , to give our thoughts , how do you know that &apos;s a lot better than hammer ?
the oed has 33 different nummerierte definitions of &quot; set . &quot;
and then there &apos;s mike oates , mike oates in the u.k.
i have the dictionary , the dictionary , the dictionary , the dictionary .
so i &apos;m going to get a chair .
and to make a long story short , i ended up here .
and so , play for piece , during those three days , you start to understand that , why do i hear all this stuff stuff on ?
you may be from a ted speaker , and so we can walk the conversation during the year and next year , after the same intellectual and emotional journey .
the manufacturers didn &apos;t have the trägerphasentechnik in their cheap gps-chips , because they &apos;re not sure what the public would do with such an präzisen ortung that could even fold on the palm of the palm .
and there was no unsicher that was belästigung , and it was technically not able to find the channel .
instead of stören the gps-signale , you &apos;ll be täuscht .
and , &quot; you can trust us . &quot;
we call ourselves pors &amp; amp ; rao and we live and work in india .
this is a video of the prototype .
this work is the cartoon of a umgedrehten .
we debate over the argument , &quot; what the world needs now is nuclear , &quot; right ?
and so far , there &apos;s only three hauptquellen -- coal and gas , wasserkraft , which is almost everywhere , and nuclear power .
we &apos;ve become the russian of the russian in the world , and it &apos;s been transformed into electricity .
co2e emissions are the equivalent emissions of all greenhouse gases and particles that cause warming and turned into co2 .
now , if you look at the fact that the prevalence of nuclear weapons in nuclear weapons , we know , india and pakistan heimlich nuclear weapons developed by urananreicherung in atomenergieanlagen .
for wind energy , the area is much bigger , but the standfläche is smaller .
the reality is that 21 states have nuclear power , or ?
and in the senate of the united states , we need the support of both parties -- just one or two voices are necessary to be the global warming in the senate , and this room can help .
we &apos;re not going to get enough energy from renewables .
i used to worry about the 10,000 years .
thank you .
that was -- my motivation was about apollo .
for the first time , we have enough wealth in the hands of some fewer people , and the available technology that will allow us to explore space .
26 groups of seven countries took the competition , each between one and 25 million dollars .
orbitalflüge -- we can bring them to the space station .
and the advantage for the donors is the sum of the bekanntwerdung and the social security .
would you surprise us , faszinieren ?
that means that the surfaces can be able to be able to cut . you can get incredibly small .
a challenge , how we can put this new self-assembly order in a column .
what i didn &apos;t know about the time , because we only had seen the outside , the space kept on , within the column , and that was a fairly surprising discovery .
inspired by the process of the cell cell algorithms , michael hansmeyer algorithms , which is incredible , fascinating forms of surfaces . no human could design them by hand , but you can build it , and you could understand our understanding of architecture .
so , look at this picture here -- many shapes dance around here for you .
it &apos;s a very rare condition .
this is a drug that &apos;s developed for cancer .
you can see , the chip ahmt actually nach the atembewegung .
it &apos;s a very young nation that &apos;s run by young people .
and i think a lot of people in the room , many of you are in the same position like me .
so i believe women are going to be leaders in our society because they recognize that it &apos;s very important for their future generations to get our cultural identities .
we &apos;ve seen that since the time has been more people , people are all using people like youtube and social networks to give their stories , show their photos and tell their own stories with their own voices .
at the same time we store them to be able to explore and we store our part of the world .
so i &apos;ve been considered more or less than nothing .
so i thought , &quot; maybe , if i do these ants a few apartments , they &apos;re going to go there . &quot;
this was called &quot; huf house . &quot;
so i thought , &quot; how can i do that ? &quot;
and when i finished it , i came back to the next day .
and it was ...
my work , roughly geschätzt , sometimes five , six or seven weeks ; you can &apos;t always go ahead .
and i &apos;m doing it around , and i shaped the kampfwagen .
so i broke the needle .
it &apos;s a very mühsame work , but the best things come in little paketen .
they expect their employees to do what they asked them to do when they &apos;ve done the job , they can do that .
there &apos;s this absolute concentration of being , this absolute ballung of consciousness , consciousness , an absolute center of compassion and love defined the primary properties of the divine .
my gebeutelter body flew in the one direction , my geschundenes wheel in the other .
i put all the spaziergänge that i probably wouldn &apos;t do with you , the kunstprojekte i might not be going to do , the friends i would not look at , the brautgänge that i couldn &apos;t walk with .
because you don &apos;t need the sich-kennenlernen-sitzung .
and if you näherst you from the back , against the wind , you can just go over and it makes it plums in the dirt . &quot;
20 years ago , the doctors had been cut my leg and i was hoping , and there was a 15 prozentiege chance of survival .
and as i became more and more , and at that point in my life , i was probably 14 pounds a kilos of lighter than i &apos;m now .
and nobody is verkörpert the modern mannhaftigkeit in my eyes more than david black .
walk upright , you say , is the threshold of what makes us human .
it &apos;s president of the international union union union , which is the least euphemistische name i &apos;ve ever heard .
it was born for a three and a half months , and it was really a fantastic überlebenskampf of him .
so once i tried to approach the piano , i became a strong weggeschubst .
and at the end , you &apos;ve been so fast that things like the &quot; flight of &quot; the &quot; flight of &quot; the &quot; flight of &quot; the &quot; flight of &quot; the &quot; flight of &quot; no problem , right ?
would you want to play me ?
dp : &quot; tiger rag . &quot;
i don &apos;t kapiere that .
they &apos;re fighting to weiterzuentwickeln their own way in this forest in a world that &apos;s clean up , a world that &apos;s not yet yet , in a world that &apos;s not verschmutzt .
so we know that they are able to make them , which is that the research has been absolutely impossible when i started .
the long loving connection to mother , who evolved during this long childhood , and also the siblings , can keep the whole life long , and that can be for 60 years .
it &apos;s not sustainable , and also the vast lager of the holzarbeiter in the forest is now meat , and so the pygmäen that jagten in the kongobecken , and they &apos;ve lived in their wonderful lives for many years of years .
the person said yesterday .
we have now in every state , and the problems in florida are others than that in new york .
come on , and i &apos;m going to go down here ?
there &apos;s been out there in the politicians .
what we want to do in the lab is so pretty much the same , but with a few dozen of different types of molecules -- so a drastische reduction of complexity , but still trying to create something lebensechtes .
it &apos;s actually very lebenslos . once you &apos;re forming , it doesn &apos;t really do something .
now , where they are all experts on protocells , we &apos;re going to play a game with these protocells .
we then see the selbst-anordnung of these bodies of öltröpfchen that we &apos;ve seen before , and the black black box represent this black schlamm -- this facettenreichen , very complex , organic black mud .
in his lab , martin hanzcyz stellt protocells , experimentelle kleckse of chemicals that behave like living cells . his work shows how life might be done on earth , and maybe elsewhere .
this is a kaulquappen-gehwagen kaulquappen-gehwagen to run your tadpole for a walk .
what is that -- where did you know that ? you &apos;ve taken it .
but if we did that in every one of every fire fire , we could redefine the case .
ruß is the dreck that &apos;s otherwise in her beautiful , rosa lungs , and that &apos;s associated with the – .
the birds could jump from one to the other .
you can abonnieren the current messages from him . you can talk to him .
but keeping this herd , will be asking a huge toll of our planet .
next , we &apos;re going to put the skin cells and multiply it in a zellkulturträger .
we &apos;ve been working for thousands of years with zellstrukturen , started with products like wine , beer and joghurt .
it &apos;s true that if we are doing the world in the world , we see that there &apos;s almost a universal pursuit of people who have a car .
let me just talk about hydrogen .
that &apos;s a huge energy energy to create energy , to create energy .
if we can see these moegliche future , it can be others .
you had to survive .
and we made sure we were to be a zugeteilt to be zugeteilt to get funding and support .
because why should our students go as far away from their home ?
it became a book , then a performance .
there was an incredible idea , a crazy idea .
here on the west coast , they destroyed their forest .
but in this image you see how we started building the ausbildungszentrum , which is soon a big umweltzentrum brazil .
when i was time , i started to start my hauptstudium , i studied the neu field of landschaftsökologie .
if you go to the south , you see the expansion of new york city as it was once , at the end of the american revolution .
the white surfaces on this map are the protected areas of the protected place .
or the moorschildkröte , the feuchte wiesen , insects and sonnige places .
maybe there &apos;s a wald-klapperschlange there .
it &apos;s so much force to combine science and visualization that you can see these images . it &apos;s like both sides of the spiegels .
and we have a really dramatic level of nicht-nachhaltiges in our society .
so i &apos;ve been not going to go into this .
you can do the unberührt , which is natural .
that &apos;s a biomorphes building .
one example we all know is that of cell phones .
and it turns all around this question -- of course , in a very artistic and indirekte way .
but it &apos;s all over , and these tools are parts that help us create .
seriously -- clapping you &apos;re quiet -- that &apos;s really great .
alex steffen sees a sustainable future future
you could mean that this could be a big problem for a law , but congress doesn &apos;t seem to be very stören .
but if you made a lot of qualitativ and sold , it &apos;s not okay .
some of the things we share , we &apos;ve done things that we found , and every single option in this industry is caused by the entsetzen .
that &apos;s the simple thing .
i had a very elitäre , versnobte , expensive education in india , and that was almost broken .
and i thought , i start a barefoot college -- college only for the poor .
a professional is someone , with a combination of competence , selbstvertrauen and belief .
when i said that , &quot; show us what &apos;s possible . what do you do ?
the entire current comes from the sun .
democracy , bürgerrecht , how to be vermisst your country , what you should do if you &apos;re arrested to be arrested , what you should do if an animal is sick .
you can go there in the spannungen , and you go down to the schools , it &apos;s coming between teachers and parents , so the puppen can call the teachers and the parents to go to the village and say , &quot; give you the hands .
you use language language .
i said , &quot; i can &apos;t , mr. president .
a erfolgsstory .
and our ingenieurskollegen are creating one of the largest dynamic world &apos;s computers in the world for this kind of informations-erkundung .
you see the elektronenfluss along the stromlinien that we have made as an artist for the scientist .
thank you very much .
interestingly , there &apos;s data from these two groups of people , data on how happy they are .
&quot; i &apos;m going to walk physical , financially , emotionally , mentally , mentally , and in almost every other way . &quot; &quot; i don &apos;t know about minute .
he didn &apos;t lieh him and of course , ray croc , six months later , the same idea .
in this case , it &apos;s because you &apos;re in the experiment i &apos;m going to be used to report on , drucke of monets images .
we collected our materials , went out of the room and we waited half an hour .
i &apos;m going to show you why .
they made two pictures and they had two beautiful 8x10 , &quot; glänzende abzüge , &quot; for them , and we said , &quot; which would you be made ? &quot;
we take a completely new group of naiven harvard-studenten and say , &quot; you know , we give a fotokurs , and we can do it in two different ways .
the nachtaufnahmen that &apos;s durchfliegen in the big car and the milchstrasse are beautiful .
voices : it flies in the air . oh , shit .
&quot; ma , don &apos;t start . &quot;
don &apos;t forget that these tradition is not from the nebeln of avalon , but it goes back in a time , even before we zeichneten stories on papyrus ritzten or piktogramme on feuchte höhlenwände .
the kind of food , yeah .
the type of the gewellten roof , you know .
and so , we had my father seinen his mittagsschlaf , because i knew he would kill me if i let her ride . so we go into the car .
&quot; and did this guy like a blue uniform , and a entsetzten expression on the face ? &quot;
does i really want to go there ? because if i don &apos;t have ariadnes faden to ankern me -- enough metaphors for their taste ? -- could i never get out .
see ? we &apos;re a secret club with a secret händedruck .
she says , &quot; ma , you have to look ! &quot;
&quot; i vote for the little old lady , damn even ! &quot;
it &apos;s up from the car . &quot;
i really fear that .
so what is the social result of that ?
where can i go and who are with whom ?
and if we have it , we &apos;ll decide how many miles we go to what reisemodus where we live and work .
and you &apos;re communicating smart terminals at the time , and you see where your bus is coming out , and when it comes , and you can buy your tickets in real time .
i want to do the wireless , verflochtene , and i challenge that this network is to be accessible to the open standards .
and they came to the late 1960s here .
and for all of you who had a mental illness in touch , you know what a challenge that could be .
i said i wanted to tell the fantastisch-geschichte , i wanted to share the three a &apos;s of all the way , and i wanted to leave them with a abschlussgedanken .
because they were all three years old .
and so what i love about this story is that , as a result , that &apos;s the reason that you &apos;re just a authentic person , and that &apos;s why authenticity is .
i ate oliven oliven . &quot;
you can sleep in your green sleep .
j so it &apos;s so many that the vision has become problematic .
i thought it was strange about it , as if it was a competition that was going to be so fresh .
it &apos;s a weiße , reiche , rich unternehmergruppe , which is not repräsentativ for the city .
it looks pretty simple , but that was a halbe-million-dollar-projekt .
people were staunten about two things -- they were amazed about the destruction , but there was also a sense of unglaubens about the heldenmut of new york , which i found very moving .
because at looking at four platforms along the grundstücks -- where one was the more version version of a familienplattform &apos;s familienplattform -- we knew it had to be beweglich to respond to ändernde conditions and the changed definition of ground zero .
we have the opportunity to rethink our thinking about cities .
dr : it was me an honor .
and i know children suffer every year .
if god forbid -- somebody from us here and a concussion erlitte , most of us would complete a zeitraum of a time of a few hours to a few weeks .
you have to be a auskennen about problems that we &apos;re talking about today .
and as it turns out , tom saw a helmet for 20 dollars a good way to keep a 100,000 dollar-studium .
it &apos;s not true , but it happened tony blair going to be in the head of the head in 2005 when his doodles , of course , &quot; and he &apos;s been described to be described .
in other words , they have a common and growing complexity of visual language that &apos;s happening in vorhersehbarer .
and he was told that there was no cure .
today , all countries are committed to offer patents to medicines who have been at least 20 years .
it depends on the bereitwilligkeit of the pharmaunternehmen industry to bewilligen their patents and make them available for others .
in the orlando , the same kind of stage , a open-air-stadium , people were sitting in the sun , afternoon at very high humidity , and they didn &apos;t feel comfortable .
you can adjust everything to worry about your well-being .
he offers all these services , überweisungen , tickets , and so little things you &apos;re doing short online , but for people who are just connecting to the digital world .
the question was , &quot; how do you make a teacher out of this teacher ?
let &apos;s see what he does .
and the husband of the daughter , he was also sick by the erschöpfung of his wife .
but the visual complexity is still very large .
now , schlagzeilentexter had a heidenspass on our studies .
now , when we feel emotions , we show them .
and you could get the impression that the unhappy people are going to take a different structural position within the network .
that &apos;s my sozialerfahrung . &quot;
they &apos;re both of carbon , and yet one of them has been put in a particular way on the left , and they get graphit , which is soft and dark .
to put this into something , let me just take a little bit of a moment .
and older , finally , it &apos;s not easy .
under the same circumstances , older people are richten their cognitive resources , like aufmersamkeit and memory , more on positive information than the negative information .
we cost life .
they &apos;d like me , &quot; tonight , i &apos;m going to perform this moonwalk for this girl on this bar mitzvah . &quot;
kid david : it &apos;s like i said , frankly , often don &apos;t know what &apos;s going on when i dance .
they were called me and uncles and uncles , and i kept invited over a period of five years .
1868 : the second contract of fort fort case clearly souveränität the souveränität of the great sioux nation and the besitzrechte of the lakota of the sacred black hills .
the contract from fort fort asked that at least three quarter of the stamms sign had to sign up country .
they were tired of the treaties .
the lehrerfluktuation is eight times as high as the average average .
so what &apos;s going to do ?
and today ? child mortality rate since 1960 , 6,5 percent of the time .
you either get it as a pill or a syringe , you have to take it every day to regulate the blutzuckerspiegel .
if we have it , like here , we have to do with people .
but essentially , it makes a lot of sense .
it means : are you smarter than a fünftklässler ?
bmw is a very safe car .
the problem for bmw is that this car looks safe .
now you &apos;ll think , &quot; if my life on it , i would be able to use it every day . &quot;
we need to connect this with a scientific method .
that &apos;s something different than actually doing an effective campaign .
what &apos;s not new .
the lights are being dark .
we do it for our clients .
we have the ones that we have in the sun .
now -- logic , logical , you see , logical , is that you &apos;ve got to see this position where you &apos;ve got to go to this position -- without moving the wrist .
i &apos;m going to intervene . now , if any time -- another person -- not always , ever , could respond .
so , if you &apos;re interested in this , i &apos;m going to present some untergrund-techniken .
here , i have to take care of the beginning , so i can follow my cards during the mischvorgangs -- oh , we should have been going to start -- no problem , no problem .
yeah ?
i think ... i think ...
lg : pardon ?
what map is i want to use ? the lady or the five ?
lg : you see your hand .
moment , wait -- take a card .
another color . lg : diamonds , perfect .
compassion .
karo-ass , yes ? zoe : yeah .
here -- let &apos;s put all the cards -- here -- are all the cards , right ?
and finally , the king -- in fact , five seconds .
some of you seem to know this child .
after i was back , i &apos;ve done my whole company to a ein-pobacken-firma . &quot;
if you don &apos;t have a musical hearing , you couldn &apos;t switch off in your car .
let &apos;s see what &apos;s really happening .
i always say to my students , &quot; if you have a trugschluss , you always have a augenbraue , you know , everybody knows . &quot;
imagine the person , and then they follow it at the same time , at the same time , from b to e , and they &apos;ll hear everything that &apos;s the chopin .
i had an amazing experience . i was 45 years ago , and i had a realization of a time .
she came to auschwitz when she was 15 years old . her brother was eight , her parents lost her .
so ladies and gentlemen from the jury , look at this .
if you &apos;re the fastest of all today , you get 20 dollars . &quot;
but for tasks of the 21st century , this mechanistische doesn &apos;t work -- doesn &apos;t work often , often the damage .
think about your own work .
the standard standard is lower .
these are the building blocks of a whole new business of our businesses .
that one day of intense autonomy has led to a whole range of software-fehlerbehebungen that might never have been given .
make it because you like to do it .
the aluminium is used because of its light weight .
in a series of 55 spheres , they &apos;re going to go around , proportional , every sphere and their distances rate proportional to the small soil .
and the blue side , the gegenseite , is showing the other direction .
it &apos;s developed in many durchlläufen years .
the standardbild on the object would probably be a highly aufgelößtes picture of the earth .
but it &apos;s always leaves the 10 percent or more that most benachteiligt or erfolglos .
232.000 dollars , and in a group of a group of hungerbekämpfung .
nonprofit organizations have to go back to the zurückhalten , bold , big , angelegte , new spendenaktionen to try and fear that they &apos;re versagen by the schmutz .
so what should you do ?
the overhead has gone .
dan pallotta : our thinking about charity is grundverkehrt &apos;s denkweise
then there was the klatschenden audience , yes , that &apos;s the music that you have to do .
people who &apos;ve done these stradivaris , the amatis , all these beautiful instruments .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m responsible .
it &apos;s all about the execution of music , as it &apos;s written , not to take interpretation . &quot;
that &apos;s great . and what &apos;s the eyes ?
that &apos;s what he does .
you know , authority is available when it &apos;s needed . that &apos;s very important .
so kleiber is about the process .
as a kulturgemeinschaft , we tell ourselves a lot of stories about the future and about what steps we could do from here .
there are 98 ölfördernde nations worldwide .
and in the face of climate change , it &apos;s not really durchführbar .
and it &apos;s a process that really makes joy .
they &apos;re a little bit like to think about whether they &apos;re going to push it forward .
and the ratspräsident said , &quot; if we didn &apos;t have the transition to do the transition , we would have to invent all of the kommunale infrastructure for the first time . &quot;
but there &apos;s a problem .
budgets are not really balanced , and until a certain degree , the games that they play to keep this , the subject so much , that you can &apos;t see what the really obvious challenges are .
in fact , there are five states that are worse , and really only four states that are not facing this great challenge .
and even if you &apos;re doing so , you could get back to it .
it should be more like private accounting .
but i had a hintergedanken , when i went to gottfried schlaug , and i was in a scheideweg in my life , and i tried to decide between music and medicine .
when you laugh , you know .
many years after the early clocks , a young lady i knew that sex might be so good for the five senses .
in the course of the befragten , the way that &apos;s good is all the five senses at an extreme level .
of course , the five senses are not the only thing that life is interesting .
we are all born as artists .
if you have a conversation , the child has to come up with the next answer to verantworten what it started .
but their parents tell them , &quot; it &apos;s going to be weggespült by the waves . &quot;
but children usually do art for fun . it &apos;s playing .
but you rarely find a teacher .
in karaoke-bars , there are always people who are singen &quot; she &apos;s gone &quot; or &quot; hotel in california &quot; as they &apos;re doing gitarren-riffs .
so in that minute , we can switch off the tv . loggen out from the internet , they are on and start doing something .
the students fall into a kind of a trance .
he said it was his profile . &quot; and what are they ? &quot; i said , &quot; actor , &quot; he said .
let &apos;s start to start with this point .
there will be more and more powerful and more überflutungen .
if you know , there will be an warming in future .
but the second is exactly what &apos;s expectations .
the economic effects are almost undenkbar .
a huge part of the species will be threatened by extinction .
if a accident accident happens , it &apos;s critical that we don &apos;t only make the stone , but the crew .
for something , it used to be used as a trampoline , and once it was once you had .
but today we use a stickstoff-druckkanone .
it &apos;s not a hüpfburg that &apos;s not a hüpfburg .
1960 , joseph kittenger did some of the united states air force quite incredible force .
one of the trouble at that altitude , if you go to 10,000 feet -- it &apos;s great , right ? if you go on 10,000 metter , you can really just use oxygen .
they designed a puppet for him , and that &apos;s what he looked like .
we expect and others expect that maybe the faa or the caa are going to say , &quot; you need to put somebody in a suit that &apos;s not aufgeblasen , who is connected to the plane . &quot;
there were three leitmotive -- right ? -- they moved from the conference , which are important to what i want to talk about .
and the girl said , &quot; you know , you know . &quot;
the problem is an artist , as you &apos;re growing up , and i &apos;m now convinced that we don &apos;t grow into creativity but it &apos;s out of it . or we &apos;ll be more heraus-unterrichtet .
all around the world .
the whole system was invented -- everywhere in the world , there was no public education systems in front of the 19th century .
the brain is not divided in areas .
they did ballet , they did stepptanz and jazz , they were dancing , zeitgenössische dance .
the festival is going to do a very good festival . it was with a postitiven press that you would die .
let &apos;s just say value for money .
dubai is like a hand that wants to support the everyday thing .
before i go to the middle east , i &apos;d like to conclude a anregung as a anregung quote with a quote from one of the greatest sheiks .
it &apos;s also the krankhaftigkeit .
well , you &apos;re a little bit of your behavior , and you &apos;re a brain disorders .
we don &apos;t have all facts . we don &apos;t even know what tools are going to be , or what we need to find in the very specific position to get to the point of what &apos;s going to be in the face .
how are you going to scale ? &quot;
the three are all the same , although you &apos;re all in a different context , one is , you know , one thing that &apos;s the other two is like you do , i like these books because they have something very special about themselves .
the children taught them .
they were very friendly .
we also believe that the content is important .
i was transformed by my children .
howard &apos;s doing this experiment , and when he gets the data , he &apos;s recording a curve , and suddenly he recognizes that there &apos;s no beautiful glockenkurve .
this was his meerrettich . he was obsessed with it .
howard doesn &apos;t believe that there &apos;s this one .
people always say that when you ask them , what they want their coffee ?
a mustard with more elegance and culture and meaning .
that &apos;s it , and why did we liked this ?
he was eingetauscht a few times , and he spent the most of his career in lower ligen , and then ended up in management . he was the general manager of the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; oakland a . &quot;
we all know what happened when millions of women received hormonersatztherapie for the symptoms of the wechseljahre symptoms , until we were able to do a huge study , and we &apos;ve been gefördert by the national .
thank you .
but dad erschrak unheimlich , and he didn &apos;t want to do that .
but there &apos;s also a middle area in between .
these are four really different ways to see the world . i named it .
what &apos;s interesting when you ausdruckt it -- and -- by the way -- this is from 1450 -- showing all the artifacts from modern comics : rechteckiges feldarrangement einfache simple strichzeichnungen , and a lesesequenz from links to right .
and that was what i proposed : we might be able to make comics on an infinite screen , on the x- and on the line and in treppenform .
this is daniel merlin goodbrey in britain .
now , maybe you know , for all of you , but for me , i often met the very hard one day , and i had never seen this verständigung challenge of the verständigung challenge .
that &apos;s honest and aufrichtig , and the reason , weswegen , is a sustainable impression .
if you think your baby is gay or gay , you should be able to get it to the adoption .
perrys political solution was to be praying for the citizens of texas , for rain .
this song is called &quot; farther than the sun . &quot;
i want to start a different tonight , because i want to ask you to leave the country and jump out for the open ocean .
they were looking at a little bit after the dinosaur of the dinosaurs , 65 million years ago , when whales had legs , and they were entstammen of a splittergruppe rebellischer , and they allow me to erzählweise these poetische .
and how do you do that ?
the kalifornische seelöwe , when you get to the bay , reißt them , reißt them , turning it into a kind of frisbee , and then she puts it around .
i &apos;ll show you the last data set .
and the most exciting thing was that all of their love and their interest in the oceans .
as you can see here , this is a 11-zoll-durchmesser platine .
that &apos;s not something you don &apos;t hear every day .
ah- hah .
in australia , it &apos;s mostly the aborigines who are sitting in prison .
she told him , and he beauftragte the first entersuchung in terms of what we call the aussteuer-tanz .
because nobody can get a rücklage .
so why don &apos;t we do something to work in the everyday world ?
auf gandhi .
could i get my last tonspur ?
never , that &apos;s impossible ! no , no , no , no ! that &apos;s not possible . &quot;
you could deal with the same thing .
from von von von von von von von von von von von von von von von von von von , and a mathematician , and a mathematician of the army , they took everything together . and then they needed a space to build it .
the ein- and the copy worked in the first time .
&quot; ah ! &quot; finally , she found that it was a programmierungsproblem .
i know if i have to beat myself . &quot;
he made the machine running all night . if you &apos;re a stephen wolfram , who &apos;s remembered that the whole thing invented .
now , 50 years later , here &apos;s -- it &apos;s a way of kraft animation .
the next 18 minutes i &apos;m talking about here , four americans who are still alive , die because of their diet .
that &apos;s a global problem .
traumhafte city .
and he &apos;s got the schnauze full of it . he &apos;s suffering , his friends , his family and his community .
they want -- they want to control themselves .
you know , for long , long time has remained in this narrow understanding .
we don &apos;t teach our children .
and most of the kids get them .
good , supermarkets .
if you can cook , it doesn &apos;t matter .
in all the america , many wonderful things go to themselves , if we just go back .
misha : anonymous , ladies and gentlemen -- a clever group of political motivierter hacker that &apos;s enstanden in 2011 .
the network is all the way , and it &apos;s going to be a lot of human activities .
interestingly , anonymous uses its information information to financial profit .
he explained to me about 2003 and 2004 , as he went on in new york , took 10,000 dollars from the machine to be 30,000 dollars from the machine to use geklonte cards .
it was born in süddeutschland into a stable and a half year-old family , his obsession with play as a juvenile , he led him to the hacking .
and most of the exception , except for the script and cha0 , showed no social skills in the world -- only in the net .
i think there are multiple reasons . i &apos;m not going to go into the details , but i &apos;m going to mention some .
but they &apos;re all determined by the market , and what is driving the market is first -- number one is the great demographic umwälzung .
we also found a lot of examples of dead big boxes that have been transformed into all sorts of social institutions , many schools , many churches , and lots of libraries , like this one .
and finally , i expect the roads to be ausgebaut by the neuentwicklung of the mall .
it &apos;s very successful , and it has helped to have a anzuregen that eight of 13 local malls plans have geäussert to become umgenutzt .
the stream was covered by the parking lot .
their people are different than typical vorstädtisch , but they &apos;re less than cities as cities .
&quot; his vagina , &quot; she said , &quot; she &apos;s a whole tageswerk . &quot;
but actually , it didn &apos;t start , it started with a conversation with a woman .
it &apos;s about a gender , which is a fundamental resource of the planet , which is women .
it &apos;s a körperwelt , and the kind of thing exists in the body , and i think there &apos;s a real meaning , our bodies , in our minds -- that this separation has created a teilung that often makes the project from the decision .
i want to tell this little story about my own beginnings , because that &apos;s a lot of happiness with happiness and with agnes .
maybe it &apos;s in my geburtsstaat south carolina , which is not much less than much less than the present , and even from a future as independent country , dreamed of .
well , he was too gutgläubig because he stayed where he was , after long after the following österreichs , and even after the festnahmen and deportationen in budapest .
and he got the same answer : &quot; bring them to me the best workers who can find them and if they &apos;re good enough , i &apos;ll be a place . &quot;
and so , as we see , it &apos;s like , &quot; it &apos;s okay . it was so beautiful .
&quot; ah ! &quot; said dr. robicsek . &quot; i &apos;ve gone on the movie all over the movie . &quot;
as i said , he fluchte too much .
and you can actually imagine it right .
you know what they &apos;re looking for .
but we take care of the most difficult cases and order to get the other day back .
so we came to these two rules .
so i went to russia , and my mother went , during the soviet union .
and when you think it &apos;s not more , it &apos;s pushing it so long as you keep on .
what i want to do with this -- i hope to illustrate the point .
and what i &apos;m going to point out in the presentation later is 50 percent of the u.s. in the ocean .
it &apos;s rabenschwarz because the photons can &apos;t reach the average depth of the ocean , which is 3,66 miles . the average rate is on a mile .
and so we drove along the gebirgszugs in an area next to the galapagosriff , and we found the missing heat .
so i started developing a new videokommunikationstechnologie , with a robotersystem that replace me , and i don &apos;t have to go into my vehicle .
we find the konservierung of the konservierung .
and i looked at them yesterday , she &apos;s up in seattle . ok .
but i would leave a child without driver &apos;s control .
in some parts of the world , in south africa , education is hard to access .
when we saw the impact of the angebots , andrew and i would have to increase it to offer so many people as possible as possible .
what was the special thing about these courses ?
the video is broken every few minutes and the student will ask a question .
so we wanted to convince some of our colleagues in the world that multiple choice is not so bad .
in terms of certain courses , you can ask yourself , which are the most common missverständnisse , and how to fix those students .
we actually see the beginning of either through a personalisierten studienplan or by personalisiertes feedback that we showed them .
i thought about my place in the universe , and what my first thought was , what infinity means , when i was a child .
and in our society , of course , it &apos;s mostly about making the reality of others .
i have my doubt about the values of the arts science , like reason , for example , it &apos;s expected to be rational in a wortgefecht .
so you can understand my surprise when i was reading in the new yorker , that alan greenspan , the vorsitzender of the federal , said , ayn rand is his intelektueller .
i think you can make yourself about those fun , and not about the ones that don &apos;t have , and that &apos;s exactly why i &apos;m not reiße , and i &apos;m not witze by kenneth lay and his charmante .
i &apos;m right now , right , these old times of the telemarketings , i &apos;ll tell you .
he said i &apos;d have to pay him for a little bit of respect because it can take 18 years to get a really good job .
well ? yes ? what ? i can &apos;t hear it . &quot;
and i &apos;m afraid of that active person who doesn &apos;t like us .
i &apos;ve had a nachgedacht thought about beauty that you were thinking about , and i thought about beauty that she came out yesterday . there &apos;s a book in his book , that the trickster can actually come out of beauty .
george bush bush : what costs the defense of our security , and what costs our freedom for the rest of us , we need to pay the price . &quot;
ten years ago , no astronomer in the world would have come to the idea -- well , or very few astronomers -- that there are planets outside of our solar system .
there are a lot of other ecosystems on earth are truly in danger .
he constantly schwafelte out that an experiment and a particle particle , could go and get a kettenreaktion that &apos;s destroyed the world .
we need to be able to do the same thing with biotechnology .
so , we don &apos;t want to see one of course .
what can we do about that ?
and now the worst thing .
we spend a lot of money to make sure that we don &apos;t die at a flugzeugabsturz , but we &apos;re almost not going to give it to anything . and yet it &apos;s completely preventable .
we don &apos;t want to get caught on the wrong foot .
i hope that &apos;s going to happen .
it &apos;s very , very important because this is the system , the schmelztiegel that came on the planet , and it &apos;s now time for us to understand it .
it &apos;s an astonishing realization . and we &apos;ve just been known for the very recently .
and that &apos;s what the system system , a number of standorten in the southern hemisphere , represented in these circles .
anybody who &apos;s going to get it to get just reaching on the database and can get the information that &apos;s needed for everything that &apos;s going on .
we are about reiten the wave , the technological possibility .
in an earthquake , large amounts of these new microbes we never saw before , from the sea floor .
the ozeanograph john delaney creates a network of hochauflösenden cameras and sensors that make our oceans for global , interactive laboratory -- and that &apos;s what causes a datenexplosion about the world .
so i think that optimism is driving architecture .
so again , radical against conservative .
the unerklärliche against the verständliche . you know , too often you want to understand everything .
our intellectual begierden are complex .
you know it &apos;s true ; the kathedralen , as unexpected , are always unexpected .
but i &apos;d rather play something completely unknown , and even with mistakes , rather than repeat the same thing , so it &apos;s ausgehöhlt out of its bedeutungslosigkeit .
taking risks of spaces that were never more schwindelerregend , as they should be in a very large city .
there are the emotions of the victims .
daniel libeskind builds up very big ideas . it &apos;s called 17 terms , which is to be essentially liegen the vision of architecture -- raw , gewagt , gefühlsbetont , radical -- and inspiration for each of the kühne creative quest .
it has the lowest oil rate of all the size .
so , draw something like that , or will it just give you a few hauptstrecken ?
em : you just have to . if not , we &apos;re in a lot of trouble .
and then buy this capital , and you put the solar panels on the roof , and then you get the haus- or a monatliche leasing-rate , which is lower than the electricity bill .
we almost failed , but we &apos;ve come across 2008 .
it &apos;s similar to a jet jet jet .
how about everything in the world could be innovative ?
look at that .
boy , when you go to the livestock and you see a geparden , like he &apos;s eating a goats , he &apos;s very nervous . then just go to him .
we were hungry .
our tradition looks like this : in any himba-dorf there &apos;s a holy fire .
until now , we &apos;ve been able to get support of the world wildlife fund , the very small programs to raise the nationalem .
also very important -- we invest the money in education about aids and hiv .
taschenführer -- and again , again , a streitpunkt in a lot of the world &apos;s meereserhaltung -- are very useful , they &apos;re a great device .
and we &apos;re hiding that prize behind huge win .
dan barber and alice waters lead a passionate about the kulinarische revolution for ökologisches food .
schalentiere , muscheln , oysters , venusmuscheln , venusmuscheln , buntbarsch , saibling -- these are the known species .
that &apos;s like a kater of protein .
science sees the world through the mind , the quantitativ , things that can be measured and described , but they give art a frame of knowledge and knowledge .
from the plan of a few cameras , a plan for three weeks after three weeks .
this is the natural cycle .
it would not normally do a anständiger photographer , a photo of verschandeln , right ? but sometimes it must be to represent the dimensions .
here , you see the glacier &apos;s going to go back .
this is what you &apos;ve seen .
could india be the origin of the origin , or a global center for innovation , just like this , is that a global center for backoffice-dienstleistungen and softwareentwicklung ?
when we asked people to the people in these innovationszentren , what they were working on , they said , &quot; we &apos;re working on global products . &quot;
you can &apos;t be a professor , if you weren &apos;t a student .
the best hospitals , the doctors for cancer cancer , they would go to the doctor &apos;s doctors , and they &apos;re in geburten , hirnschlägen , heart disease , for artificial hüftgelenke , notfälle at 4 a.m.
it works a little bit like -- this is a recent ausgeführte google-suchanfrage at four o &apos;clock in the morning .
i said , i know a codierte message when i see one .
everyone in our society comes into cancer -- if not personal , then through one beloved person , a family member , a friend , a friend .
in this raumfähre , the genetic material is the chromosomes , within a nucleus .
we &apos;ve applied tumor fields in the lab at over 20 different cancers , and we see this effect in all of these .
he got the standardbehandlungen .
but what we can see is that in six months of the tumor , it &apos;s responding and it starts .
it &apos;s just the beginning .
this is a new arbeitsbereich , a new project .
in fact , they &apos;re down 15 feet deep , and they collect rainwater from the roof , there &apos;s a little rohr , and from their own .
so , water from 300 , 400 miles away , and it &apos;s going to look like this .
somewhere is a stream or a flüsschen through this scene .
this is called &quot; kund . &quot; in english , we have oberflächenwasser and grundwasser .
and they &apos;re going to go even further .
these are the beautiful stairs we just saw on one of the images .
and hiv-infektionsraten , 27 percent , is that $ 100 percent people get hiv in sub-saharan africa .
10 percent of india .
they will get the jobs in the workforce that people get from the landarmut and bring them towards the industrialisierung and wealth .
and the countries right , you see the pro-kopf-bip , and basically every country with a pro-kopf-bip of a pro-kopf-bip , say , less than 5,000 dollars , a korruptionsrang of say , three .
in the first 20 years , in the &apos; 60s and &apos; 70s , india didn &apos;t grew up .
buy african products .
but i think a lot bigger problem is that this logic -- that we should be ipods and not bombs -- i mean , it would make a great title for thomas friedmans &apos;s new book .
so 500 people have been beworben and four of them were chosen to go to the local institution and then besichtigen them , to be blogging about it .
so now with a einzubeziehen in the planning plan to 2020 won &apos;t necessarily change anything about it , because it &apos;s still the dictators that the agenda are controlling .
evgeny morozov : it has the internet of orwells worst expectations ?
&quot; like a man . &quot;
and he was on the other guys around us .
because for me , who was heranwuchs in this time and lived in this männer-kisten-beziehung , the question was , &quot; do you want to have sex or drugs -- and drugs are not taking .
i was paralyzed , people .
as an indian , and now politicians and regierungsminister are quite around the rummel that &apos;s affected , concerned , all the gerede about india as new weltführer , even the new market .
in other words , all sorts of different stories about countries , whether they want to get the people to get their day or not .
but when lightning in our country was pretty slowly , it took about half an hour until such a call .
she can &apos;t understand the conversation .
so , this can sometimes have an awful consequences . ok .
and those of you who have taken your money here may be surprised to see how many schriftsysteme are there in the rupien-schein that are going to explain the nennwert .
i went home and i started doing a little bit . i found some scary statistics .
ludwick marishane : a bathroom with water .
and now i feel like george bush .
now , this title , this phrase , comes from a critic , an early critic , and this is a passage i just love , and i &apos;d like to read them .
and that &apos;s a good thing , because if it would be , mother nature would have a problem : how to do everything in the world , we get chimpanzees to mate ?
this is the hardest part , which is not obvious , and so i &apos;ve picked it up for the end .
ok ? stop . that &apos;s what it &apos;s going to do .
i don &apos;t know why there &apos;s pinke flamingos , but no matter , you &apos;re in the garden .
thank you , thank you . thank you .
i actually suspect that the most evolutionsbiologen probably know many reasons why we want to put new things very , very quickly .
it looks like this . you should see that , you know , like this .
bob mckim has another version of this practice , in a fairly famous experiment in the &apos; 60s .
and we &apos;ve learned that with time : you get a lot of better , much more creative outcomes , if all of the rules are going to keep the rules .
and suddenly , there was a great conversation about design about a handfestes object .
so they &apos;re sometimes a bit skeptical , i &apos;ll go back to that .
you know what it feels like , all of these uncertainty , as long as you go back to the korridor , while the doctors are taking care of the sanitätsräume , and you ask yourself what &apos;s going on .
and so we would all feel secure and we would have a good time because we agree with the rules and agreed to agree with it .
we do everything that leads to success , but then , when we got to the success , we believe we did it . we refuse to be happy and hear all about what we &apos;ve done successfully .
i was faster , but just as depressed .
i learned that success is not a traffic street .
and the sopran-stimmgruppe is just full of hot girls . &quot;
i wrote , &quot; oh my god , &quot; -- hopefully , for always , the last time in the public .
he made sure everything fit .
it took some of 900 people .
and the second is that people clearly have a real connection .
these are questions .
as you see in modern liberal democracies , society , the state of state , can &apos;t only determine our self , to shape our own , but it demands us from us .
it means that we are going to be our full potential as human being human beings .
so these are the layers , the types of questions that i wanted to take you today -- the question : what are the intentions , who are going to be able to do something ?
so i said , and my colleague sebastian thrun , i think , there &apos;s better methods .
and we were successful .
i &apos;ll give you one in the fall .
he schubst them in the right position , stupst her and schlägt her nose .
we started the first surprise .
there had to be kind of a sprungfedermechanismus to create the amount of force , and the speed we observe and the ausgangsgrößen of the system .
a load cell is measuring forces , and it &apos;s actually a piezoelektrische load cell with a crystal inside .
this is the fangarm -- here &apos;s the heel , and it &apos;s going to get herumschwingen and the load cell .
a very , very , very bequeme solution for the particular problem .
and hawkes : it &apos;s not earth , stupid , it &apos;s ocean .
i think this is one of the most beautiful classic tauchgeräte that ever built .
i don &apos;t know any other tauchfahrzeuge , not even ferngesteuerte , which just benefit that this is a three-dimensional space .
now look at this -- he &apos;s just let me just stand .
the submarine that was out last year was this one .
gleichermassen is the understanding of architecture as störer , zusammenhanglos , -- please , apologize for the obvious example -- is not the right approach we need to choose .
basically new york is built on the back of the austernfischer , our streets on their shells .
in these eight seitlichen rooms , little babyaustern are a little gemästet .
so you walk around in london and was overwhelmed by this gestank .
and finally , the snow was a map of the outbreak .
and that &apos;s every second week .
i did her back on the top of the jokhang .
and in this area of the amazon , in the amazon , the country was discovered .
the other side of the field is tora bora where it &apos;s actually osama to be osama bin laden . that &apos;s stammes-gebiet .
that was one of the big motivationsfaktoren .
this is the ausgangsüberlegung . let me go forward and show you the hubble deep field of field .
but then you go to jupiter and it &apos;s 40 minutes long . that &apos;s a problem .
this is going to be part of it , in which it &apos;s going to be the beginning of the universe .
we only have one million galaxies .
so the stuff that &apos;s in the picture seems to be white , dark matter .
when you saw this picture for the first time , you can &apos;t see a lot of it .
this simulation was done with 1,000 and a month long , just to make this visible .
with planck , we hope to have a resolution that corresponds to the earth &apos;s image of earth , where you actually can see the complicated patterns of the earth .
and in the process , we are stressed stressed .
47 percent .
this is crazy . we &apos;re doing this all the time , even in the everyday everyday .
i went into a vicious cycle , and that led to a lot of pain and problems with the joints , so i could almost keep anything .
so i asked myself , could you be more creative if you seek to search for the constraints ?
all of this happened in tomorrow .
the constant is an obligation , as an obligation , as an offizieller bewacher , is drakonische strahlungsregeln and andauerndes monitor of the kontamination .
stalins hungersnöte hungersnöte the &apos; 30s , der , killing millions . in the &apos; 40s , they saw the nazis , the metzelten , verbrannten , verbrannten , vergewaltigten , many of the women were trafficked in germany .
that &apos;s the grief to get the grief . &quot;
and as a psychologin , most of the idea of most of the idea of what we learned in virtual world we had and identity , could use our identity , to live a better life in the real world .
we used to be used to a new way to be in common .
human relationships are üppig , messy and fordernd .
it &apos;s tröstete .
because in the moment that people are alone , even for a couple of seconds , they become hibbelig , and they &apos;re going to get a panic , they &apos;re going to take a electronic device .
but we are in danger , because in fact , the opposite is true .
i &apos;m optimistic .
but apparently we didn &apos;t have the punkte-differenz that some of our absolventen predicted , and quite often -- -- quite often , i felt they were given their predictions in a new way .
perhaps because my dad used to read to us .
so i left them in quiet , but i had to be nice and clean , and they had to be clean .
finally , i thought of a pyramid , but i don &apos;t have time to go into it .
although you lose not fear from failing , if we gave tapfer everything , because who can do more desire to be more than anything that he can do .
when i call names , i never know an answer .
do i have enough ?
the second challenge would be .
now , in many clinical trials , different types of stem cells are used for disease disease .
only last month , it &apos;s been able to do this with this technology to show the creation of human lebergewebes .
we can map it then to a 360 degree , and then analyze the kidney in all its volumetrischen properties , and then we can just take that information and then scanning the print of print printing .
i couldn &apos;t regular school . i just did not dirty .
i was a kid , i said , &quot; yes , i want to do this . i want to do this surgery .
you may have noticed that a new area is called the swap-tauschhandel .
and in the world , there &apos;s been around with these mengen-manie -- the election of a president to the berühmt-berüchtigten wikipedia and everything that lies between -- the ones that were able to achieve a lot .
third , drängende , ungelöste problems .
because what you need is that the hole is not the drill .
i don &apos;t want a cd , i want the music that she plays .
i mean , joseph and a member of a member of kenya .
we need to wegbringen our women and children , we need to run . &quot;
i &apos;m trying to improve the infrastructure .
late in the night i was driving home and ice .
together : anybody &apos;s got post-its ?
co : i decided to stay in the country , to give the master &apos;s master &apos;s master and work in a while i could do this .
this can be huge amounts of spending , but if the city can win a number of x volunteers for y hours , the dollarwert of the aufgewendeten work is the kostenaufwand of the city .
they have hotlines , tables and data .
so , these are the 18 minutes that i &apos;ve been given to speak to you , between two and dreitausend people who are going to be in cities .
and he was in a großflächigeren wässrigen mud .
the buildings here have several stories .
these green things are the mangos .
and if you &apos;re a legaler unter-stadtbezirk , you have political activity .
i could not know that i would be part of a technological revolution that would be true that dream would be true .
think about it . these men who didn &apos;t have the same bildungsmöglichkeiten , like me , helped me get their committed support for weiterführende qualifikationen in school .
and then , texterkennungsprogramme used to work with a schriftart schriftart , but by using a ladungsgekoppelten flachbettscanner and sprachgeneratoren , he could develop a machine that could read any schriftart .
but you know , i find it very lonely to read in the machines .
because it &apos;s not allowed to transport these books across the border , had to eingelesen different versions of eingelesen in the different countries : britain , united , united , canada , australia , australia , and new zealand had to have all different lesungen from harry potter .
the durschschnittl . lifespan has been more than doubled more than doubled , and it &apos;s increasing increasing with a speed of five hours a day .
one last thing . wish you &apos;re lucky to me , okay ?
secondly , the new machine is such a good news because , as soon as the world &apos;s doing , we don &apos;t need to do this anymore , and that &apos;s what we &apos;ve got to do with the plackerei and schufterei .
the social challenges of these inequality should be be addressed .
the economic rules are surprising , and surprisingly , very surprising , especially in short term .
and my biggest concern is that we create a world with technologies , embedded in a slightly more schäbige society and gestützt by an economy that is fördert .
over the course of years , i began to feel increasingly unwohler with this notion of god .
some have geschlussfolgert that we can only believe in a god that &apos;s shared our pain .
in second strophe , the line is coming and the wind and waves follow him .
who is god , if not the big strippenzieher or stammesbewahrer ?
the liebende soul of the universe .
by looking for god , by kultiviere my own einwärtigkeit .
one of the first things i started studying was the history of the begriffs technology .
we &apos;ve never found a neanderthalerfossilien that was older than 40 years , and the average age of those tribes and tribes tribes are 20 to 30 .
our bodies used to be used to this new diet .
so this equality of energy and matter , the einstein has shown , and also the modern science of the quantencomputer , which is that entropy and information and energy are all connected to each other , so it &apos;s a long continuum .
so this is a robot that wants to plug your own plug to get more power .
and what i mean by that is that we &apos;re looking for a new job .
a great evolution that started billions of years ago moves by us and we continue , and our choice is in a way , in technology , is really , with this force , which is much more powerful than ourselves .
and they said , &quot; well , we &apos;ve got five classes 30 and 40 students .
we took all this down and found beautiful holzböden , geweißte bars , and it had this -- as we had gotten over , and it was like , &quot; you know what , it looks like the ship &apos;s ship . &quot;
so we waited , we sat around the table and we wait .
there &apos;s a lot of symbioseeffekte . the only problem , especially for adults , work on the mcsweeney , which really knew that all of that , when they started , there was only a toilet .
the teachers we &apos;re working with -- everything is different for teachers -- they tell us what we should do .
about 170 , tutoren , they worked with them on the book , and so this worked wonderful .
and right behind -- there &apos;s a little chain of the chain -- right behind the , they saw the children teaching children .
there &apos;s also these geheimtür -- it &apos;s a shelf you don &apos;t see when you &apos;re in the läft , but it &apos;s slowly .
he &apos;s evangelisch . he &apos;s bringing his cousin .
and he &apos;s writing an email , he will answer you every question you can imagine .
i was this girl .
80 percent of the refugees in the world are women and children . oh .
there &apos;s a side that thinks that peace means the end of the fight , and there &apos;s a side that thinks that peace means the creation of schools and jobs .
she sent her children to school -- it found a new home .
there &apos;s one that &apos;s called the &quot; manual for a complete idiots , &quot; did you know that ?
the cape of cape is there are idyllische roads , and we can all go here .
this is my baby reina . thank you .
he basically said , &quot; i designed everything . &quot;
and in a sense , i felt really badly about that .
so i &apos;ve met this kind of complications .
i found that there are a lot of good ausdrucksmaterial .
in college , the most difficult , so is number 10 .
and from everything in a strange hotelhalle of klarsichtfolie , which is a window above to the moment that the street had been geteert black in front of my house and that weisse motte was sterbend in the sun .
and i was reminded by the great presentation of karen armstrong , that religion really understood nothing about faith , but to do with behavior .
the nordpol-eisschicht has seen a lot of the same size , it doesn &apos;t look like this , but it &apos;s got the same size as the united states , abzüglich of an area that &apos;s roughly equal to the state of arizona .
but it &apos;s not just the world &apos;s developed .
we can &apos;t wait for the trockenheit , the australia , to change our political culture .
so this challenge is part of the structure of our entire civilization .
a new appreciation of the privilegs that we own in the assumption of this challenge .
before i show you a few images from the picture of a few images , i want to point out to this beautiful detail about wissenschaflter and design .
and the thing that &apos;s really , in this particular , is an extraordinary school .
we &apos;ve been talking about keith shrubb this morning , that many scientists don &apos;t tend to show a little beautiful in their talks , from fear as stupid blondinen .
here &apos;s examples of that you can actually print in 3d , which is very interesting .
so that lets us think more about what robots mean for us .
no . so i had to think a little bit of a bit .
we did the same thing for iraq .
that was a challenge we had to be as a physicist .
we can push it up . the forces are more fragmentieren , and they are more of them , but they &apos;re schwächer .
&quot; naturally 7 &quot; a whole band .
and there are some employees in foundations that call this mitgefühl-müdigkeit .
the idea of justice , which is the limits of our lives , and give us a sense of what &apos;s right in life , which is the same thing in life , which we should do , social justice .
and like this is , it döste in the predikt .
so every week the putzkraft would come up . &quot; god , you &apos;ve been back to me . &quot;
they are a symptom for a tumor , an infection , a entzündung or an operation .
the muscles were frozen , paralyzed -- dystonisch , like that .
we treat them with symptomverändernden drugs -- schmerzmitteln -- which , frankly , in this kind of pain , is not really effective .
now , you get a sense of how much rock we &apos;re talking about .
it was in a very way . it &apos;s not doing anything . so i can live .
i don &apos;t know if you can see him from the back of the back of the back , and that &apos;s just stars .
in 2005 , nasa started a probe called deep impact , which one -- that was a part of the nucleus of a comet eindrang .
these are smart guys -- men and women -- astronauts , as i said , engineers .
the difference between the dinosaurs and us is that we can have a raumfahrtprogramm and vote , and we can change our future .
at that time , i led a b92 , the only independent , to be precise , the only electronic medium in the country .
and i thought that b92 could survive and a great company would be if they were only going to be disappeared , which was really out .
and at the end of the meeting , he says , look , it &apos;s not going to work , you &apos;ll never see your money again . but my foundation will put 50,000 dollars on the table so you can test the idea .
and we said that -- that &apos;s okay , we meet ourselves , you get your business plan to do what they actually did .
you see , we started in east and mitteleuropa with our work and went to russia .
after a while , we opened a medienmanagement-zentrum .
and we &apos;ve evolved to spend the idea to spend to spend , to give a whole press on the open press .
and in that way , you organisiert the funding , so that there &apos;s no dunkelkammern , no blind anymore , running around , to find yourself .
so why does this work ? that &apos;s the question .
now , some call it a theory of everything .
just one simple example is this : newton found the law of gravity , which works as a divided by the square of the abstandes between the one another anziehenden objects .
the more symmetry you have , the more you have the simplicity and elegance of the theory .
one thing that he thought about , most of us were taking , but for his time , it wasn &apos;t .
it doesn &apos;t mean the importance of these fächer , that they follow grundlegenderen laws and accidents .
but he read in every free moment he had , books .
by this ambition , he returned to the staatsparlament .
but when he was just sitting under the proklamation , his hand was deaf and zitterte because he had a thousand hands in the morning of a neujahrsempfangs geschüttelt .
not very surprising -- it was only three women under the 16 stipendiaten in the white house .
but i have to say , the older i became , the more i understand what was an incredible privilege to have this aging lion from a man so many hours .
and as lincoln told the story , all of the way to the war .
i asked my dad , and i asked my dad , &quot; what can we do ? &quot;
what the reason is that i &apos;m always grateful for this strange love of the story that i &apos;m allowed to spend life in the past .
he had the temple and geplündert .
this is the erlass , which is the proof that the jews in northern asia , after the years they were in babel and the whole years they were sitting in the rivers and remember the memory of jerusalem , that jews were allowed to go home .
all these are respected by cyrus .
the babylonische cylinder is from the priestern of the great gotts of babylon , marduk .
you all know what happened .
to see this object in tehran , thousands of us came from iran and lebenden jews .
some people know more about the dortigen , but they still think they &apos;re a notwendiges evil .
the new aufgenommenen babies &apos; weinten for the first few hours , but their needs were not befriedigt , and eventually they learned not to go into the effort . within a few days they were lustlos , lethargisch and start in the air like everybody else .
one study shows that 10 percent of a cost of heimunterbringung cost about 30 percent in the cost of the cost of 30 percent .
and that fascinated me , because i had almost spent my life in front of a camera .
you know , you know , very quickly what you have to do to find an answer .
it was 114 people -- most of them and family .
we heard every single one .
but of course , he never came . the explanation never happened .
and after many , many meetings , i was thrilled that this man , ahmad fawzi , really one of my hero and mentors , has managed to get the boat into the boat .
so he said yes , and we found ourselves in afghanistan .
they were the ones who believed in peace and they were on their opportunities , etc . , etc . and they made it actually .
we connect with olympia -- i met seb coe . i said , &quot; in london 2012 , it &apos;s about the waffenruhe .
it &apos;s about their wählerbezirke , to do it .
the biggest brains of the world should be the most cognitively .
i &apos;m durchforstete the literature after the background of the number , but i could never find it .
it &apos;s just a big primatengehirn .
and it &apos;s amazingly , that &apos;s exactly what our ancestors had invented a million years ago when they discovered the cooking .
so , very simple , very simple approaches for the hochtechnischen conversations that i led .
and i think i &apos;m just in the beginning .
but once the fight is verschärften , the physical rehabilitation was exposed to the physical rehabilitation .
behind him was a kid , his son , red in his face in front of his mind , to get his father .
but mahmoud and his son were there .
i was talking to my head in the headquarters at the headquarters , and i told them -- i &apos;m log -- i told them , &quot; look , we start with a few hours a day , just for some of the reparaturen . &quot;
two groups of mudschaheddin began to fight .
so i asked him , &quot; what &apos;s it ? &quot;
&quot; but yes , we need to increase the production of feet .
he was a new man , even bigger .
physiotherapie , not just in the middle of the center , but in the houses of the people .
and you should see me during a partie .
and this hospital would have been able to afford .
why ? because the way i had ever been banned .
but i learned something more tiefgründigeres than that , which is the leader -- the manager of the economy was ghanas -- incredibly bad decisions that our economy had just been to collapse before collapse .
because i knew that the state of the african continent for my children and their children would be important .
i &apos;m trying to bring the experience that i had in a swarthmore , to bring africa .
is my time ? ok .
we &apos;ve reached a moment from which one great society can be up within a generation .
you &apos;ll notice that he &apos;s very similar to the bildhaften yellow ball -- the sun we draw as children .
in fact , that &apos;s something that half of them is , more than half , it &apos;s not familiar .
32 tabletten tabletten &apos;s forte .
leb . &quot;
and these are the messages they convey to you ?
because , in effect , the donors are like it , and so it &apos;s always bringt it into television .
a professional hellseherin that talks to dead , and she doesn &apos;t reach me ?
what &apos;s homöopathie ?
we &apos;d like to get suggestions from you people like you and get bundes- , landes- and kommunale authorities so you do something .
thank you .
that &apos;s why the whole hospital often comes over a generator .
there must be something better . &quot;
but so the user can control whether there &apos;s electricity or not , because they can control the zufuhr on the base , how much percentage oxygen you give your patient .
but we want to be sure that this is the most effective and safe device that we can give hospitals to be .
the different types of writing in africa , the first was protoschreiben , like the writing schrift , which is the schriftsystem of a secret society of the ejagham-volkes .
anyway , until 1998 , as a yale-professor named john coleman darnell in theben-wüste kalksteinkliffen , entdeckte inschriften in 1800 in 1900 to 1900 bc , centuries before the mesopotamien .
almost one fifth of the greenhouse gas is made from the livestock -- that &apos;s more than traffic .
not bad .
i like animals , and i like to industrialisieren and industrialisieren animals , and make animals on the fließband of the way , is not just so order .
feinkost was a pure thing .
a picture of fischstäbchen would be better , right ?
so it wasn &apos;t quite bad .
i &apos;m going to ask you a question .
some of us would mean that maybe that might not be bad at all .
and about a year ago , i asked myself a question : &quot; why am i , though i know what i know , no vegetarier ? &quot;
the weekend , you have the election .
you can make an image with an iphone and get them all names , even though it makes even mistakes .
it &apos;s abgelenkt . he eventually wins the race .
you can &apos;t see it because it &apos;s too big .
you would think it &apos;s an interest to find out what the einsätze are so high , but it &apos;s a very vernachlässigtes area .
or an aesthetic experience -- a sonnenuntergang or a big piece of art .
human nature had to change .
but part of the reason -- and that &apos;s the reason we have an ethical level in the eye -- is that it &apos;s also intrinsically valuable .
it could be more complicated , but maybe not very much .
jh : is it befreiend with these forces ?
and so i knew i need something to control .
so there &apos;s eranziehungskraft , there &apos;s fliehkraft , there &apos;s the dynamic behavior of liquid .
and so i think that they can be vorhersagend .
this is a great assistent in the studio .
we take the pizza , our very first pizza , and verschlingen the individual slices during the bote in the flur and we &apos;re anstarrt .
i was sure 20 , before i first went into an art museum .
i thought , okay , you &apos;ve got a couple of criteria to pick the works .
it &apos;s not photoshop .
they were interested in creating an alternative alternative kunstraum , and they needed money for it , so they decided to do some interesting , interesting , projects .
this project is called &quot; liebesnest . &quot;
and so we went to the grave and did this , it was a urkomisch -- the attention that we got .
and she describes how the zäpfchen -- everything that you say is like to the verbotenen .
he &apos;s a australischer stammesältester of the aborigines , and he &apos;s an artist .
it &apos;s related to origami . so , go .
people are wandten mathematical principles to the art to understand the underlying gesetzmäßigkeiten .
or they &apos;re pushing it on top , and they make 50 stars on a flag with 13 streifen .
how would you make a single flap ?
we &apos;ve found out these rules that you pack circles , and you covered the lines of lines , which is the other rules of the time . that makes the pattern pattern .
you can do a lot of things .
but if you want to make it bigger , you could need something origami .
and that doesn &apos;t matter whether you go into space or whether you go into your body .
i grew up in a blockhütte state in washington with a lot of free time in washington .
we only have three minutes . but we &apos;ll talk about it for hours .
and so i want to talk about this , because if we don &apos;t know it , this transformation will be very painful .
and in a moment i &apos;m going to show you a graph , and what you &apos;ll see in the graph -- it starts in 1973 , just before women start to überfluten the market market , and it goes on to the day .
you gave instructions .
because i write about all of this book , i still have to do this , and i don &apos;t have an answer .
and that was very , very scary .
because we haven &apos;t processed this information yet , it comes back to us in form of culture culture , in this awkward and some sort of übertriebenen way , where you can see that stereotype are changing .
there &apos;s no man or a woman who &apos;s in the middle , and it &apos;s the wire .
in terms of the personal income on a scale that &apos;s been kept constant to take inflation , and more than doubled , in that time , almost nearly nearly .
and to hear me and understand what i say , you need about 60 bits per second .
so , on the last book of me , in the last book of me , &quot; good business &quot; i interviewed a few ceo who were very successful in their environment as a very successful and very ethical handelnd , with great social social .
control is always a safe thing , because you feel you &apos;re probably not doing a very good job .
&quot; where are you born , grew up and went to school ? &quot;
because when my grandparents were born , they had their own meaning of what &apos;s home , and they had their importance of community , and even for feindschaft , which was born of birth to birth , they didn &apos;t really have the opportunity to go beyond .
more and more people are also in the future or present , as in the past .
i went down into the room i should sleep .
pico iyer : where is you home ?
there was a big gap between which one billion in the developed world and two billion in the developing world .
but that &apos;s the world we have today . no gap .
and let me show you why i &apos;m going to take the altmodischen and digital technology .
the survival of the children is the new green .
and again , they were better than we , &quot; your british and your mortality rate is shocking . &quot;
but if you &apos;re vitamin-d-ergänzungsmittel people , you don &apos;t change the high number of heart disease .
and i started working at the time of zellkulturen , let them grow , and then i worked with knockout-maus-modellen -- mice that the gene couldn &apos;t produce .
one of the subjects was my mother , and of course , i don &apos;t know how old she &apos;s .
if you could be the equator in summer .
certainly many progress , many more gerettete .
this is actually real photography , in the process of time , the way that the limb is regeneriert within a few days .
and on the right here , what &apos;s going on on right is what &apos;s going on six months later , the technically angepasste .
a blutgefäß is made of two different cell types .
we put it back in this ofenähnliche device .
even more complex organs . and then , with the fact , the most complex organs are highly vaskularisierten , with all the amount of blutgefäßen organs , like heart , liver and kidneys .
this is still in the experimentierstadium .
we prefer cells that are not abgestoßen , and not form tumors .
we need five seconds .
for every problem out there , anyone would have an idea .
so i &apos;m actually panic -- unlike all of the koffein and sugar i had -- but this is an entrepreneur really scary .
that doesn &apos;t mean you have to go to a mba-programm .
i went to door and sold nummernschild-protektoren .
it &apos;s like a recession . so there &apos;s a recession .
and you would make these chairs .
it &apos;s useless . &quot; you have to find a way to get faster to money .
i sold a huge amount of sonnenbrillen .
they don &apos;t get a regular income , but they have the opportunity to find more tasks , and they learn , the ability of the learning system , and they also learn the ability to find more possibilities .
if you go to a restaurant and you &apos;re going to be bedient bad , you &apos;ll show you how bad kundenservice looks like .
these boys , grashüpfer .
the development of the present is to throw all the interests out of the board .
the erlenen of grundfähigkeiten or a minimun of cultural belesenheit , is entziehen the most of our students .
the values of the past are wiederbelebt , which is a lot of society .
but it &apos;s a policy policy policy , not the parteilichkeit .
they have a mind . and they have other people .
what we should be concerned with when we think about conservatives -- except this case of the 1980s , what &apos;s going on -- is this : they go to church .
sure , i know you don &apos;t really believe me .
and that doesn &apos;t only lead to a different outcome , it has the potential to change how we interact with each other .
totally different .
in fact , that &apos;s not an even right organization , but i &apos;m sure -- let me finish this -- creative commons is a simple way to add your content to the freedoms that you want to leave with you .
john mccain .
and i wonder how often something happens .
he told me that he hereinbrachte the versuchsperson , and then he said , &quot; there &apos;s a snake in the next room , and we &apos;ll be hereingehen now . &quot;
so , for today i had the idea that i &apos;m going to lead them through this process and show you what this journey looks like .
and the hospital and general was happy .
i was alive , only by the way we understand .
i &apos;m always asked people , &quot; is it really possible to use these microbial ecosystems to our advantage ? &quot;
another way of how microbes can spread through humans , and architects , architects , gruppieren spaces like typs , to promote the human interaction or exchange for ideas in the way , labs and offices .
so imagine a design for taking the microbes into account , for example , the plane or on a telephone .
and nobody knew about it .
my company , owl , built a system called guide for the apple macintosh .
in 1992 , his was abgelehnt on the hypertextkonferenz .
and greenpeace wanted to do this , and a method that was trying to do that , they were , in that whales , a ortungs-chip einzupflanzen .
in 78 percent of the voices , and to give you a picture of the erdrutschartigen victory , there &apos;s only three percent in the world &apos;s population .
and the last message i want to tell you is : you can be pretty successful online .
i think i don &apos;t need to explain what a great privilege to stand here today .
this is the school that was built with the community .
something we have in gando are tontöpfe .
just like this .
good morning . magic is a great way to be able to predict the realitätskurve , to make possible what the science will be really going to be .
there are color red and the color black , they are standing for the constant change from day .
voice : why not ? that &apos;s a very good slate .
that &apos;s an illusion .
so this is china , a zivilisationsstaat , not so much a nation-state .
but you can &apos;t lead a country like china , a zivilisationsstaat , based on a civilization , a system .
and the reason for this is , first , the state in china gets a very special -- you have a very special place of the world , the embodiment and the hüter of the chinese civilization , the zivilisationsstaats .
he was in 1972 miles , verband beijing with hangzhou and shanghai .
we &apos;ve seen this in terms of the g20 -- the position of the g7 rasant of the g7 -- or the g8 .
he &apos;s driving on a road in the ground , and the cars drive .
red = blau blau = orange orange orange orange orange violett violett violett mundstück mundstück .
and the first song was in english , the second was in chinese .
she agreed to be on her song .
i made graffiti , i wrote my name everywhere , used the city as a canvas .
i mean , that was the faces of my friends .
they all accepted , that their picture was next to each other .
&quot; you mean , you &apos;re klebst a israelisches face -- that &apos;s a funny slice , right ? &quot;
most places i went to go to go because i heard about it in the media .
i took more photos , and we started this project .
are you an ngo ? are you from the media ? &quot;
so the roofs were gedeckt , witzelte a woman , &quot; now god can see me . &quot;
because this is a big part of it . there are layers behind every photo .
but they basically took me a promise of the promise .
or , &quot; how can we help . &quot;
when i think about the mesh and what they &apos;re driving why it &apos;s going to happen now , i think there are some factors i &apos;d like to give you a hintergrundinformation .
they &apos;ve been caused a trend .
zipcar started a decade earlier in 2000 .
it challenges a participation . cities have welcome a lot of verschiedenster art .
it &apos;s very cheap , and it &apos;s very meshy .
the last 40 years were extraordinary times .
and also , miniaturization .
that would be a erheblichen migrationszuwachs .
it &apos;s vital that the people at ted ideas , ideas that we think about , are gerichtet , and make sure that this will be a very herrliches century and not one of umweltkatastrophe and ökokollaps .
my own family are boring academics who are concerned with this , sammeln abziehbilder for our ambassador .
i said , &quot; i &apos;m here to meet the prime minister . &quot;
i thought he was crazy , but something that was really stuck .
i was sitting , as you are here , in the audience .
this is another picture .
since netra , my career has been my career , i &apos;ve been doing a lot of success .
i started studying the dunkleren abszesse of the human mind .
this time i said , let &apos;s try something else .
so i said , &quot; okay . &quot;
sw : a lot better . einstein is very honored , here at ted 2006 , in ted 2006 , in 2006 , in the world of einstein , in fact , is very excited .
it would be very dangerous if you would fall off .
sw : no , i don &apos;t have a problem . you &apos;ve got the problem , you remember ?
sw : big finish .
sw : what about a stinktier ?
my parents found this important for their inner quiet .
when i have a talent , it &apos;s the thing that i have to take apart from which i schiß unheimlichen .
the body has a higher density than the water . at least 95 percent of the body comes from even under .
and this is going to be very far .
i asked him what that means .
and at that point , you can , if you want to go , you know , a couple of languages , and they take them in a way , and they &apos;re going to affect each other .
and she looked up and said , &quot; well , that &apos;s a better way .
i think they agree to me that they look very good .
and so far , tests have done over 50,000 students , so much , a half a dozen schools , my readers , by the way .
we found out -- and we were wrong with a lot of things and then it &apos;s done -- but we found that the young people loved it .
geoff mulgan : a little introduction to the studio-schule of the studio-schule
and finally , the only person , the hervortritt , a young shepherd , and he goes down to saul and says , &quot; i &apos;ll fight him . &quot;
there &apos;s the kavallerie , men on horses and with streitwagen .
goliath is easy to pick up . he has no opportunity .
so goliath is about the time , the size of the time , and usually , there &apos;s a explanation for that if someone is so far outside the norm .
and i think there &apos;s a very important lesson for us all .
and it turns out that we are covered by a mikrobenwolke , and these microbes are often doing well , instead of killing us .
they have all the microbes , and they put the farmers into the receiver .
most pills , or the joghurts you can eat , contain one or two , maybe five species , and the human community has thousands of species .
we need a bestimmungsbuch for the microbes that live in and on people so we can understand what they do to our lives .
a lot of people think of the internet is very , very much in english , but for us , it &apos;s truly global . we have a lot of languages .
when you saw him a little bit of a silly change on the side of me , they thought that it would just be ausarten in quatsch .
it &apos;s a social concept of cooperation , so we don &apos;t talk about truth and objektivität .
and we have 40 40 40 40 , 40 mailinglisten .
it &apos;s not perfect rule , but it &apos;s enough for the beginning .
and i &apos;m always like to say that you &apos;re also the only person who actually knows all the rules of wikipedia , which is that .
it seems to me , as though most of the textbooks that are used to education our children are being used by nature .
in the dschungel of guatemala , in tikal , the temple .
a nicht kwakutl indian native indian indianer told a missionar a missionar in 1896 , and here is it .
it &apos;s far under your cognitive denkprozess .
we found activity in other gehirnregionen -- in gehirnregionen , which are associated with the calculation of profit and loss .
i have a friend that &apos;s just a terrible liebesaffaire .
and i said , i don &apos;t know .
we &apos;re turning to each other , and we think our looks &quot; verankert , &quot; and we talk .
tools like sägen , knives , sicheln , äxte , and äxte that i had made in a towel .
i had been looking for long and wide , but never looking for myself .
in some of the erdteilen , they &apos;re putting tools , about a schwämme of the fischjagd .
so dolphins can be schnarren and they &apos;re kitzeln from the distance .
look at how she &apos;s synchronisieren with your partner and the other zweiergruppe .
but what we found quickly is that , no dolphins are not just hanging on a boat in a keyboard .
this dolphin called us &quot; tuchdiebin , &quot; because she &apos;s about 12 tüchern abgehauen .
but while we &apos;re dekodieren your natural sounds , we &apos;re also planning to put these back into the computer system .
and the word is invented .
there &apos;s yves rossy .
and especially when you &apos;re in the tracking-position , you have to feel the feeling .
yr : i just try to be fit .
i &apos;ve been using this for the last 15 years -- never with this kind of wing , but at the beginning .
that &apos;s not what we &apos;re saying .
but it was up to the top of the top and full of kakteen .
you &apos;ve wondered , because of what you saw , it would be in explaining with an unsichtbarer force .
because this event was the scientific revolution since our knowledge from the physical world , and how we can adjust them to our needs , unerbittlich in the beginning .
by the way , why do we not do that ?
it &apos;s based on vermutungen ; our auf .
there &apos;s something like a fehlkonstruierte story .
and only when one explanation is good , it &apos;s also important to check it .
don &apos;t do it very expensive . they &apos;re quite a lot of zahlreich .
it &apos;s currently been using 30,000 .
what is minto for a place ?
the new festival is asking the audience to play a key role in design of the performance .
she had met with others to see &quot; the sultan &apos;s elephant &quot; and it did all well . &quot;
&quot; no rumpfataxie , that &apos;s good . &quot; first doctor , is you schwindlig ? &quot;
i thought my career was over .
this is a bear i was sitting on the rock for a while .
this is a piece of mehrjährigem ice , it &apos;s 12 years old .
i &apos;m going to show you pictures of belugawalen , grönlandwalen and narwalen and polar bears and leopard seals , but this picture here is more than any other i &apos;ve ever done .
people said , &quot; we knew they &apos;re bad . we knew . &quot;
and this seal took the penguin to head and he kept and he kept .
she was able to go , and i started a penguin .
she tried to zwangszuernähren my camera , which is a dream of one photographer .
paul nicklen : stories from a vereisten wunderland wunderland
open your eyes now .
you also have a ring ?
they &apos;re looking at this task .
joe , we &apos;re doing this now until it &apos;s been schnallen .
funny , yeah , we have a little man , a gewerkschafter gewerkschafter , working up all day up there .
as i said , she &apos;s shaping their reality .
first , we worked together with ushahidi and developing ushahidi .
a call in the u.s. , in canada or china , is five kenia-schilling , or 0.06 u.s. dollars .
it &apos;s built up modular , so you can also join a satellitenmodul and you have to have some remote places .
over time , the buildings were higher and bigger our technology , so the mechanical systems were enormous . they need large amounts of energy .
imagine two americans in italy , in italy .
now , please raise your mind as a liberal liberal .
the best definition of &apos; angeborensein i know -- it explains so much -- comes from hirnforscher gary marcus .
it &apos;s lässt us very , very old triebe .
but look at the other three lines of the other lines .
are that not just the foundation of fremdenfeindlichkeit and autoritarismus and puritanismus ?
she goes up with the rising up and keep it .
and they say , &quot; hold your laws away from my body . &quot;
and we have the signs of shiva to the right , shiva , god &apos;s god -- and both of them work together .
and so the answer , i think , is to use this passionate commitment to the truth , and try to turn them into a better future for us all .
but when they &apos;re responding , there are a lot of other people in the environment that are innocent , but also be injured -- the military doesn &apos;t like to talk about kollateralschäden .
we &apos;re looking at something else , &quot; and realized that they weren &apos;t really comparable to the situations .
so , someone &apos;s a commandment , as often as you think of how many times the police were used in queensland spray spray in the back ?
there were only some people who were shot in this incident .
it &apos;s 72 and it looks like this is the most angemessenste way to deal with it .
and if you &apos;re facing them , people will give them into , but they don &apos;t want to cause any bleibenden damage . &quot;
we &apos;ve started organizing makers in our &quot; fair .
billy-bob , or bass , or something like that .
and i &apos;ll tell you more about it , but just ...
but he moved here to the other people who did the same thing as he did .
this is &quot; makerbot . &quot;
and we need to put it into the schools , or in the communities , in many , many ways -- the ability to build the world and neu the world .
there &apos;s glamour of physics .
and in fact , we see these glorifizierten photos of stars all the time -- it &apos;s called the falschfarbenfotografien .
it doesn &apos;t look like a way , but you have to imagine your world mental .
the stairs that winden from a hinfort winds are glamorous .
but it &apos;s going to be able to tell you that when you buy this lamp you will live in a world without cords .
the perfect liebesleben -- symbolisiert by the perfect chain with the perfect diamantring .
because glamour can be very totalitär and trügerisch .
but i also knew how hard they worked for all the week .
i did this before a couple of strangers .
i heard women were belästigt in their shoes , or ausgepeitscht in their burkas , like dead left on parking lots , with no säure burned in their own .
and then i got cancer -- or i found that i had cancer .
my friend bereitete this big bowl , and i asked her , &quot; what is that ? &quot;
it was my friends and a sister sister for me .
because we &apos;re all so bad , we &apos;re going to imagine the inner experience of our human beings and their secret intentions . &quot;
children need a long time until they master the system .
rs : oha . -- now joshua go to get something to drink .
rs : should ivan get into trouble ?
and she &apos;s in the coffee of your friend .
so , first of all , i &apos;m going to show you that it &apos;s a magentfeld .
i &apos;m going to tell me that you don &apos;t rangehen , if , let &apos;s say , the pentagon is called the pentagon .
but why do you have to feel anything at all ?
and it was , you know , it &apos;s probably a course for speed-yoga .
and secondly , is it possible , or at all , even more wünschenswert , to slow down ?
you want to go back to a slow rhythm .
and norway , sweden , denmark and finland , under the six wettbewerbsfähigsten nations in the world and working hours , where the average americans would cry before .
but the new idea , the revolutionary idea of the entschleunigungsbewegung is that it &apos;s something like &quot; good slow . &quot;
i &apos;m finding the gutenachtgeschichten task of my aufgabenliste , it was grauste me , because they were so slow and i wanted to finish .
and so everything took his beginning , and they said , &quot; you can &apos;t build everything on an island ; a part of it has to be on the bank because we don &apos;t want to turn away from the community . &quot;
i worked on it and i didn &apos;t work with it because i felt that people who came from the historical museum , already with information , and if you can still see a museum of information , they would not be able to process it .
when i flew home , the grundsteinlegung was planned .
but you can see the einzigartigkeit of the environment .
moshe safdie over the building of the einzigartigkeit
and when christian played a note -- play , for example , an f. for example .
so in jazz , the bandstand is absolutely amazing .
it &apos;s not about that , my vision , or something like that .
am i interested ? do i exist for them ?
they had to come up with a lot of erdulden .
in summer india , india is extremely hot .
and the adult animal that comes after that , is still one or two months .
i didn &apos;t know that , but i know it &apos;s today . these are hundreds of wanderlibellen .
i &apos;m curious about this . i hear it once , because i want to ask you , and here &apos;s a lot of people , which -- of course -- people who &apos;ve spent their childhood here .
so , next thing i was on the phone .
october , november , december . this is not the time of the northeast monsoon .
okay , they lay their eggs at the time of the saisonalen rain during the monsunregens .
only last week , it has geregnet . the regengüsse have started , and now it &apos;s raining .
it &apos;s a pretty incredible kraftakt .
incredible . this is the außerordenlichste wanderung of a raubvogels at all . one pretty incredible .
that &apos;s what i did from my life .
and everybody thought i &apos;d be good . but on the new terrain i was terrible . people said , &quot; oh , he &apos;s -- oh , what &apos;s happened with mullen ? &quot;
i looked at the night before i was in front of my surgery , and i asked myself , &quot; how am i going to do this ? &quot;
next -- oh , aufgepasst . these guys are the community .
so i was quite successful . and if you &apos;ve achieved all this , what is it that you &apos;re driving ? i &apos;ve been told about the knieoperation and other things , but what drives you ?
in my last tedtalk , about seven years ago .
but carl norden really broke the code .
whenever the norden bombsight gets brought into an airplane , it &apos;s accompanied by a series of bewaffneter .
the chemical plant erstreckte on the über of quadratkilometer .
after the war , there was a überprüfung -- like the army , the force force always -- and they asked the question : how many scuds we actually destroyed ?
i &apos;ve described to you the opposite of a success story .
a walk in a city city or a journey is that this diversity of human species in an amazing way .
we &apos;re asking questions about human ancestry .
but what is the data that &apos;s based on what ?
imagine that you have to get it .
it was a african based on the global diversity of the world &apos;s population .
the sahara was much bigger than today .
the people who are doing the killing of animals that they hunt in the savannen , moved to north and followed by about roughly roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly , roughly ,
the humangenomprojekt , rover-missionen on mars .
we know deep in our heart that the universe is not moving from its complexity to complexity .
so there we go .
what you see here , the blue areas are about a tausendstel of the degrees of cooler than the red areas .
so , the smaller times as gravity works , which explains why you and i &apos;m smaller than the stars and planets .
you &apos;re going to be familiar with the dna of dna .
let me explain why .
in the last 200 years , something else happened .
you might ask yourself , &quot; what &apos;s talking about ? &quot;
we &apos;re not so good when it &apos;s about insurance companies .
and then you have to decide how to invest in your 52 choices , and you &apos;ve never heard of a geldmarktfonds .
at least one wonderful study that predicted .
but if you get a driver &apos;s license , you &apos;re going to go on the box if you don &apos;t want to donate your organs .
the other group gets two apples , one is taken .
save more tomorrow it &apos;s just done .
this is just one example .
it &apos;s a song about a so-called kolibrimotte , a creature that &apos;s a creature that does a creature , which is a creature .
hello , who &apos;s because , please ?
thank you .
and this has a lot of impact on the lebenserfahrung .
i &apos;m trying to schinden time .
so what did i do ?
we are inventing stories to explain our existence .
so what did you do ? they sent her walter raleigh to separate her human part of their own .
do you want a child ?
elizabeth : scher yourself out ! scher yourself out ! scher yourself .
i went to visit a friend of mine and he made me wait in his appartment hill in the 20th floor , a really rich place in mumbai .
everything is a contradiction .
we lived from less than one dollar a day -- about 15 years .
and you &apos;ve got to use nuts in the &apos; 60s to show that forests forests are more than the forests of the grasflächen . &quot;
he said , &quot; you can &apos;t aufwecken to sleep the ones . &quot;
but it &apos;s not just about people ; it &apos;s about lebenswandel .
if you have to be able to be sustainable , if we can do that , if we can do that , if we can do that , if we can do that , if we can do that .
coke has to work with diet .
these are nine of them .
at the end , we think 60 percent of the global production production is at the table and 25 percent of the bedarfs .
it &apos;s not important .
but they don &apos;t just buy the juice ; they buy carbon in the trees , to auszugleichen the kohlenstoff-kosten of the fracht , which is the stream of the product to europe .
so the communication of the brain and the spinal cord is broken , and that leads to a complete and permanent paralysis of the process .
after a few years , we &apos;ve managed to develop a elektrochemische neuroprothese that puts the nervous system of the spinal cord in a wachen state .
we &apos;ve been working hard to get this goal .
after a few weeks of recovery , we put a programmable pump to inject one individual medikamentencocktail directly to the spinal cord .
and i was a kid who was working .
he was speaking of the world , like she &apos;s &quot; and the world as she should be . &quot;
and by doing that , these women are räumten many obstacles out of the way .
the white house , and the desk he &apos;s sitting is called &quot; resolute desk . &quot;
the last day , the woman who was looking at everything , and we talked about a little bit , and suddenly she said to me , &quot; would you sing me to do something ? &quot;
for this gesangsstück , it &apos;s a hymne of the voice , because it &apos;s mysterious -- as you can see -- it &apos;s completely spontaneous , and it &apos;s originally .
they didn &apos;t have that .
so the internet takes adressierung and instructions .
one of the most popular sites of the world , which is done by the most powerful company in the world , and there was nothing that youtube or google could have done .
and today , wikipedia is so omnipräsent that you can actually find them on the maps of restaurants in china .
and that &apos;s what wikipedia understood .
this is a blog that &apos;s going to be widmet on bedauerlichen .
why ? there &apos;s a mitfahrersuche in craigslist.com. .
the world ended up in the &apos; 90s .
and we see that the impact in the lernleistung of the lernleistung in some countries is very , very strong .
all this costs money .
and it was done a lot to give students with migrationshintergrund or social families , the same opportunity .
how will schools and teachers represent in the media ?
in the world , in the classroom , the teachers are left in the classroom and keep themselves in a lot of unterrichtsvorgaben .
some people argue that the change the bildungsverwaltung is similar to the verlegen of a friedhofs .
but if you look at the problem from this perspective , you see what &apos;s happened in the last 60 years .
and i walked around 15 miles to come to the apotheker .
so this was obviously a unverzichtbares device .
we could do that with phones .
so a business comes out of it .
&quot; government needs to provide economically services services . &quot;
it was once , long , long time when i was 24 years old , and i was in the st. of john john at the time of bangalore .
and you can see my map if i &apos;m here .
and i &apos;m also teaching an invention .
now we &apos;re in the 1930s , and you see that japan is going through a time of war , with lower life expectancy .
and they decided not only investing in health and education , but also started to grow the economy .
washington , d.c. went out .
not the bubble , not my bubbles , but the financial bubble bubble .
and the wealthy countries that would have been really accept a completely different global economy , and the transition transition from where it was , while it was over the last 50 to 100 years , back to asia ?
the rest of the diagram is a very mysterious substance called dark energy .
but that explains the presence of the whole mass .
and then , listen to the fact that we live in a three-dimensional universe -- a three-dimensional space .
again , this is a kind of wahrheitsgetreues model of what &apos;s going on during the gravitationslinseneffekts .
they &apos;re moving from each other because the room is bigger .
by looking at things like galaxies , their teilchendichte , how many of you have as a function of time -- we can bring in experience , which are the way dark matter and dark energy in the competing to form structures .
the big questions in physics .
the guy is the banjo boys : virtuoser bluegrass from ... new jersey ?
so , recycling and wiederverwendung are hauptstreitpunkte here .
marc koska : 1.3 million reasons to reinvent the plastikspritze
and in fact , there was this change in gay men in the united states .
it &apos;s a disease that kills a lot of adults in africa , and also many children .
in uganda , we see the prevalence .
that &apos;s what makes it close to a similar .
but openness and verknüpfung has a prize when we think of disease . that should be no surprise .
coffee is ugandas hauptexportprodukt .
emily oster , even the aids of the aids in africa from a economic perspective and comes to a surprising note : all of our knowledge about the spread of hiv on the continent is wrong .
but i was fascinated by this because i saw this kind of feinem italian vorsatzpapier .
it was bullet train , zug-geschoss , because he was the front of the front . but every time he drove into a tunnel , he built a druckwelle . when he was going on a druckwelle .
that höcker is the water like a magnet .
then we ask ourselves why the membrane is going down and why it &apos;s going to be so much electricity .
for example , in the einbettung of nanopartikeln , of nanopartikeln , in a material .
at biomimicry guild , my beratungsgesellschaft , we &apos;re working with the architektenbüro hok architects .
janine janine : biomimicry in the use of the use .
&quot; yes , but why ? &quot;
we were four , not one , and fortunately , not boys .
you can &apos;t do anything about it .
it will never happen in india , because that &apos;s once again , and never again .
they said , &quot; yes . &quot; i said , &quot; well , let &apos;s ask for you . &quot;
this was a meditationprogramm for over 1,000 inmates in this prison .
second , it &apos;s about the most anti-korruptions movement in india .
now let me tell you about a project that we did a few years later , a kind of developing captcha .
essentially , you &apos;re doing it by starting with an old book .
the number of pages of the world &apos;s actually actually use the recaptcha that the number of words that we &apos;re doing a day is very big , very big .
some are more fun .
at the time , the web is divided into multiple languages .
then my favorite question comes the question .
there &apos;s a way to beat two flies to a closed stick .
but what &apos;s more surprising is the translation that we get from the site-nutzern , even if you &apos;re just a anfänger , the translation that we get are just as the professional übersetzern , and that &apos;s very surprising .
because people are learning value while they &apos;re not paying with money , they pay for their time .
the connected side , the company , does what they really can do .
plattformern to active participation is everything else than normal .
and zipcar offers a very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very ansprechende , konsequente service that works .
for aristotle , happiness was the highest good , the goal to get everything else .
maybe these people have right . his thought , maybe , is not good .
10 percent of the time goes back out of the mind ... ... sex .
i was playing the violent african , the african terrorists .
well , from the first wahlrunde , no one of a unique sieger was -- so no one had been the absolute majority -- so the election were still doing a second round of three weeks later .
now here &apos;s an interesting comparison .
so i went to la jolla and i learned surfing .
people in the 17th century didn &apos;t really know what we think that this stuff is a bunch of different molecules , and that we breathe that from a particular reason and so .
and so , charles , i &apos;m going to give money to give you a building , and you can meet you there , but don &apos;t talk about religion there .
reality is what you can see .
i thought everybody would make this happen .
just to see what would happen when you mix the two .
so i have something that &apos;s not personal .
if you want to be rich , entrepreneurs will become entrepreneurs .
they &apos;re saying , if you measure the temperature of the atmosphere , it doesn &apos;t increase up -- they don &apos;t increase up at all . we &apos;re measuring it for 20 years , and it &apos;s not going to go up .
biochemiker kary mullis talks about the basis of modern science : the experiment . he tells stories from the 17th century and from his own backyard in the garden and preist curiosity , inspiration and care of the very good science in all of your forms .
i wanted to represent a very simple body that is occupied these verfallenden , heruntergekommenen rooms .
&quot; naked city &quot; is a spitzname for new york and spleen , &quot; verkörpert the melancholie and ermüdung , which is coming from the feeling of entfremdung in a urban environment .
i love to travel , and berlin is a mine i &apos;ve become .
and all of the time i &apos;ve been seeing a single rat in some of these places until i was the other day i was on the london in london .
the first question is , and maybe they write them , either on a sheet of paper , physically , or a virtuelles slate in your head , and you can do this , and you can do this .
and we then stop , &quot; we are the best naturwissenschaftliche college in the world , &quot; because of our british hybris .
except that -- you &apos;re going to be -- you know -- well , in your ellipse , you thought , &quot; well , what happens during the night ? &quot;
and one of the most difficult problems , when people have an idea of how everything works , it &apos;s quite hard to change .
and as an expert for the anorganische chemistry , i have friends and colleagues , who are different between the organic , living world and the world &apos;s world , leblosen world .
and you can see , he befruchtet , keimt , grows in a way .
we have even amazing life forms that we can manipulate .
and darwin himself , in a letter , even a letter to a colleagues , the guess that life would probably be done somewhere in a warm pond -- maybe not in scotland , maybe in africa , maybe somewhere else .
what &apos;s life ? what is that stuff of life ?
and we can connect them and literally create thousands and thousands of really large nanomolekularen molecules , in the same size of how dna and proteins , but it &apos;s not a carbon in terms .
we want to put them into the environment , and we want them to get their energy from the sun .
and i think if we can make a anorganische biology and matter matter , weiterzuentwickeln , then that &apos;s going to define life .
there &apos;s another reason why i like this entwicklungsziele : every single one of them is measuring .
and that &apos;s the professional female interviewer who sit down with a woman for an hour and ask them to her geburtshistorie .
i was sitting on friday on the friday , and i could see the rate of mortality from that morning of 128 on 84 .
as you know , these economists love the money , they want to keep more and more of them .
as you can see , that doesn &apos;t make a sense of an average of an improvement that has no one , and that very fast progress .
but you don &apos;t talk so much about it .
there were high , or very high , child mortality and the families were also very big , six to eight .
here &apos;s the katar .
what &apos;s always is worth for money .
yeah , i went barefoot , i was 12 .
and he said to them , &quot; it &apos;s the question of the question .
all the time was a border .
and gandhi-entwicklung , according to my opinion , will make the world forward , will make a difference , not just for a few , but for everybody .
... above the knee , yes , that would be hard .
the entwicklungszeit -- it took about 10 years and 700 million dollars .
he said , &quot; the earth is enough to meet everybody &apos;s needs , but not everybody &apos;s greed .
and säuglinge die .
i went to high school .
when i was on the council of scientific research research -- 40 labs -- if two labopartorien didn &apos;t speak each other , i built teams .
they &apos;re actually made on it , and now i have apps on the app store .
it &apos;s about to perfect , perfektionieren , and take an old century .
it &apos;s still very hot , but not more radioaktiv .
because this reactor is not under a very high pressure and not so reaktiv , it means that the spaltprodukte aren &apos;t tend to leave the reactor .
i &apos;m convinced that the reactor i designed here , a innovative energy source , can be the great scientific projects of electricity , and i &apos;m really ready to do this .
we move towards a erlebniswirtschaft , where the experience is the actual product .
there &apos;s a manufacturers of the funknetz that &apos;s going to be in the forest for the case .
the end of a long litanei of litanei , ratschläge , who he &apos;s got to have his son is , he says , &quot; everything , is redlich against yourself .
normally you don &apos;t walk in los angeles , but there &apos;s a place you can walk a lot , outside out in this city .
then you &apos;re going to be empfunden , as a schaumschläger -- by applying properties that they don &apos;t have .
when i was little , i was very , very an introvertiert , and i just like to stayed for myself .
then it was just about starting to a point and then build it up to the end .
so i built it from concrete because it &apos;s actually no matter .
that was the tool .
and for me , this is the most important thing , because since i was a kid , i wanted to convey my passion and love .
25 days : the herzkammer entwickelt entwickelt 32 days : poor and hands , in the end of 36 days , the primitive spine begins in the zeitraum period where the fetus developed the fastest .
the complexity , which is built in a single system , again , is beyond any understanding or any existing mathematics .
because apparently , there &apos;s not this instabile isotop lithium-6 in the atmosphere of stars stars .
so what can you do with these spektren ?
recently , a colleague of berkeley , gibor basri , an email , an interesting spectrum and said , &quot; can you see this ? &quot;
there are two ways -- about massereiche and massearme stars -- on the matter of matter and chemical elements in the universe and regeneriert .
because can you imagine that everything is siedet ?
now imagine an object , an incredible object , or something we can &apos;t explain , and we just stand up and say , &quot; this is , we &apos;ll give it up . physics doesn &apos;t work . &quot;
and when we see stickstoffdioxid , and then , i think , we have the perfect e.t. &apos; s .
i just said , &quot; really ? &quot; and he said , &quot; absolutely . &quot;
what i can tell you is : it &apos;s universal ; we all have them .
i &apos;m very easily on büroartikeln , but this is another talk .
that led to a little collapse -- -- actually , that was actually the way .
and i said , &quot; but the thing is : no familienzeugs , no kindheitsscheiße . &quot;
what is that feeling vulnerable ? &quot;
i &apos;m right , you don &apos;t have right . shut up .
we do as if we have what we do , not an impact on other people .
people protokollierten their meals in twitter , the windeln of their children on the iphone .
so if we think of it , to make a systematic improvements , we think we can also think about how to be useful in our selbstverbesserung , for our selbstfindung and our selbsterkenntnis .
and today i want to talk about one of the things that we decided to do at the time , we wanted to find a new access to healthcare .
steven is all sharing his story . but he &apos;s not alone .
here &apos;s why people pray .
i also love this cyberkinetische implant , also these were the only patientendaten that were online and available .
and here &apos;s a paper .
you didn &apos;t have a abschirmung , you have no data , it &apos;s not going to scientific methods .
this is the curve of the behandlungsabsicht .
but my brother didn &apos;t end up with him .
if we went from here from here to the b-15-eisberg , we would go to something that would be 300 feet up , 120 feet long , 28 miles wide , and it &apos;s two .
to change the state , you only need two volts of a millisekunden-impulses .
we said , &quot; can you build this ? &quot;
we can do that better .
but there &apos;s a fascinating solution that &apos;s called the so-called komplexitätswissenschaft .
so , these are netzwerke darstellungen systems .
and it has also effects on the risk .
so we could put a einflussgrad in the zuweisen .
we see the emergence of langfristiger and kapitalkräftiger programs that are looking at understanding our wired world from the point of view .
wasserrohre have a festgesetzte capacity of festgesetzten durchflussraten -- except you use expensive pumps and valves .
and we had 500 of these glaskolben prepared for 500 .
without human zutun .
so we were up on our doppelstockbett .
and this graph doesn &apos;t even mean something that data &apos;s invented .
and my brain starts very quickly to think that this is a akkurate representation of negativem in the world .
because this question is what our external world can predict our glückslevel , but the truth is , i only can predict 10 percent of the person &apos;s langzeitglücks if i &apos;m going to berücksichtige their entire external world .
and this is a scientifically scientifically inkorrekt and verkehrt .
we &apos;re moving people when they open up their mailprogramm , a positive email of the lobs and the danks of somebody in their social environment .
hard to say -- a familiengeschäftgeschichte , you know -- my dad was the aufrichtigste man on the world .
and so i went . i went to mit , i was closed .
they said it will stop .
they take a huge amount of cardboard .
he was the first digital media producer in tokyo .
listen to that ? like cows ? this is the morning at 4 a.m. in burma .
so there are all these things to do , but most of love i love to taste the world .
and i &apos;m doing this with passion .
their culture doesn &apos;t come in school , and i want to tell you how we can overcome this problem .
that &apos;s what makes you nervous about because girls don &apos;t want to go to school , where there &apos;s no boys .
and over little moments in my life .
or mothers , who are raised young ?
we need to change the posture of the young people in elementary school .
and you have the idea that you think that &apos;s okay .
let &apos;s see where this hypothesis is going .
is that a problem ? yes , a big problem .
we believe that &quot; why &quot; -fragen evidence can give evidence about the fundamental principles of nature .
i &apos;m going to try and i &apos;m going to go to the end , and i &apos;m also excited if it &apos;s working .
and that was really an important lesson for me that you can &apos;t really act on an object .
we &apos;ve created a newspaper for example , a normal newspaper .
it &apos;s connected by the radio of my ipad , and this is a software that &apos;s going on on the ipad .
it &apos;s a digital sculpture , so i wanted to add a interaktionssystem , so i &apos;m looking at it in a näherungssensor , so that people in the jar would respond to you when you &apos;re coming to it .
from my current i &apos;m going to be turned into a male age of age , and then into an old man .
50kg extra extra extra .
radio : what &apos;s you think about ?
just fold the wings up and drive it .
so i &apos;m going to ask you a different question .
and he made a königlichen kartoffel-garten , with wachmännern , who had instructions , to bewachen it , and bewachen it day and night , but with the secret instructions , not very good at him .
because they found that verlust-vermeidung determines the human behavior .
however , we have to create a very clear medien-ökosystem of medien-ökosystem , which can be creating this kind of value , and it &apos;s also a lot of fairer .
now , if we all have these tools , we have to just ask the question -- and thaler and sunstein have done this -- how we use this one ?
they &apos;re running the new karo-shreddies .
she &apos;s providing little trivialen alltagsaktivitäten .
i felt passion , seele and heart , had my body left .
audience : no .
sb : no , not without &quot; no . &quot;
all around us , klummpig umhertreibend , will find another replicator in this urzeitsuppe of culture .
you probably bought it .
imagine the world full of brains and more memes than place for them all .
we are the only gen- and mem-maschinen .
i think that &apos;s the wrong approach .
that was dangerous , but hi .
they use us to make the resource of the planet , to produce more and more computers , and more amazing things we hear here at ted .
and will we see that third danger , how we have the second and the first time ?
in working with minustah -- this is the un-vertretung in haiti -- with the ministry of public health services , with different nicht-regierungs-organistaionen , we would deliver more than 1,500 buildings .
it won &apos;t cost us more than we do it right . &quot;
and because i had to burn 70 percent of my body , it took all an hour .
we also found that it would have been good , would have been pausen to erholen me by the pain .
and how bad would be the fine if i caught ?
it wasn &apos;t that the religiöseren people -- the ones who have more commandments gewußt -- they would have less cheated , and that less religious -- those who could never remember the commandments would have betrogen .
so , if you don &apos;t think of money for a couple of seconds , because you get a brand , does it make a difference ?
so it &apos;s like this .
i think all these forces have very bad impact on the stock market .
but you can believe me . i work in the world .
these are the harmloseren that i show you today .
and suddenly amazon becomes going to be brand and konkurriert with the notenbank , which is how they want to spend their money , which is money and what it is .
maybe it seems to be a big jump ?
i don &apos;t have to go to the audience -- last week , i had to explain to my neunjährigen -- and you see , you know , you have a strukturen structures that transportieren the spermien from one individual to another .
and i knew animals like the regenwurm , or even most animals , they don &apos;t stabilize their tissues by spannen them through bone .
and that was because every skeleton that we found until dato had been found over the same grundelemente .
all of the ones i showed that was really surprising .
a funny song about the global warming , from jill sobule .
well , i guess i need to be here .
all right .
do we want to play a piece ?
selbstunterricht , selbstentdecken and selbstbehauptung ; they &apos;re the benefits of a great education .
the minecraft-community flippte completely out of this , and ben became a medienberühmtheit .
and on it goes , what is the area of this character ?
i was forced to leave my home to leave the democratic republic of congo , where i was studentenaktivist .
but bemerkenswerterweise has been estimated the umweltprogramm of the united nations in the united nations country on 24 trillion dollars .
but we &apos;re not at the goal .
they have to be very low-cost .
but could not be done for that angle of the arbeitsmarktes ?
they asked about the governments of the unterstützende , and in many cases they have got them .
but let &apos;s take our goal to bring new economic action to the base of the pyramid .
because they need a whole bunch of these little transactions to make their profit .
he liked it to sit in their lap because he said it was painful to be in his own bed .
since i &apos;ve been in 1920 , when sir arhur eddington and the british society in wissenschaftsförderung , that &apos;s why the sun seems like .
so , what is fusion ? here &apos;s something kernphysik .
and that energy is it &apos;s going to go fusion .
something like that &apos;s how high as a traditional kraftwerken machine .
we need to make it a power station .
but it &apos;s the largest arab country , and it &apos;s also a great impact .
in fact , they wanted to be democracy , but they were all the countries who were the population who had been saying their opinion in the last month , in the last month , in a public officials -- it was only four percent .
but the expectations of people in their future are significant .
so the question is , &quot; what drives the men &apos;s support for women &apos;s disease ? &quot;
i promise you , it &apos;s read the news .
nobody can listen to you , you just send them on a text .
you could see the immediate effects of the laws or the hasserfüllten talk on a schulversammlung , and see what &apos;s going on as a result .
flight took 12 seconds , and i went about 35 feet of m. .
that &apos;s the unnatürlich of a rocket .
he weighs less than a aa-batterie .
by the smallest lufthauch of the schieren forces of the storms of nature .
we can afford to be the individuals and give us hearing .
we believe someone else , someone else somebody who &apos;s somebody who &apos;s somebody who &apos;s going to be fähigeres , somebody with more means of solving this problem .
we didn &apos;t flew him in the pacific .
it took 10 full prototypes until we had something that was really flying .
and so there &apos;s this incredible hochgefühl that you can do , which is possible , and that kind of thing that &apos;s serious .
and let &apos;s think about our moral .
and the director was quite amüsiert , and he said that he thought me was crazy . and he said to me , &quot; this place is a strafanstalt . these guys are severe straftäter .
it took me several of these events until i figured out what i should do .
when i started this program four years ago , my ursprünglicher plan was a siegerteam of the underdogs plan to do a siegerteam of the underdogs .
and they &apos;re looking down , and it &apos;s so small and tiny .
i feel blessed and happy , that i had the courage to give my post to the nyu and return to my country in my country , where i can do these incredible rides with this group of verstörter children from ethiopia , morocco and russia .
and how often would my own die of my own before i would understand that it didn &apos;t exist from the beginning ?
and i was a really good dancer .
well , seltsamerweise , these insights don &apos;t have my geringes self-esteem , this sense of otherness .
that was because i had no myself , what was between .
imagine what kind of existence we could have , if we honor the unvermeidlichen death of ourselves , the privilege of life and what &apos;s going to be happy to be the next .
and this is a café cafe in the u.k.
but instead of looking at what we &apos;re looking at .
we also found that as a effizientere structure and a kostensparendere way , would get through this structure .
but we found that seeds -- this really important project is going to be instead of -- but that seeds -- in the top of the botanischen gardens , seeds are not available .
we worked with a kunstrasenhersteller kunstrasenhersteller to develop a miniversion miniversion for the seed seed , so even if you were visually impaired , it was kind of knusprig and soft , the piece of landscape that you see here .
it &apos;s actually just the first few stories you know , and the rest is just for postcards .
the book is called &quot; the blank slate &quot; and the popular idea of the human mind is a blank slate and all its structure from its sozialisierung , culture , education and experience .
well , there &apos;s a set of political reasons that they like the people .
and it &apos;s not even clear to whether these are verallgemeinerungen zutreffend , but then the datenlage appeared to be able to support this .
another is the geistes- and kunstwissenschaften at universities , who are in the decline in decline .
now , the other hot eisen is the kindererziehung .
and i think you can &apos;t even tell that .
i &apos;m also calling peta , just like jux , and you don &apos;t like it , but they &apos;ll confirm it .
there &apos;s no script , there &apos;s no script , there &apos;s no nonsense .
he says , &quot; a day . &quot;
i don &apos;t like what i think i &apos;m thinking right now . &quot;
oh , i live in a computer program -- that &apos;s strange .
so i asked myself what would happen if we challenge some of these geheiligten challenges .
right ?
it &apos;s like -- we &apos;ve explained the war , as a society , everybody from us .
your iphone without the people , the same shell , are doing the same circuitry , the same keyboard , over and over again .
and then it &apos;s always got and bigger and dicker and it &apos;s been 886 pages .
and i said to brian , &quot; what &apos;s tony done ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; is it true that you have to have a fake here ? &quot;
but how are you sitting in a geistig way ?
so all the things that came on in tony on the normalsten are evidence for this , according to his own , that he &apos;s crazy in this new way .
he came in schwächelnde and entließ 30 percent of the workforce , and we moved american cities in geisterstädte .
and i added , &quot; i have a list of a psychopathischen features in my pocket .
and the jewelry are always the most extreme aspects of the person &apos;s personality .
anyway , it was two years ago , and that &apos;s where my book ended .
in fact , the trend of the rest of the world .
and as a result of this , it &apos;s very difficult to say , very difficult to say : i &apos;m vertrete the real islam . &quot;
it may be that a great war between east east and west ausgefochten became , and that it was necessary for communism in a framework .
and even though the president of the president , for polit-taktischen reasons , very , very well , very well , it &apos;s not very well , to sagendas islam , is nonetheless , a natural impulse to call the other side as an enemy .
when the treasure treasure went in 2000 , you were watching the peak of the best brütezeit that the scientists for african penguins had ever had before -- that was a endangered species of galten .
the day after we arrived , two of us were 2 with the control room of room 2 betraut , and room , in the same time , is a 4,000 penguins of oil .
we &apos;ve used this method in the treasure rescue .
and this is really important because the african penguin was explained in a endangered species ago a year ago .
on the corner row of eisenbahn , am , a gesundheitszentrum gesundheitszentrum , in the vorgärten and even before the police police .
people are open to the essensgeschichte .
we launched this campaign -- very , very much , called &quot; every single egg . &quot;
this is not a schulübung of the second class .
these lessons came out of unbewiesen , abstract .
and he took a leg and said , &quot; what you &apos;re doing is not a tu . that &apos;s the torah . the rest is commentary .
now , but that &apos;s not the whole story .
and achilles takes hektors leichnam and he &apos;s übergibt it carefully at his father , and the two men look at each other and see each other as a göttlich .
and this is really , in fact , in the biologie of the cells , has been drawn into biology and science , looking at the living cells in the microscope .
each grain of grain is a size of a tenth of a millimeter .
you can see these mikrometeoriten .
this picture was the beginning of the röntgentechnologie .
we &apos;re all looking at the same from the inside , believe me .
the walls are out of 700 mm and a thick concrete concrete concrete .
and the left is an x-ray .
it has human association .
in the x-ray , we see all the little überlappungen in the corners .
i had to durchsägen the car in the middle , for you , for you , no really easy job .
yes , you &apos;ve given 12 monkeys for a week of schreibmaschinen , and after that week , they just used them as a toilet .
the science actually says we will live forever .
no , i &apos;m spucke a tooth .
for me , it &apos;s a very , very important thing .
thank you .
where do we know it &apos;s wrong ? maybe we don &apos;t agree on it .
not professor and verurteilter , just two spirits , ready to philosophieren .
and then my life was fine .
all i saw in the manufacturing was that there was right streits between the feinschmeckern between the züchtern and the jägern-sammlern .
would then be time to process information ?
we spent a lot of time , a billion dollars store , and you hear the right place to study a billion dollar- ölgeschäft , which he was in , and what we found was shocking , but then later .
there &apos;s even dan etete .
we were erschüttert , that these companies had rapidly had their vermögenswerte weiterverkauft and the most important in london gelisteten bergbauunternehmen bergbauunternehmen off .
that &apos;s complex and hard to change it .
we &apos;re all going to die . we &apos;re all old . we &apos;re all sick . people leave us .
there &apos;s places that you can &apos;t walk , you know , you can &apos;t think , worlds that you can &apos;t actually have to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to bewohnen .
they have a wildheit and a freedom that i think is the foundation of a new paradigmas .
she made the decision to be keine or glasscherbe , but to be devoted to life to be a little other girl .
we &apos;re all refugees .
but you &apos;d put it on the head , and then you get that thing .
but that &apos;s not what you do . &quot;
i miss michael .
he didn &apos;t think his staff knöpften him and said , &quot; you &apos;re going to go in the reha , or you &apos;re going to get fired and die . &quot;
ah ! we meet them , the heimlichen ones . let &apos;s get out of it .
when it &apos;s on the box , which is the gegenseite , it &apos;s the form .
the characteristics that the word of the word is so often in adults , that we should eliminate this old diskriminierende word when it comes to criticize behavior that is associated with verantwortungslosigkeit and irrationalem .
when i anzweifle my sister &apos;s ability to take 10 percent of the interest that i &apos;ve been ausgehandelt on your last loan , i &apos;m going to spend your ability to get more money from getting it back .
it &apos;s the reason we &apos;re not living in the dark times .
and the third is all the sounds that we create people who are anthrophonie .
that &apos;s after the selektiven fällung .
there are many facetten of geräuschkulissen , among other things , like animals , who taught us the dance and sing that i &apos;m doing for another time .
so this was extremely embarrassing .
and if you wonder how much this is , this ebay-logo is 16 .
so 37 is our audience .
it &apos;s very impressive and a very nice concert .
and these are the topics that we &apos;re actually at heart .
a generation that &apos;s so much more relevant to video games than from the real world .
all of these are problems outside my ichs .
i &apos;m not sure what the future of video games are for our civilization .
finally , it &apos;s it .
it would really do that well .
so , you quickly get from simple to complex , if you do more . that &apos;s what we like .
and then they take them look at them , and that &apos;s a umständlich -- i thought that at least long time , until she explained to me that , to make it a little bit of auszubremsen , so you think it was going to be .
the other direction .
girl : there were a sphere and a schaumstoffball , because it &apos;s two completely different gewichte , and if you fall to the same time , you might fall out of gleichschnell .
but we could not train a thousand new teachers to save our lives .
and it &apos;s a märlein . &quot;
in the end , we will change ourselves as we have changed the world around us .
that will have incredible effects .
why do they do what they do ?
everybody would want to want to want to do the new version .
they affect us .
they &apos;re actually going to be schwärmen over this time .
i &apos;m going to put his words back in the order .
&quot; well , yes , &quot; i said , &quot; weird , you &apos;ll get this .
and they said , &quot; you don &apos;t need to do that again . &quot;
and we looked at it , and i was grateful because she said , &quot; wow ! that &apos;s awesome . &quot;
the goal of the project is very simple .
this is completely personalized medicine in topform .
now the answer is a multidisziplinäres team .
i &apos;m working with the imperial and the brompton , which is some serious problems about the project , problems that should not have been .
in medicine , there are so many people who don &apos;t want change , not quite a rather than an engineer engineer , the answer , has the answer .
you can really find novel solutions that have been not seen before , and that &apos;s very quickly and easy .
yeah , good , you guys , i got to get my life , because trackpads once were around , it &apos;s beautiful runder form .
no , but it &apos;s true : the internet has changed the world .
you know the story .
and i met the dozo .
and i didn &apos;t think they &apos;re looking for nice cartoons .
thank you .
so , &quot; our einsame earth &quot; brought me a lot of people about the meeting with the audience .
we &apos;ve been in a long time for the existence of animals on this planet than you &apos;ve been here , until we &apos;re reaching the second microbial era .
his impact is the distribution of these very thin einschlagschicht over the entire planet , and we had a very zügigen death of dinosaurs , the death of these beautiful ammoniten , leconteiceras , and celaeceras on here and so much .
it &apos;s the top of the top , the t-rex of his time .
they hate us animals .
this is when material comes from the depths of the earth and the surface , it spread out of the surface of the planet .
i &apos;m a 130km off the coast , which is going to happen to me ?
they have an accident . they have two options : they will die , or they take the hydrogen sulfide , and they say 75 percent of them will be saved , mentally .
pw : blessing and fluch .
some of them are countries that believe that deregulierung or even no regulation in the best way to do is to promote investment to promote investment .
the answer is simple : the chinese are definieren these factories as chemical , not as a pharmazeutische , and check them .
i don &apos;t know what we can do , but i can use my office at least to bring them together to get a solution to a solution . &quot;
they need a safe environment .
now , we have the idea that it &apos;s the beginning of a new way of the regulation international tasks .
human rights are going to be a very simple question : can i put that person back to this ?
or you could find the boy who had laid the fire to fire , to see if you can change it . &quot;
okay ? go .
i was fire and flamme .
again , again , we saw the spoken poetry of walls .
after the fight , he schüttelte his nasses , wolkenweißes hair and said , &quot; you &apos;re a god . &apos; no , anderson , you &apos;re the god . &quot;
i travel a lot when i teach , and i don &apos;t always get to see how my students reach their third step , but i was lucky to see her journey evolved as she did .
my parents have called me , sarah , which is a biblischer name .
i want to talk about a few ideas that have been driven me to become a dokumentarfotograf .
when i saw that war for every person had such an incredible consequences , and that the fotojournalismus could actually be a factor in the konfliktlösung , i wanted to be a photographer to be a kriegsfotograf .
at the same time in south africa after nelson mandela had been released from prison , the black population the last phase of liberation from the end .
the next day , i made myself to rwanda , and it was like i was going to go into the expressfahrstuhl .
after the fall of suharto in indonesia , i began to explore the conditions of poverty in a country that was modernisierung .
a hospital of the doctors without borders .
the kriegsmedizin has become so efficient that the percentage of the soldiers that survive a verwundung , in that war is much higher than any other in our history .
to make sure that as little as possible can go wrong , we have all this procedure at choice .
so you &apos;re looking at this .
but that &apos;s a breites and fairly difficult subject , so i had to get myself .
the size of the population is here , big china , here big india .
and in all the eastern religions , japan , the level was equal .
because the death of a child will be kompensiert with another child .
and what is the reason in qatar ?
they have a great lehrwert .
all religions in the world are able to maintain their values and adapt to this new world .
and then , like all the other generation of our generation , we lived in a himalayakloster .
day eight .
in india alone , my favorite friends of my friends and i had the same picture , and i had this same picture , every single house in india . we did a billion hausbesuche .
this is the überwachungssystem .
i asked them -- they &apos;re all grippespezialisten -- and i asked them those questions they want to ask them .
i think we owe the gphin and ron st. john john gratitude , i hope , ron is somewhere in the audience -- there -- he &apos;s the founder of gphin .
larry brilliant : first , are they not pissed off off the injury of the world &apos;s injury ?
i &apos;ve built a klimawandel-ngo , &quot; the climate group . &quot;
why should we have a positive impact on the world , in the world , as a company ?
they &apos;re saving 85 percent of the electricity with an led that they used to use an old light bulb .
sometimes people think 100 percent will be pretty hard , and we have this conversation in the company .
a solarpaneel paid himself in seven or eight years .
from our 17.000 managern in ganz , 47 percent women , but it &apos;s not enough , and we want to conclude that gap and follow this way to high management .
there was an equation in my family , like this : if you &apos;re intelligent , you don &apos;t have to be spiritual .
this , he wrote , &quot; is the zusammenhängende structure of reality .
someone , it feels a ängstigt or your point of view and take off the ears .
at the end of our day , we realized the openness of others .
as i would go to bangalore and often , at a very vivid conversation with my friends , where we have a lot of topics , while they &apos;re heftig , they &apos;re beschwerten heftig , where a drink is often more costs than what they paid in their 14 years of old hausmädchen .
he &apos;s looking for forgiveness , and he said that he wants to go to improve the child &apos;s child .
this kontingent seemed to be pretty happy , and there were no deaths of beklagen , even though dozens of friedenssoldaten in liberia have been killed .
and how are we responsible for that ?
it &apos;s a little bit , not ? -- that the media of the world are so bad for a small group of activists , and then put more of this information , and then publish more of information than the rest of the weltpresse .
j yeah . this was the cover in the guardian , and it has been printed in all countries around kenya , in the tansanianischen and the south african press .
j the effects of the people who worked on it were beträchtlich .
and there &apos;s a lot of information .
i would be interested in just because of what we &apos;ve heard about -- i &apos;m curious about the opinion of ted .
and we said , &quot; oh , tell us more .
so you have to be careful with the term hacker .
and only one month ago , which passed everything from the isländischen parliament einstimmig .
and all of these numbers , i &apos;ll start with only two or three variables .
this piece here can be read very different depending on where you &apos;re hinstellt .
first i read about this in a klage a arztbesuch , which was in between the ärztekomitee of verantwortungsvolle medicine and seven fastfood-restaurants .
so according to this research , the best zubereitung for a chicken is not to just not in the right , but not to leave it to be a long time , until it becomes black and a marinade of sugar sugar sugar sugar sugar sugar and water .
and then the next summer , i worked under the leitung , dr. basu at the unt-gesundheitszentrum unt-gesundheitszentrum , texas .
and this realization is incredibly powerful for the efficiency of chemotherapy , perhaps for many different cancers .
for example , flüchtige organic compounds , which are in our schools , care and the workplace .
because all these solutions are , of course , they are sustainable , and they &apos;re langzeitinvestitionen -- langzeitinvestitionen for our generation , and for the next generations .
and immediately , a voice called &quot; känguru ! &quot;
after the conference , people came to me , and people came to me , men and women .
hard .
a prosthetic is not more for the need to be a lack of auszugleichen .
we are all different from different perspectives .
i was in the beijing for the olympic games beijing .
about 80 percent of these microblogger are young people , under the 30 people .
and they &apos;re most unemployment , inflationen , anziehenden anlehnen of the banks , werterhöhung of the renmenbi , nachfragerückgang from europe and america of the products they produce .
they have a kind of mean that they can paint on a piece of chicken or fish , and it looks like beef .
people think about the question : are we going to continue to sacrifice our environment for a higher more than a higher ?
there &apos;s nothing on top , but the conditions were ideal for the winterruhe .
now , the series hasn &apos;t been even ausgestrahlt , so they &apos;re the first ones to see this .
mars more similar than the earth seems to be the same .
and the sousa was scared that we would lose the opportunity to lose these , quote , &quot; höllenmaschinen , &quot; they would take them .
but more importantly , that bmi used to use the information of general accessible works to generate new arrangements that they free to weitergaben to their clients , and then in the year of the year , when a ascap mit with a verdoppelung of the gebühren , the majority of the public wechselte .
and i ...
for the ausgleich , for which i am eintrete , i &apos;m going to be first of a good liberal , of course , a little bit of the government , a mistake , right ?
this realization is incredibly zersetzend , incredibly beschädigend .
okay , i don &apos;t want to let me go to this one , but i just noticed that the person on the right is a liar .
&quot; honey , you don &apos;t see fat in it , no . &quot;
another study showed that strangers are three times within the first 10 minutes of their own .
here &apos;s a koko thing with her pet .
i &apos;ll tell you again .
don &apos;t think liars are not in the eyes .
we say , &quot; yes , &quot; as we shake the head .
science has been much more indikatoren to the daylight .
look at that right and you &apos;ll see the verräterische smile in the entire video .
in this way , in this much lauteren world , it can be a sense for us to be a little bit of a bit of a bit more of a bit of a bit more of our moral rules .
and that &apos;s not true , right ?
you know , we often think that language is the world that we live in , and we are , but that &apos;s not true .
so what &apos;s a exzentrischer , if not the tragic joke of harry , fungiert as ethnic hetze .
six months after that , no any explanation , they would let me freely .
that &apos;s what i think is trouble .
when i was 10 , i had read james baldwins &apos;s &quot; another country &quot; and i was zerbrochen .
a new song , i gave you a song .
so i took a little time to study coke .
and in the remote areas of africa , it &apos;s hard to find a good road .
how are you going to have the incentive based on the impact that you &apos;re doing to these remote villages ?
klingtfür me not as attractive as waving flag .
they &apos;re waiting for the beschnitten .
a lot more people would have been .
now i &apos;m going to tell you two things . first of all , what we &apos;ve lost , and second , how we get it .
here you can see the largest part of the living of the living of the florida of florida .
if there &apos;s no fishing in a reef , because it &apos;s rechtlich protected , or abgeschieden , it &apos;s great .
after a few years , after five to seven years , the fish come back , eat the sea , and then the algae grow again .
you can see the border of the schutzgebietes , because there are all the boats in the boote .
if it &apos;s so good , if that &apos;s so easy , how much is it ?
so the protection of the sea and the ocean has become a greater senke , and it &apos;s become vertretbar , and that &apos;s not vertretbar .
in the coral reefs , we &apos;ve found that the pyramid is the equivalent to the serengeti , where there are five lions to a gnu .
okay , i thank you , you know , you &apos;ve got a part of your spiritual erlebnisses . thank you .
it has been proven to the longest creature in the ocean .
you &apos;ve come to the submarine -- you come to the eyes and you go to the submarine .
among other things , we &apos;re trying to go to our partners at the woods hole , this virtual world -- this world , this is an area of the lab .
bl : these worms don &apos;t have a verdauungssystem . they don &apos;t have a mouth .
what we &apos;ve seen before , was out of the pacific .
we &apos;re going to try to show you the pacific in hd .
these worms are growing several inches in the week .
the concept of bestandsbewahrung is the zwecklos .
and the rest of one percent is looking for the formula they can apply in the situation .
they also have the mathematical structure that &apos;s from rastern , measurements , beschriftungen , points , points , etc .
the students have to do this . they need to be able to make them .
and the best part , or one of the best parts , is that we don &apos;t get the answer from the end of the end of the lehrer-version .
what &apos;s the small hadron collider going to happen ?
here , you find the fastest growing population in the world .
they &apos;re privatschulen . there &apos;s no government schools in the slums .
this is a computer that was installed by a revolutionären social entrepreneur named sugata mitra , who took the radikalsten experiments that showed that children can learn from certain conditions , on a computer .
now the key is motivation , and that is in two ways .
this is a school in a bus on a site in pune , the fastest growing city of asia .
it should turn it into a mcdonald &apos;s .
there &apos;s a formal framework , schools , health care hospitals , hospitals where innovation can be in place , and informal environments , communities , families , social networks .
every child to the age of 15 who wants to have a place in a school will be in 2015 , will be able to get one .
and while i &apos;m looking at it , this scene that comes up with me , and i &apos;ve been herumtrage with me for 25 years .
here are some parents &apos; some parents &apos; from teenagers , all the time , we have to cook for them -- and they &apos;ll hauen every night for two , three or four in your hands ! it &apos;s ridiculous .
he goes on and all the time .
these gay people like me , they want to be treated as a full citizen , and it &apos;s just written in front of our nose .
there &apos;s people to be scared about their job , so they don &apos;t show who they are at home , here at home . it &apos;s not just about north carolina , in all states , in all states , it &apos;s legal .
think about it .
and i was scared .
about three years ago , i read an article in the new york times .
who were my grandparents ?
it helps us become what we could have .
this is how evolution works .
and in fact , here &apos;s this insect .
i &apos;d like to smell one of someone .
it doesn &apos;t mean 43 to 44 degrees c to c , and it &apos;s a constant temperature .
but contrast is going to be like this . it &apos;s sticht out of the background .
here , the americans beat the russians , and yes , it was -- actually -- a game .
she started telling me about it , and all the parents here are going to see the schlüsselworte .
i have a irische .
our lives are determined by data , and the presentation of this data is a chance to create a chance of fantastic interfaces that can tell great stories .
i also put a look at the various perimeter , because you can pick what you want to highlight from the data .
it &apos;s a beinloser man sitting in the box and controls this schachspieler .
one of the sammlungsgeschwindigkeit of about 11 sheep an hour , which is a stundenlohn of 68 cents .
and so , in the reason , you can see -- what you see on the left is the originalframe , and on the right , you see the frame , as he was interpreted by 16 people who had no idea what they do .
daisy bell : the world &apos;s , daisy , aaron koblin : and we took all those pieces and speisten them into another mechanical turk request .
but we knew we were to take the right person to put us behind it , and we could build something .
and it &apos;s all the individual frames that people have submitted to the project .
thank you .
so i made rows of images , cut , and i put them in portfolios .
one of the unvorhergesehene consequence of it is that you &apos;re always seeing a part of your image , and that &apos;s what it leads to a very free architecture .
and sometimes i have an emotional reaction to news , the earthquake in haiti in haiti .
then i walked 50 kilometers , 60 miles .
it &apos;s like the different layers that we are made of , and what we present to the world as our identity .
another glasprojekt is in a public library in san francisco , california .
so every building has its own personality .
it &apos;s perhaps easier today than ever before to make a good living .
i don &apos;t think we &apos;re special materialistisch .
it &apos;s just too weird .
you know , in the middle ages , england , if you met somebody who was very poor , you called this one &quot; unhappy , &quot; and literally , someone who was lucky enough to be a destiny , a un-glücklicher .
and this is going to do the last dish with the angels and trompeten , and the sky will open up .
i told them the action of the madame .
what i think i really was talking about is success and failure .
we should make sure that it &apos;s our own , that we really are the creator of our own ambitionen .
de de botton : a freundlichere , sanftere erfolgsphilosophie , erfolgsphilosophie erfolgsphilosophie
when you train to that sport , you don &apos;t smile .
you know , you &apos;re swimming with beschlagener schwimmbrille , and you &apos;ll go 60 trains per minute , so you never really do anything , you don &apos;t see well .
they &apos;re eingetaucht into the liquid .
my breath is down three atemzüge .
and they should worry about me , i didn &apos;t make me .
i &apos;m able to go through this thing .
it &apos;s the only schwimmstrecke that i &apos;m interested in .
it &apos;s already today .
the gateway can be a smartphone , or it could be a specific eingerichtetes gateway , as many of these things are special gateways , because they &apos;re not so much integrated .
many of you have the direct direct life .
this is an important part of our life . we should sleep a third of our lives .
ok . let &apos;s go from sleep to disease .
so we can change medicine in the pflegebereich , in all ages , from frühgeborenen or ungeborenen children to the elderly ; the pharmazeutische arena is changing ; the entire spectrum of disease -- i hope i &apos;ve given you a sense of it -- around the globe .
so , i hope i &apos;ve convinced you -- the implications of the krankenhausressorcen are enormously , and the effects of disease are so impressive in all these different diseases and more .
how do we create robust societies ? longevity .
and in the novel , a particular name of the alvin , and he says , maybe it &apos;s not the best way , and it breaks the whole system .
and so there &apos;s no arbeitskräftet .
and she &apos;s a great thing .
and then , you know , it &apos;s going to be faster .
you might ask yourself how we do these schnittbilder .
our is the only world &apos;s kochbuch , in the partielle of differentialgleichungen .
this is the finished hamburger .
so a talk about surgical robots is always a talk about surgery .
and surgeons were more than a physicians .
but ultimately , the woke up .
they had to give up their intuitive movements with the instruments .
i &apos;ve been told you about the big complicated robot .
and as you see , how it comes out to do something useful , it can &apos;t be so zusammengeballt .
and we don &apos;t have to be einschränken on those makro-blick .
we &apos;re here to talk about accidents .
but we had a problem .
okay , well , it was partly my fault .
we haven &apos;t just shown that bacteria can be the solution to plastic waste , but also that the openness to ungewissen ungewissen and ermöglicht the risks of taking unexpected discoveries .
the movie we &apos;re going to see right now , they &apos;ve done for the weltausstellung in new york .
i &apos;m not exception .
it continued . they always have always trying to do things better .
they didn &apos;t say , &quot; our style are curves . let &apos;s do the house . &quot;
i think in my family , we had very lucky . because we &apos;ve learned design backwards .
all right !
ed : and then embassy row is really an historic stätte . because in the kymaericanischen story , the pariser in the beginning has taken its beginning , where the message has been .
see that chair ? the orange one ? this is the organic chair .
because it &apos;s part of what we want to be .
it was nachrichtenartikel full of the empörung , they were full of the spekulation . they were anekdotisch . no solid information .
one of them is known : the population of the population , the world &apos;s population has gone from two to almost seven billion people in the last 50 years .
brent lawson : beautiful here .
you see the lines check out when the population is going .
before i talk about the cost , i have to clear that that is that i &apos;m very clear to hold it .
this is actually liberation liberation .
but only recently , we &apos;ve been able to get more advanced progress , now showing the quanten-levitation and quantum quantum quantum .
so , first of all , some strands of magnetic field are trapped inside inside , but the superconductor doesn &apos;t like when they move , they use energy , and they &apos;re going to mind the supraleitung .
and of course , i can expand to form a random track .
and it was inspired by this quote from douglas adams , the situation is from &quot; by the way through the galaxy . &quot;
because they don &apos;t explain how to do that , if you want to do it yourself and don &apos;t have a schmelzanlage .
but even though they were not convinced , they said , &quot; okay , we call back . &quot; -- they never have .
tt : yeah , i have .
so some of them will say , &quot; what will happen if moore &apos;s law has to go to its borders ? &quot;
today , they can buy half a billion , and they &apos;re even better , because they &apos;re faster .
but where do we get the software ?
larry page has been a passionate talk on our gründungsveranstaltung that he plädierte to ask these great challenges of humankind .
they wanted to catch the fish .
this may sound unbedeutend , but it &apos;s incredibly scary to hear a lot of gerüchte that another more flutwelle , bigger than the last one , the last one , the last 13 o &apos;clock , or maybe last night or maybe ...
so the tsunami can be seen as a kind of a bahnbrechender moment , a moment that the blogosphere sort of grew up .
and you probably , in three to five percent of the number of the geleebohnen in the jar , and it would be better than the estimate of 90 percent of them .
somebody has to link something , so other others , etc . , etc .
he finished his erläuterungen , and i wait a 300 pounds of paper with a long plans of the paper , but it &apos;s only saying , &quot; that &apos;s all i want to do . &quot;
so i &apos;m going to show you now for the end of 30 seconds , film from the thing without the skin .
this habitat is covered more of the earth &apos;s surface than all the other living systems .
many of us , i &apos;m including , think , the exploitation of the oceans in the last 50 or maybe 100 years , in the last 50 or maybe 100 years .
these are linked vehicles to the kabel , and hands on the floor of the sea .
so there &apos;s a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a product that tells the computer what the product is .
but i &apos;d like to share with you some of my favorite discoveries of the census .
we don &apos;t know why they do that , we don &apos;t know it .
this graph is based on a new article that &apos;s going to appear in the fachzeitschrift of plos biology .
but that &apos;s not even more than it .
as an architect , i have a konfrontieren .
mitchell joachim : don &apos;t build a house , grow it !
i find that very interesting and very proaktiv , because what you &apos;ve heard in the last few days is the sense of walk in different directions : directions that are specific and unique to the problems .
now , we all think that shelley was obviously a great romantic poet , many of us forgotten that he wrote some wonderful essays , and the most famous one is one of the defense poetry .
i &apos;m going to read that .
and at a certain time of his life , she siedeln on rocks .
but let me show you the latest robotic .
if you used to hear the digitalen radio radio , the radiosender einstellte , and krrckkk , &quot; krrckkk &quot; on the other network , that noise was noise .
the basic idea of the bayesianischen is that you have two sources of information that the implications are .
that means that i have to predict the future .
now , there &apos;s a very clear example of where one of my erzeugter sinneseindruck feels very different than when he was produced by another person .
and in the meanwhile , i had two daughters .
so they didn &apos;t know the rules for which other person plays .
if those dots were cars on a rennparcours , you would have no idea what &apos;s going on .
we &apos;ve shown that we can explain a big part of the data -- people are actually planning their movements right to the negative effects of the noise .
this is from the vorbeiflug of marine iv .
mars has the largest solar of solar system in the solar system .
this is my lieblingsbild . it &apos;s been recorded just a few weeks ago .
the oldest stone on earth is only 3,6 billion .
and the result of our meeting was a raketengetriebenes roboterflugzeug called ares .
we fold it , and we carried it in a raumfahrzeug .
that &apos;s about tilamook , oregon .
i think that &apos;s what i think is looking at here -- &quot; eight to 12 . &quot;
and there was a guy who sold these guns for lego , because lego -- the dänen -- no , they &apos;re not standing on guns .
and then there are some examples of .dies stuff .
i have to tell you , for me , it had changed everything .
perhaps most important , the impact on other companies is enormous .
in fact , politics is rang .
in brazil now , there &apos;s 29.000 ethanol-zapfsäulen , whereas the u.s. has only 700 , and armselige two in california -- and within three years , the percentage of four percent is up by four percent .
this is not unwesentlich . it &apos;s a really big thing .
scientists explain to us -- and these are just estimates -- that we have to cut the rate of greenhouse gases in half and as fast as possible .
i can &apos;t wait to wait what we do to tedsters against the crisis .
there are always fewer people who are still available , and then you get this plateu of the curve , and you get this classic sigmoidale curve .
b is on the edge of the network .
and that &apos;s what happens to every foreign nodes .
the red dots are going to be the grippe-fälle , and the yellow dots will be friends of the people with flu .
would you get the immune system on populations-ebene ?
and there &apos;s three ways that i can use that data that &apos;s used to be used .
the building was in building , until the collapse of the venezolanischen economy and the death of the bauunternehmers , the beginning of the &apos; 90s .
although it seems to be a completely chaotischer place , if you see it from the top , it seems like a whole network of wasserwegen and kanälen that are connecting every single house .
in this tradition , the future of the voices is all of their own besitztümer that she &apos;s going to be bringing her new husband soon .
what makes a place like the torre david makes a remarkable thing is this kind of skelettrahmen , where people have a base that they can use .
we can only ask , &quot; what are the rentiere of the weihnachtsmanns ? &quot; and experience it immediately -- or whatever we want to ask .
it &apos;s replaced with the workers by technology .
you can see on the left on the screen , and you can see some symbols that show what &apos;s on his right arm .
they &apos;re older , and they &apos;re getting older .
or even if we &apos;re getting a lot older to drive our cars , so we can go to visit people .
they were disappeared in a moment .
it &apos;s been becoming more obvious that we can &apos;t win .
the two specialists behind the wing will help me to get the result of the screen .
one of the journalists asked , &quot; what &apos;s going on ? &quot;
the evangelikalen are hinzugekommen , same as jewish .
i think there are some , actually , many reasons , but here &apos;s just a few of the ones that we &apos;re focusing on .
he was dressed by the fire , he pulled them , he was like a motte for light , a little bit of a adrenalin-junkie .
let me go to the international community door to the international community , and see if there &apos;s somebody who &apos;s polizeikräfte or troops to these are aufteilung .
but for sergio , it was too late .
he saw her .
samantha power of a complicated hero .
so , these are jobs and opportunities all the way .
but today i &apos;m going to talk about food &apos;s the food , because actually this year , last year and 2008 , while the hungerskrise there was going to be there in the hungerskrise , and for every 2,700 pounds of calories .
and i go into these stores , if you &apos;re there , you &apos;re going out into the fields , and you can see what you can get , and i find you can &apos;t get food .
we &apos;re seeing the change in participation in school .
i want to talk about something i call a digital food .
and what i found is that instead of subventionen and other things , you invest in a school program .
thank you .
we could do the same thing for cancer .
they &apos;re not going to go to a brustkrebsklinik .
it &apos;s not abstract ; it &apos;s an interaction with the environment .
it &apos;s a umwerfendes device , not because it tells me how many kilokalorien i verbrauche every day , but because it &apos;s überwacht for 24 hours , what i do .
it &apos;s never been shown .
the leistungskraft of these magnets is so large that we can see a single amount of a deal with this technology .
you don &apos;t have to shrink the tumor .
when the magnet is big enough , and your resolution high enough , then you actually can actually detektieren all the proteins in your body and start to understand the individual system .
most of us find that beruhigend , and interestingly , 12 vibrations per minute , roughly the atem-frequenz of a schlafenden .
for example , if i had this -- -- no longer than a few seconds , they would be uncomfortable , and longer than a few minutes , and they would leave the hall in scharen .
that &apos;s all the erkannt . and that &apos;s the melody that &apos;s the most part of the world in the world .
and i stood there with two very good friends , richard weber and kevin vallely .
while we were crossing miles and miles from sastrugi -- gefrorene eis-schneeverwehungen , who could be hüfttief .
so as i &apos;m standing here and talk to you , i &apos;ve walked over the gesamtzeit of about five years .
just 10 miles off the coast of the coast and down feet .
the ocean is what climate and weather , and it keeps the temperature stable and form the chemistry of the world .
one-way-reisen are easy .
that &apos;s the result , if you don &apos;t know that there are borders for what we need to take the ocean .
in the past three years , the u.s. usa has been protected sea square square miles of sea .
we need tiefsee-u-boote , new technologies to exploration the ocean .
most of my early career , i wanted to figure out how the wing of insects generate enough force to keep themselves in the air .
let &apos;s look at this idea of simplicity .
this is a beautiful image of visual interneurone from the lab from jeff lichtman . you can see the wonderful pictures of brains he showed in his presentation .
they selektieren a zellsatz to make some behavior , another neuronenregler , has a different zellsatz and patterns , and they think that &apos;s a very complicated system .
our mission is to build a detailiertes and realistisches computer model of the human brain .
he &apos;s home and drinking tea .
if you look at the surface of the neocortex , you &apos;ll see it &apos;s made of a little components of it . g5 , you can have , like in a computer .
how many per tree tree are there ? where are they ?
we can look at the tissue , and we can change neurons .
we can put all these neurons , every single one in their own , activate it , and see what happens .
henrsy markram says that the secrets of the brain can be solved . mental illness , memory , perceptions , you &apos;re making neurons and electrical signals , and he &apos;s a super-computer with a supercomputer that can find the brain with 100,000,000,000,000 synapses .
there would be two or three thousand bombs .
the air force began to build smaller models , and began that .
this is what nasa did to get a acht-mann-version that would fly to mars .
i &apos;ll tell you a little bit about irrationales behavior .
it &apos;s a fantastic time to write . because there &apos;s so much resonance you can get from people .
the bottom one ? yellow .
when you ask people that question , they usually think it has something to do with culture .
the countries on the right , those who give the very much , have a slightly different form .
i &apos;m going to give you one more example of this .
but bring it back to it , it &apos;s going to be complex .
it &apos;s a online online service for the $ of the $ .
the general idea here , by the way , is that we don &apos;t really know our präferenzen as well .
in fact , in medical terms , this is our view .
and radio waves are limited .
so , for protecting the eyes , you can only use your eyes .
and the intensity can be easily variiert very quickly , and it can be turned very quickly .
they are critical .
but that &apos;s only one .
cars have led-scheinwerfer and led-rücklichter and can communicate with each other and then communicate with the datenaustausch traffic lights with the cars and so forth .
dna is what &apos;s common to life .
because it &apos;s actually not that much of data .
you have the apotheker genome , and the power of that you can do is a personalized medicine that &apos;s better than the present -- it has no side effects .
it &apos;s really simple -- has only 246 genes -- but we could fully synthetisieren it .
we &apos;re not running as a little organism alone in the world , but they &apos;re part of a big ecosystem .
the consequences can be bad -- if we were to ourselves or poison us , but that &apos;s just a consequence of us from a gemachten .
now , i &apos;m mostly here because there &apos;s a way of graben a dog to the moment where we have a side of people who think you put a dog , first of all , by set rules , human rules .
they &apos;re just so schlagbar , just beating , and that &apos;s why they &apos;re going to beat .
no , we &apos;re going to make &quot; little , sit . &quot; -- boom , it can try to go to six to 10 .
they &apos;re like golden retriever .
and i would say if you don &apos;t need it , then you might not be supposed to be .
not only with the welpen , but also with the rest of the family .
these are just so simple .
their children are just to train .
wk : i want to make a windmill .
so , and this windmill -- does it work ?
wk : yeah . i still think of working with energy .
because even though i &apos;ve been using science terms in songs , it &apos;s sometimes very hard to sound it lyrisch .
and even more rare when it &apos;s accompanied by selbst-bewusstheit and sprachbeherrschung , like in my case .
one is a white light of light .
64 multiply by 75 .
let &apos;s look at the third question .
the desert desert a mile or two a year .
homo erectus , had the same tool for 100,000 generations .
you can teach them in the lab a little bit of a tauschhandel , and there &apos;s also an reziprozität in other animals , but the exchange of an object against another one .
it &apos;s wealth , and it &apos;s the pleasure of your needs , time .
that &apos;s what we &apos;ve done as a species .
but there &apos;s no evidence for that .
and when people began objects like this far herumzureichen , it was a clue that a exchange between groups existed .
but who knows how to make a mouse mouse ?
but that &apos;s me also because of the connections that people go to , and the way that there &apos;s no way to meet ideas and to mate . i &apos;m sure that technology will continue to continue and therefore the lebensstandards continue .
that &apos;s as high as a 42-stöckiges building . i &apos;ve been added the freiheitsstatue as compared .
we don &apos;t talk about that , we don &apos;t take it seriously .
they &apos;re just gone , these feelings , they &apos;re disappeared .
when we think about the herrstellung pan-viraler nachweisreagenzen , then the rapid development is typically the problem because how can we discover things that are constantly changing ?
and i &apos;ve been speaking to this -- you know that situation when you don &apos;t have a diagnosis at the hospital ?
what about real people ?
we sequenzierten a part of their viruses ; they &apos;re new , bisher rhinoviren .
after 10 days of the time , she came back -- still a fever -- she &apos;s got hypoxie -- little oxygen in her lungs .
it was not used to be very common .
it &apos;s a classic , but it &apos;s completely new . nobody has ever seen it before .
a huge battery could be done .
let &apos;s invent something that fits the kostenpunkt of the strommarktes .
i brought a flüssigmetall with low density , a low density below , and you salt salt in between .
but david is young and clever , and he wants a doktoranden-stelle , and he &apos;s building it -- he then build the very first liquid liquid composition with this chemical composition .
so what do we learn from all of this ?
this video was taken in the aquarius-unterwasserlabor . six miles off the coast of key largo , about 20 meters under the sea .
so quickly , we realized that our garage was not big enough for this growing project .
i started to take a maria and interest their way , and how they care about this , and how important they found that children are discovering things and they didn &apos;t teach them , to be taught to an open way .
evolution is often seen as one way that we chose , but it represents a huge number of possibilities .
i &apos;m going to jump into the phase of space .
our cities are endangered , because there are many of them on the coast .
there are stars and so forth .
so if we &apos;re thinking about nonverbales behavior or body language , as the social scientists call , it turns out to be language . so we think about communication .
this phrase , as a proud , has been studying by the israeli tracy , and she showed that the sehende people and the birth of the blind people are doing this when they win a sportwettkampf .
so i thought about it . you hit these people and see how they participate . could you do it , and would you get more ?
what happens in a rollenänderung , what happens when you take on the allerkleinsten stage ? how the following little manipulation , these tiny , tiny ?
it happens in the lab . the little exercise , for just a few minutes . where can you actually apply this ? that &apos;s what we &apos;re really important .
these things . people are kind of telling their true to me . they show themselves .
she was completely niedergeschlagen and said , &quot; i don &apos;t have anything to go there . &quot;
they need their bodies , privacy and two minutes . it can affect the other way of life in the large way .
lachse swimming swimming to get to their laichgründen , and leberegel kapern an ant , and you go into your brain and drive a blade of a blade of a grashalm .
and you have to have a kind of autoaufkleber , you have to have an answer .
so , it &apos;s like i think richard and i care that these ideas aren &apos;t missbraucht .
and of course , they &apos;re essentially extinct .
but under all these ideas that are inevitably to the world &apos;s technology , a lot of the toxic ideas are coming to .
and how about viruses , we don &apos;t have to try to vernichten them .
and in my game , that &apos;s called the übergestikuliert .
we put some ideas on the legs , and we went forward to tour .
i know you &apos;ll tell me , &quot; t doesn &apos;t exist in music . &quot;
audience : t , e , d.
nobody hears each other . nobody is familiar with the other .
you will see the orchestra in a kind of a mürrischer revolte .
i don &apos;t want to go out to that , but we need to be better at the question that we &apos;re going to be better to answer the questions that you need to consider when you think about the consequences and the reactions .
they &apos;re working in regierungsbehörden . they &apos;re driver .
five dollars can save a life .
she deserves about two dollars a day , building a erziehungs-fonds on a erziehungs-fonds , and it tells me that she &apos;s not going to get married nor children before these things are done .
finally , from despair , she went and konsultierten a wise old woman .
it &apos;s not even new .
and as you say , when you &apos;re angry , you will be the best speech you &apos;re ever going to regret .
okay , the vast majority of us .
his message was basically about unity , the bond of everything and the unity of everything , and the fundamental value was respect , was kindness to strangers .
who &apos;s struggling to do ?
they have started to go , in israel and palestine , in jordan , in turkey , in syria .
and so , more and more wanderer , and recently , they have a income for their family to support their family .
just take a person to someone with a different culture , from another country , with another ethnizität , which is kind of different and then get it into a conversation ; listen to him .
i start to start where the story started , 1985 in zentral-australien .
this morning before she herkamen , who i had the opportunity to take a shower ?
you see here -- 35 percent of these fewer houses in which 50,000 people live , 35 percent of the houses had a functional shower .
21 percent of what we fix are the following things that are tatsächlich , things that are actually going to be in the verkehrt .
we did that . he got a besorgte .
we found out later that in this region , it &apos;s lungenversagen the cause of disease and death .
one thing about everything we &apos;ve done , in the middle of the 2000er , nelson mandela didn &apos;t say nelson mandela is not far from here : &quot; how slavery and apartheid is not naturgegeben . it &apos;s the work of people .
i don &apos;t mind if you call me a lesbe , really .
it sounds really abgedroschen , which is up here , but when you try to do this , it &apos;s impressive .
with that point , i &apos;m performing to you , in the belief that children don &apos;t want to leave their communities to live in a better way .
this is the youngest staatlich workforce in america in america with our bezirksbürgermeister bezirksbürgermeister .
this is a picture from the mayor of the bronx who empfing the kids in his house , not in jail , so they felt zugehörig .
we gave something back .
if you &apos;re big kids with little zusammensteckt , they &apos;re the big fat man in the middle , which is cool , and they create this responsibility under gleichaltrigen that &apos;s incredible .
now you might be wondering about these kids .
keep children away from these stores .
stephen &apos;s ritz : the south bronx begrünt begrünt begrünt .
second , i bet you &apos;ll see you as a laien here , here is a increase in the st-segments right after that sharp line .
to 10 : 06 , the pig &apos;s pig suffered a heart attack .
people with a migraine headaches that vorausgeht an aura , has a band with nervösen neurons -- in red -- three to five millimeters per minute on the road .
the problem is that 30 million americans have a migraine headaches , and we need a behandlungsmittel . i think we have this now .
my first wish is that the reaktive neurostimulator for epilepsy , the rns , for reaktiver neurostimulator -- an spitzenmäßiges akronym -- for treating other gehirnstörungen .
lawyers of taking cases in the hope of a fette anteile anteile , which the geschworenen of the poor patients are full of pity .
a year and a half ago , four of five of the vollzeitbeschäftigten in ushahidi , which is called &quot; zeugenaussage , &quot; which is also ted-mitglieder .
where do you know what &apos;s important to do ?
so i thought , &quot; i &apos;m going to talk about death . &quot;
i &apos;ve got it to take it to the first time here .
these people below the barrier i call ausgeschlossene , because they &apos;re really going to have to share their knowledge with the world .
they have a platform to use , you know , to develop and entwickeln your lehrmaterialien and auszuhändigen , which teach the world around the world .
yes , books that might be sold 100 or 1,000 spending in the year .
it doesn &apos;t surprise that it like it , right ?
how do we protect it for the future ?
so that &apos;s not very hard .
the days of the pilotprojekte are over when people say , &quot; well we &apos;d like to have three or viertausend from our country to see how that works . &quot;
no , it &apos;s not a laptop-projekt . it &apos;s a bildungsprojekt .
you can use a few thousand children with two megabit .
so it &apos;s like an electronic book .
everybody says that &apos;s a $ 100 , you can &apos;t do it .
and that &apos;s the markteinführung .
you click on things and stare at the screen . &quot;
he says , &quot; no , no , no . there &apos;s a better way . &quot;
we &apos;re all about &quot; i love lucy &quot; on a big line of sound , and we &apos;re all the time , and we can &apos;t keep up with it .
thank you .
i think most people think that a pregnant mother , always , their child .
that &apos;s not possible . that &apos;s not possible .
it &apos;s all good . they &apos;re going to live .
one , to prevent the mutter-kind-übertragung .
two years ago , one of the mentor mentor came to me and told me a story .
how do you build a better health care system ?
the außergewöhnlichste is , how easy the system is .
if you look at the volume of gray matter at the age of four to 22 years , you &apos;ll take into childhood what this graph shows , it &apos;s gipfelt in the early adolescence .
the idea that her father was singing in the public , so they were enough to get away .
that &apos;s the gokart that we built together .
after the first year , it was invited from the ars museum museum in austria , to install it in its lobby , and i &apos;m happy to say that there was online , 24 hours a day , for nearly nine years .
but at night , while we were zusammenpackten , i asked the tele-schauspielerin , like the tele-regisseure decided they would have been kiss sam donaldson .
and here &apos;s the result .
a place where my family has been working on four generations in the safari-geschäft .
and honestly , i have no idea what it has on a hirten , but they &apos;re hugely findig .
the first thing you see when you see the krokodilbiss is the terrible force of the bisses .
he &apos;s wickelt it up by my leg , picks me up again , puts me into a vehicle and can give me a doctor .
it was a vertiefung in the ground .
and she said , &quot; well , it &apos;s about you . &quot;
we &apos;ve calculated that 200 years of our direct climate change is the end of our direct climate change .
it &apos;s so simple to see technology as a metaphor for memory , but our brains are not perfect speichergeräte like technology .
she &apos;s the mitbegründerin of my 200-jahr-plans .
i would like to think -- thank you .
and i can assure you , corn is in most possible .
you should know that in every community , the number of hofläden are already increasing .
i &apos;ve run three tauchexpeditionen in antarctica .
but tell me where they are and what country they belong . &quot;
we also study the surface of the islands -- a very important nistplatz for birds , one of the most important most important in the pacific .
and we are standing in front of the rest of the world .
he coined the term &quot; reverse fischfanglizenz . &quot;
and of course , the tiefseegebiete and the open seas unbeschädigt , but the korallenteil , everybody likes to look at , was in trouble .
here &apos;s the pacific , with giant meeresschutzgebieten and giant umweltschutzzonen .
now , there &apos;s mehrsprachige , immediate , automatic übersetzungsdienste , kostenlos , we &apos;re going to give you through many of our devices , even on the smartphone .
it &apos;s an endless debate , and there &apos;s no schlüsse , no one answer that , but if you &apos;re a computerfreak like me , you say , &quot; well , what &apos;s the data going to tell us ? &quot;
instead , he has very carefully documented what happens when technology is going to be the first time in an environment and in a community .
so there &apos;s , of course , two different possibilities .
this is a blue field -- it &apos;s actually a yves kline painting .
i mean , at least , it was at least how it made me happy .
well , there was , of course , a question that i had a zeitlang for a while in my mind : well , i can do more of the things that i like to do in design , and less of those who i don &apos;t like to do ?
and here it is on the front .
they are standing in a terrible situation without the way .
they &apos;re going to be in hospitals .
as a 15-jähriger , for example , i was considered extraordinarily talented at multiplikationen because i knew the mulitplikationstabellen mulitplikationstabellen , and i know how i have to use logarithmen and i can quickly work with the rechenschieber .
i &apos;ve seen this value of older people in so many of my friends that are in their &apos; 60s , &apos; 70s , &apos; 80s and &apos; 90s , as a anlageverwalter , landwirte , juristen and doctors .
as a christian ikonographie , transformed and made of kruzifixen swastikas , young jewish jewish men in the u.s. and the canada and the canada and the superman , and the superman , that would be besannen back to the bible .
the case of granada , the last muslim muslim europe of europe .
the biggest bösewicht , rughal , doesn &apos;t want those rocks to updaten . so he &apos;s trying to prevent them from the updaten .
and one of my favorites is al-batina from yemen .
&quot; and when does the paper come out ? &quot;
rughal : there &apos;s to be something we can do .
&#91; &quot; the 99 &quot; &#93; .
it &apos;s dangerous when a group is identifiziert themselves .
naif al-mutawa : from islam beflügelte superhelden
let &apos;s look at it .
let me highlight it for you .
let me show you this .
and when i started designing with this , i found something curious about myself .
so you have the eye , and then the concepts come into this .
but , of course , china has an enormous population .
but what this is , however , is that this kind of visualization of information is a form of wissenskomprimierung .
it &apos;s even a pleasure of engaging with them , because they &apos;re visual .
the eden-kopfnote is named after the eden project in britain .
why don &apos;t it smell like the potato or veilchen ? so there are two theories .
and a theory allows you to work .
now after a few months of the field , i discovered that there &apos;s a kind of molecule called a borane , and that &apos;s what it has done .
that &apos;s the basis of the machine that these two people built from ford .
they made it -- and it &apos;s like to smell coumarin .
that was a good thing .
now , the number of things that are happening in the advance that i want to pay attention to .
and she didn &apos;t really have an idea of the context that she ended up in .
norman ! norman !
i don &apos;t say anybody to see , neither my mother , my father , not my sister , my brother , my brother , my cousins , my cousins , my cousins , no one , no , no one .
i &apos;m telling of it . i &apos;m just telling it , i just said , i had two things when i left the orphanage i wanted to do . that one was to find my family and write the other .
and this is how we &apos;re looking for them .
and then you hope that one of us is going to go around and find small parts .
he had a skoliose , and it has to be a penibel of others , female and probably a lot of smaller family members of being behütet to reach his age for 12 years .
is that a good evolutionary adaptation , or will it lead to be the hominide species that exists on the planet earth ?
but will we do that , or are we going to take nature of the time ?
one day , a couple of weeks , or maybe a year later , i was with my kinderm in a shop for künstlerbedarf . i wanted to buy tonwerkzeug -- we had a bastel-tag .
that meant a fundamental change for me .
my point : about 70 , about 70 , take on this , matt-schwarze auto-grundierung .
do you know how obsessed i really am ? this project is just for me , and yet i &apos;ve been so far , i &apos;ve been able to buy a chinese newspaper from san francisco from san francisco to make the bird so reasonable .
when we bahnten the path to the spectacular blue mountains in the west of sydney , it was a perfect herbsttag : the smell of eukalyptus and a dream .
&quot; no , it &apos;s too hard . &quot;
and if you ever become going again , just with a laufgestell . &quot;
i remember my dad pulled me in the wheelchair outside , and i was in the top down and i felt the sun on my face .
they said , &quot; we &apos;ll put you next to you , because we think that it would be good for you . &quot;
she was enough for me to go and i called the school , i was buchte , and i said that i wanted to buchen a flugstunde .
and i said , &quot; jap . &quot;
and mom and dad ? never up .
i am in the world , but i &apos;m looking in a little bit .
it &apos;s like a anish kapoor that flies through a richard serra .
how about hell are i going to do a telephone in three weeks when i have evolved these things that have evolved over millions of years ?
each of these elements could be attached to the wall as a kind of kunstobjekt .
in his days he was the highest most in briten .
i &apos;m looking at a single oberflächenstrukturen and how they &apos;re flowing -- how they expand and flow . it &apos;s based on furniture , but it &apos;s not the endmotivation . it &apos;s made from a aluminium , as opposed to the aluminium and it grew .
this is the car of the future . it &apos;s a wassertröpfchen .
if you think it &apos;s next to contemporary architecture , it feels really , of course .
that &apos;s my studio . it &apos;s the ground .
it was made from the kevlar .
and after i did my dr. dr. dr. , i was fortunate to be a member of a forschergruppe member of the first time to explore the ocean .
there was one of these rippenquallen .
he uses red bioluminescence like a scharfschütze infrarot-fernrohr to see the light on the red light , and can you see it without seen .
so they &apos;re using it to eat and mate .
i challenge you to call me a different science that &apos;s still using hundreds of years old technology .
this is a magical place .
so i made myself to rediscover the value of the schlafes .
and on the fifth of june , i heard a loud bang on the disk that changed my life and ended the duck .
and here are the duck .
after the price , my life changed .
another example of the impact of glasgebäuden is to the life of birds .
so , for example , if i like this , this is the sound of purple .
the after i can hear it , i can hear music with the food and i hear it .
one of them is &quot; i have a &quot; i have a dream &quot; by martin luther king , and the other is from hitler .
now , you &apos;re always more likely to see that we have the ehemalige rechtsberater now .
you don &apos;t want to say anything unbedachtes that could be used against one . &quot;
absolutely critical .
and what happens if teachers want to make order of policy ?
and why not ? they don &apos;t trust the law . why don &apos;t you trust the law ?
because it &apos;s so that freedom is a formale structure .
because life is complex . and here &apos;s the hardest and biggest change : we need to be done the authority for the auslegung and application of law to justice and beamte .
a free society needs red and green lights , otherwise they &apos;re going to suffer close to a complete death .
it &apos;s setzt the zinsen that the kreditkarten-unternehmen can be calculate as well as the amount of which you can take .
now , if you think about it , it &apos;s really hard to take a round of columns with a ruler .
he had a very bad job .
he had just a spielzeugpistole .
but the problem , to leave with rules and incentives , is that they demoralisieren the most , and they &apos;re doing the most important thing in two ways .
so smart gesetzlose are better than nothing , but it &apos;s hard to imagine that some smart gesetzloser can sustain this for the order of the time .
why has this idea spread ?
people want to be tugendhaft .
it was an extraordinary time . i &apos;m going to make the mentality a little bit more complicated that we -- america and the rest of the world .
this was bert , the schildkröte .
we have a complete realitätsverlust with a complete realitätsverlust .
what i want to show you is what they need to transport the 34 pounds of uranium uranium .
what would have been if they had nuclear weapons ?
we come down and bring the truck you just saw somewhere here in the finanzviertel .
part of the problem is that the katastrophenplaner themselves , are overwhelmed by the idea of a nuclear disaster .
it was sent to me from someone who &apos;s a kenner of the zivilschutzmaßnahmen , and the fact that america had hard .
there &apos;s a lot of black sheep out there that are doing the wrong things and the problems have even more .
we can show our results . we can make things better .
how can we tap them ?
it &apos;s a rentabel thing to have a dangerous environment .
imagine we could do it because if we could , we could achieve more .
the governments that make most progress are the governments that have found ways to enable shared value in the business of the business , rather than seeing the government to see the alleinige .
i may have a look at this , and i can look at the brain , and i can change my slice .
i want to zoom in .
come back to me , with me , in the 19th century , right to the 24. of june .
we could all be so productive , if facebook or twitter don &apos;t cost us so much time .
they were wirkten unerbittlich on the british government to get money for building machines &apos;s machines , because they thought these machines would have tremendous practical impact for society .
these benefits , not only do not only do not only fewer wealthy men , but they also also regten to look at the tellerrand , rather than just answer the questions of the questions .
i &apos;m going to tell you how i learned about life .
when you start looking at the very little things -- this person wrote an entire article and said , &quot; hey , these are bacteria . &quot;
and all the ones who are not old enough , they have no idea how that infection happened -- that &apos;s what they &apos;re doing .
there are about 10,000 programs .
this would be the frequency of which you can find every one of the 26 letters of the alphabets in one of the random affen text .
everywhere is life , you &apos;ll have this distribution , as opposed to this distribution .
hot , hot , hot .
the officer says , &quot; are you sure ? hey , buddy , are you sure you &apos;ve lost that ? &quot;
this is the data from one survey in a single district in zambia , from a few years ago i &apos;ve been mitgearbeitet .
as you see , bruce , bruce , willis used to be a lot more hair .
you could talk about 10,000 , 20,000 or 30,000 dollars , if i had the time or it fit in my plan , and i wasn &apos;t just on vacation .
instead of teaching people how to put the paper paper on the cell phones , we should develop software that allows them to do that , without practice , without my zutun .
that &apos;s less than i made when i went to a berater for two weeks .
and then we understand that if we want to change the trajectory , live or in the balloon , we have to change the height .
that can be in the spirituality .
and that &apos;s why they need to take care of it .
i promised to me that i would be the next time i would fly around the world , not take a fuel , will be independent of fossil energieträgern , to be safe , not to be threatened by the tankanzeige .
i think you need a pilot in the plane who can speak to the universities who can talk to students , with politicians during flight , and can really make a human adventure .
and what &apos;s the goal ?
that &apos;s the reason why all people who believe in those minds are welcome to be part of this team .
now , you need a laptop .
anyway , for us , africa was a magical place .
the next thing i want to do is to create clarity , which is what this problem is and what it is .
this is crazy , really , if you think about it .
let &apos;s stop for a second with that .
the fact is that we can see the first generation , and these extreme poverty , in the eyes , see , over the ocean , will tell it , and i think it &apos;s not to be .
it &apos;s going to be on the nerves .
this year is a test for us , especially for the leaders of the g8 states who are in the angetreten and look the world .
people are starting to find that slowly .
and with this one campaign as our screen , my organization , data , and other groups , the energy and the enthusiasm that from hollywood to the hinterland of america .
and , step for step , go forward , a nurse , a teacher , a hausfrau , and life will be saved .
the idea that the internet , which has changed all their lives , can change a country -- and a continent that &apos;s just made so much , much more , much , because of digital -- verdreht your mind .
lips are not lips , but volcanoes .
now , their job is to see what these shapes are , and which is the one .
now , if you &apos;re not just gefängniswärter , then this sentence is literally , falsch .
if we solve a problem or discover something new , we compare that what we already know about what &apos;s known to us .
nadia al-sakkaf : i &apos;m glad to be here .
and they don &apos;t fit to all of these darstellungen .
pm : i don &apos;t think that .
how are they going to have it , they &apos;re personal , but also with their mitarbeiterinnen ?
some of my reporter were arrested .
and that &apos;s clearly a different picture of yemen .
my heart was a half times a half .
this is a list of side effects : if you eat too much salt , like a erdnußbutter and marmeladen sandwich , you probably land in intensive care .
but soon , i showed symptoms of rechtsherzinsuffizienz , and i had to go back to meeresspiegelhöhe , knowing that i would never ever see my home .
i was sitting there and i was talking about the chefchirung of the brain of the brain , and asked him what i needed when i needed a transplant , i could prepare for me .
i was hanging on a dozen machines that kept me alive .
thank you .
interestingly , one of those geburtsschäden ebenfalls in the united states also angestiegen .
also , interesting is that the same companies that are sold to the 80 million pounds of atrazine , the brustkrebs-förderer , the antidote to the same , as well as the same company .
we started as a wasserorganismen .
what would our kids say to us when they were a day , every child , and i had a little bit of octylphenol , some artificial moschusriechstoffe , and a little bit of bisphenol a.
the problem is that you can &apos;t see this connection in my village , in my villages , in most of our villages .
here you see this is the ansammlung of the biona creek next to the airport of los angeles .
i offered five cents for every flaschenverschluss .
the wegwerfgesellschaft can &apos;t be eingedämmt , it &apos;s a global .
here you see , in red , the spread of the küstenmammutbaums .
they &apos;re like a mouse looking at the foot of a elephants , and the largest part of you is hidden with them .
it looks out of their hängematte and vogelgezwitscher , all of the directions around us .
redwood trees have a huge surface that &apos;s expanding in the sky because they tend to something called reiteration , and that is wiederholung .
strebebögen are geben , the baumkrone stability , just like a cathedral , and help the tree to live longer .
it &apos;s absolutely herzzerreißend to see that .
but for the time , all the doors of the palastes open up and the walls are .
it was 25 years ago .
so , for example , let &apos;s take a look at the centipede-virus .
how do these people do with these infected computers ?
and they can afford to watch how we work -- like sicherheitsleute work -- and try to find a way to find a way to deal with the sicherheitsvorkehrungen that we &apos;re going to meet .
you &apos;ll notice that you can see a internetadresse , and you can see unionseek.com / d ioo.exe and if you open up this computer image on your computer , it &apos;s going to be heruntergeladen and ausgeführt this program .
and if you look into the pictures of the scene , you can see the kennzeichen of the mercedes o600ko78rus is .
we need to make any way to make sure that everything is going to be , even if the computer is .
but i have nothing to do with that .
this person is sitting around .
why should we believe what he says ? &quot;
what does his future look like ?
these forces completely go completely , nobody understützt the 2011 .
it would be good if people were aufmerksamer , and they would take these kind of calculations , and they would be involved in this , because this would change things , but it would change things in two ways .
that means that we can see a copy of themselves , if you only used one part of the originaldatei , which is in slow motion and a worse bild- and tonqualität .
and the happy , jill and kevin , and you know , they came from their hochzeitsreise and saw that video had suddenly spread like a lauffeuer .
thank you .
you &apos;re going to go into the distance .
that &apos;s what it was taught to do since it was five years old .
i &apos;m grateful for the fact that i had a mentor like the mau who taught me how to navigiert .
what is it that &apos;s driving you in life today ? not 10 years ago .
what are you doing with what you do , and let &apos;s do it ?
didn &apos;t have the -- time . didn &apos;t have the -- technology . you know , i didn &apos;t have the right manager . didn &apos;t have any of the manager .
and right now , consciously or unconsciously . right now , where you &apos;re going to entscheidest you to focus you on something , you can make a meaning , and whatever it means , it &apos;s making feelings .
you &apos;ve ever done what , and you went to that , &quot; i was like that . &quot;
so , god in his infinite wisdom , gave us another human need to give us a human need .
but that &apos;s true : we need it . we can do it through intimacy , through friendship , through prayers , by wanderungen in nature .
and there &apos;s seven different beliefs . i can &apos;t go through them because i &apos;m through , and the last element is feeling .
the jewish man with family in the besetzten area , someone in new york who would have died when he had been to work on the day , and this man who wanted to be a terrorist and it was clearly clear .
instead , i &apos;m interested in developing tools that a large number of people can tell their stories , people all around the world .
the color of particles the way of the feeling of the feeling -- happy , positive emotions have bright colors .
we see , &quot; i feel like i was the computer all day . &quot;
and when i go over here , the list starts to walk , and there are thousands of feelings that were collected .
the 10 topics from the rays and circle the time .
it &apos;s called the universe : enthüllung of our modern mythology .
we can click on this and see this very ikonische picture of the betty ford , like she &apos;s going to go to the guy &apos;s sarg .
you can also look at a little bit , if you like to read about a zitate to climate change .
so people are looking at clouds as something that &apos;s in the way .
they started in life . she has tens of thousands of members of the entire world today .
they only need one step outside , and to notice that , that &apos;s so common , so so simple is so simple that everybody else is missing it .
so look up , admire the kurzlebige beauty , and think of it , and you always think of your head in the clouds .
they had 25,000 images that would have been made by the same , which is , &quot; 25.0000 , good , good .
and you know , 10 years ago , it was about 10 years ago when i got the fördergelder to buy my first grafikcomputer , it was a huge machine .
these images come from a virtual physical field .
and here you can see the knife is eingedrungen .
it &apos;s a little mechanical pen , which has built into its inner inner , very fast schrittmotoren .
now this is a really interesting project .
so he &apos;s doing it .
so , very talented people .
i went to the kids as much as possible to bring the academic stuff into the real world .
it &apos;s not all that , but it &apos;s an incredibly leistungsfähige summary of everything we know about the basics of nature .
i &apos;m not going to go into the details of why we think the universe , but it makes you out of mathematics and trying to explain physics that we know .
in the course of my career , i always have a little bit of me .
in 2001 , i went to a forschungsaufenthalts .
we got a lot of bewerbungen .
this is what it shows about the first year in 2004 .
he &apos;s about to graduate from the end of the book and he was filmed with someone who &apos;s all known .
each one will have a panafrikanische studentenschaft , but they &apos;re specialized in different scientific disciplines .
i got my first computer as a teenager in accra , and it was a really great device .
he &apos;s studying the brain using mri , and he says this is the most beautiful brain that he &apos;s ever been scanned .
i &apos;m going to explain to you a little bit about the next few slides .
transistors are going to make it a little bit , and that has made our technology much better .
our netzhautchip is behind this lens here .
i felt like that , we &apos;re going to do it wrong .
so in that sense , it &apos;s a very simple object .
so , we know what a radius radius is .
i like to call it the primadonnen of the galaxywelt , because they &apos;re kind of angeber .
we can see the way we see in our galaxy , than somewhere else .
and that &apos;s what brings us a factor of 20 .
so there was a bunch of alternative to the idea that there was a supermassive black hole at the center of the galaxy , because you could put a lot of stuff there .
it pulls a lot more stronger than the other one and the cloud is totally gerissen .
and i hope that i at least believe that , at least , we have a really supermassive black hole at the center of the galaxy .
one day i was on the streets of new york , and i saw some kids between walking and cars and fire fire .
so for example , the people like this in the 11th century pieces that ended up .
in the first eight centuries of these tradition , the big &quot; what &quot; in the &apos; point of appreciate god and prices .
through new and verbesserte instruments , the age of virtuosen .
but one question is : what happens when the music stops ?
michael tilson thomas : music and feelings over the time of time .
so we &apos;re at the beginning of a new drachenzeitalters .
until the year 1945 , they took it in 100,000 .
so i &apos;m going to talk about musikkomposition , although i don &apos;t know where to start .
wow , a volunteer , great !
but recently , my interest in a new way of looking at a new perspective is because there &apos;s circumstances where this kind of really cool stuff .
well , i think this is the aktuellste development of a phenomenon called &quot; massen-beschleunigte innovation . &quot;
but the element of the desire is really the most important .
we get more talks of them .
let me just think about this , sam , sam haber .
but even if you &apos;re weglässt the screen , there &apos;s a lot more than just words .
thousands of individuals and organizations share their knowledge and their data online .
it &apos;s not crazy ; it &apos;s going right now .
how webvideos are doing global innovation .
one , i have to give a service to the audience and talk to what i &apos;m going to give him rather than to say what i can &apos;t offer .
and they &apos;re fun to design their own , ultimate , or final tedtalk .
now , you can &apos;t compare them to each other .
they hold them alive and give them sugar , so a kind of verhaltensimpuls that we call the market .
now , these kinds of tests are going to do this , ok ?
somebody asked &quot; why ? &quot;
he thought he could reverse the waves . couldn &apos;t .
i think there are three major changes in the areas of transparency , wahlfreiheit and nachprüfbarkeit , where people have a real power .
how do we do that ?
my bridge-coach , sharon osberg , suggesting that all the world are more photos of their back than any other .
11 of 14 countries .
and secondly , they looked at the videoaufzeichnungen and the fragebögen as a hilfreiche device , because they were in specific areas of what a fortbildung sense is .
so then i wish for all a beautiful weekend .
and writing dna , it &apos;s getting easier and cheaper .
biohacker work alone .
now , you might be wondering , &quot; what would i do in a biolab ? &quot;
if you have this umfelder , you can lead to a perspektivenwechsel , which is allowed to do biotechnology .
the kingdom , the law will allow him to einzusperren or abzuschieben , which is an economic risk or a risk of health or risk for public health or the moralvorstellungen of the state .
these laws are a schlag to the science and based on prejudice and ignorance and a umschreiben of traditions and a selektiven religionsverständnis .
why are you pregnant when you &apos;re positive ? &quot;
one of 10 people who are affected to drugs .
so that social workers , who are condoms for endangered bevölkerungsgruppen , not even by police , beschimpft or randomly locked up .
here were children born , people died .
office office office in personal work are now obsolete .
they &apos;ve got the high line , the street zurückerobert , the river below the street , and you get from one end to the other , without crossing the fahrstraße .
people say , &quot; we don &apos;t want to live in tiny homes . &quot;
also jobs should be shared .
their liver starts literweise oil .
and they killed the 12,000 sharks at the time by just a hanfseil of landzunge in keem bay in achill island .
we know very little about them .
so this tag is actually going to find the place of a shark , depending on the time and the sun , the water and deep .
let &apos;s look at the nukleotide , which has to do with the genes that are passed on by the parents , and then we see basking sharks , compared to the first study , one to have a factor of 10 diversity than others .
so , verfeinerte les this research and found that the size of the 9.000 is the size of the 9,000 .
and what was fine . we got wet . no problem .
and i thought , &quot; hey , i can build on that . &quot;
so if we can tell the gender of the shark before we take a sample , we can call the call , if you were a male or females .
so i decided to give myself the händler .
their bodies are broken down with macheten , and they &apos;re determined to be used for any zaubertrank to make money -- people are telling themselves a lot of these stories .
no business done with no .
my journalism may not fit on other continents or in other countries , but in my part of africa , it works . it &apos;s about corruption , people immediately ask , &quot; where are the evidence ?
thank you .
i was raised in downtown manhattan in the early 1980s , two blocks away from the epizentrum of the punkmusik .
i wouldn &apos;t be as a transsexueller durchgegangen .
and had these people ever been aware of their diskrimierung ?
nowadays , you can be gefeuert in 29 states in more than half of the country , because of his sexuality of rechtmäßig .
at some point i understood that my mission of &quot; schwule &quot; was in a fehlerhaft , because there was a million different people of gay .
at least i hope it &apos;s going to be harder , human rights .
one : the world is , and it &apos;s always been good and evil because good and evil , and the yang and yang are the mensch-sein .
and third , i had access to all the 1,000 pictures that the soldiers were done .
in three ways , the vorherrschende species is veranlagung .
this is stanley milgram , a jewish boy from the bronx , and he said , &quot; could the holocaust happen , here and now ? &quot;
&quot; my lord , who &apos;s responsible when he &apos;s going to do something ? &quot;
stanley milgram , and i was actually 1954 , the high school of school , the james monroe in the bronx .
here are the guards with the symbols of power and anonymity .
entmenschlichung of the other . entindividualisierung of the self .
alexander solschenitsyn says that the border between good and evil through the heart of one of the people &apos;s going .
and i was hired the experiment on the next day .
and he said , &quot; i did what everybody could do , &quot; no big thing to jump on .
it &apos;s a mystery that really aufzuklären , really hard .
we have a self .
but on my left retina , a delle show up by the red arrow .
there &apos;s only one referenzpunkt , which is the body .
i promise i &apos;m not saying anything to do that , except that it &apos;s supposed to be scary .
and the autobiographische self has extended memory of thinking , to think of creativity and language .
thank you . thank you for the hip-hop -- and anita hill .
now i &apos;m going to tell you this -- i &apos;m going to tell you , and i &apos;m going to make it ridiculous , because i think feminism has to be the task , to admit , to admit , to aesthetics , and beauty and fun .
we don &apos;t want to have a hero .
you can have now , i haven &apos;t set up on fire .
she spoke about vorstandssitzungen , she founded friedensorganisationen , she &apos;s organized fahrgemeinschaften , she &apos;s tröstete friends -- all these everyday acts of the care and creativity .
i mean that it &apos;s this selbstwahrnehmung that &apos;s different from homo sapiens from former menschheitsformen .
in fact , that &apos;s a sensor for the brain that &apos;s reads the electrical activity in my brain while i &apos;m holding this talk .
we &apos;re erweckten numerous prototypes and products that you can control with thought , like gedankenkontrollierte appliances , or a schwebenden chair .
this is a satellite that &apos;s wireless connected to an ipad or a smartphone .
how these kids can use their new consciousness to their recovery , many of the schädlichen and the most vulnerable social practices are going to be around , which people are diagnosed with , as a different way .
they understood the power of human narrative , and that the value that we zuteilen on people is changing , and it &apos;s growing .
and said , &quot; how are you going to celebrate ? &quot;
my skills and my possibility .
vorübergehend , and ganz , gave them .
and this is a doctor who didn &apos;t think of my eyes .
i was going to go a track that i know good .
and , very slowly , it happened .
i didn &apos;t really believe me in my faith , not really , not all of the kind of the anteile of me , all the little ichs in all of us .
that &apos;s me . my whole .
what we have is the same thing , the same thing , but one of them feel great , and at the other , with only a small change in the posture , they feel awful .
but i think it &apos;s a different debate that has to take place , which is to be the level of control that we have about our steuergelder .
for 0,01 percent of this money , you could have install wifi in your body , which would not have reduced the duration of the journey , but what the pleasure and the nützlichkeit would have been improved .
i &apos;m not asking for the full one of the one .
sometimes the warteschlangen are very , very long .
i think the danger in the world today is that the field of science science is understood the vorausgehende discipline of human psychology .
the average response would have been 50 to 60 percent .
it will be zugetraut that they &apos;re not verletzen themselves , nor other people .
juhu !
she &apos;s 20 , 30 years .
but that doesn &apos;t mean i had a coin with a coin on either side .
it &apos;s not hard to solve this problem .
but this is our hülle of the visible universe .
thank you .
with the hyperscore , we had enough , actually , very strong effects on children around the world , and now at all ages .
it &apos;s about a man , rich , successful , powerful , who will always live .
hi . my name is dan ellsey . i &apos;m 34 years old and i &apos;ve been zerebralparese .
this is actually the score of dans piece that he created completely in the same .
odysseus said , &quot; well , let &apos;s do a probelauf .
there &apos;s a present one .
i have to write five pages on the day , or i had to give five dollars .
it &apos;s not possible that this is going to work today . &quot;
and i &apos;m going to show you some of these tools here .
the last thing i &apos;m going to show you is the last verhaltensrelevante machine machine , which is something i &apos;ve done with hal hershfield , who was introduced to me from my mitautor in a previous project , bill sharpe .
it &apos;s pretty good that it doesn &apos;t affect people , because when one of the faces smile , the other face is finster .
and that &apos;s one of the reasons that so much of what we think for western science , mathematics and baukunst , in the first few centuries , our zeitrechnung were developed by the persern , arabern and türken .
x is the unknown , because it &apos;s not &quot; sch in the spanish . &quot;
so it &apos;s not surprising that if you &apos;re talking to people with mental illness , you probably have the stories of verstecktem suffering , shame and discrimination in almost all of the life .
a little more than 30 years ago the world &apos;s nations gathered in alma-ata and gave this a legendäre explanation .
what is it ?
if you look at the plane species , you &apos;ve heard about the fish .
if you look at this profit , you see that nearly 8,000 of these dollars are actually subventionen .
this was in the early 2000ern when india wanted to go on to make his bip-wachstum power -- as a means for the recovery -- after china , with the rasanten growth of eight , nine percent , 10 percent , and then asked , why can &apos;t we do that ?
it puts them in happy situation , but they have the trust and the courage , vorzutreten and to say , &quot; that &apos;s what we &apos;ve done .
green carbon , so emissions by deforestation and agriculture , and blue carbon , which are 25 percent of our emissions .
richard feynman was a very complex man .
we loved to win .
i didn &apos;t know what these things were , dick , not -- sydney , by the way .
i also liked these intellectual machospiele .
and he said he had essentially had the same relationship with his father .
there was a theory .
he did it again .
they &apos;re not moving , and because they don &apos;t move over the trial , you don &apos;t have to worry about how they move .
we removed the entire vinyl , and the zolatone color , which was bedeckte this just fantastic aluminiumhülle .
a lot of these ideas were flossen into the produzierten trailer of the airstream .
if you think about sending your kids at the top school , you will go back with prellungen , kratzern and blutig .
but let &apos;s play it under your own terms , and trust me , you &apos;ll learn things that you can &apos;t learn from dora of the entdeckerin .
if you want to throw a device like this , you don &apos;t do it .
i think that &apos;s all . this is number fünfeinhalb .
so here you see the sick knee on the left , and here my wife , the west , now , four months after , in zimbabwe , and in good terms .
how about it , how about a completely bionischem knieersatz , not just the parts ?
this is one of the seven existing sputniks sputniks that are not going to be shot .
and so it came out for the years of western europe to buy druckerpressen druckerpressen , to take thousands and then hundreds and then hundreds of thousands and then , millions of thousands of individuals , to print a million paper paper that should bring a mitten of hell into the sky .
but how does our imagination work ?
but we never think about the hidden connections .
when the electric light invented the light bulb , it looked like this .
you have to be quite smart , and although i don &apos;t have a hochschulabschluss , it doesn &apos;t mean i &apos;m stupid , because you can &apos;t be dumb nowadays and get it far .
they literally eingerannt us the door .
if you listen to the stereogerät on your hearing , both ears both hear .
we have the problem that the antenna vibriert .
thank you very much .
i &apos;m particularly interested in systems and anordungen .
i &apos;ve recently created some pretty sophisticated barocke bordüren from anspruchslosen nudeln .
and i drew her special map for every person , and i wrote her name on it , and she nummerierte it and she sent them .
i &apos;m sure i can see you can see .
and i &apos;m convinced that it &apos;s ersterbenswert , my valuable and so many times in this earth is right now .
in this mode , he &apos;s trying to keep his position .
i thought i &apos;m a little bit about how nature makes materials .
we &apos;re going to think of future technologies . we start in the beginning of the world .
and if you &apos;re looking at it , you see the amino acids with the ph-werten , where they have different charges .
and through a sequence of auswahl-evolution , you can fish one from a billion , which is what you want to do , like , for example , grow a battery or a solar cell .
in this case , you see sauerstoffblasen coming out .
when you ask people the question : where do you go to do something important ?
i &apos;ve been on my desk , i &apos;ve been using my expensive computer .
what happens -- sometimes you have those days you wake up at eight o &apos;clock in the morning , or seven or when they get up , and you say , &quot; man , i don &apos;t really sleep well .
in the office , most of the unterbrechungen and distractions that people actually prevent from work , unwillentlich .
we all know that this is true . they &apos;d never experience a spontanes meeting that they &apos;re being einberufen by staff .
so meetings and managers are now the two main main things in companies , especially in offices .
maybe every two weeks , or every week , once the week , the one that nobody can talk to .
you know , to be honest , i &apos;m going to do this now seven years and have no idea what the future is going to look like .
but when you ask people about three important things that they carry in , no matter what culture and what &apos;s gender and what context -- the most people -- key , money , and if they own one , the mobile phone .
but , and this is a very big but we have the tendency to forget .
now , i want to give you a practical example of the delegierens .
they take 10 or 20 percent provision , and then the owner &apos;s owner &apos;s owner takes 10 or 20 percent provision , and there &apos;s the rest of the amount in cash on my family .
it challenges the norm .
and he kind of hat an anerkennung for the value of the livestrong .
at the same time with the spread of these mobile devices , we &apos;re looking at an expectation of the availability .
our present reality is less interesting than the story we &apos;ll tell about it later .
what are we talking about ?
dean ornish shares a new research research that show how the aneignung healthy lifestyle can affect a human way for a human level . it says , for example , if we live healthier , we eat better , exercise , exercise , and love more , we actually reproduce our brain cells .
until i tell you who said it .
within this context , we can seem to be regret with many different things .
when i went home to the night after i got my tattoo , i stayed up all the night .
but i want to suggest that there &apos;s one fifth one .
i mean , even the stupid answer to all , &quot; -bedauern can let us back to the days of qualen .
and as i said earlier , i &apos;m a perfektionistin .
i thought i would try to be in preparation at my ted wish to try and what i try to do , and how to fit what they &apos;re trying to do .
no in india . now , at least one million active .
and i came to think that somebody in this whole world of the world has been thinking about the organization of the kollektivgütermärkte .
and so we did that to do that .
listen to that : less than four tenth of one of those who were treated , the drugs are stopped the einnahme of your medicine or vernachlässigten in sonstige ways .
it &apos;s worth a trial and i think it &apos;s successful .
the pulte are not rechteckig .
when the turbine is used , it &apos;s going to produce 8,000 watts of electricity . day and night .
and people bring their green industries , hopefully their green restaurants , with green school .
the einheimische women in bali cook cook to cook , and they use secrets that only know their grandmothers .
we need somebody who comes and that &apos;s what he does .
green school is a model that we built for the world .
my tongue , kehlkopf and stimmbänder , were healthy and nicht .
then apple alex , the best voice i &apos;ve heard of .
there was one reason for that : that was me .
the sprachfluss is not natural .
but that &apos;s not about that .
at the beginning , the internet was a hilfreiches tool , and now it &apos;s something that i &apos;m going to leave with my real life .
&quot; it &apos;s human to ignore disease .
you all know the test for artificial intelligence , the test test .
before , i was an architect , and my grandmother asked me , &quot; what are you going to do ? &quot;
we were using two gegenüberstehende pages as a single page , because that &apos;s the reader that it &apos;s true .
so what &apos;s the lesson behind ?
but one day , my grandmother said , &quot; no , this is not a nich .
it was schäumte and terrible things happened .
all of them lost hope in my recovery .
so they went to their lagerräumen and all collected their furniture furniture -- they gave me a töpfe and pfannen , bettlaken , everything .
they don &apos;t know how far the road is , and they don &apos;t know if they &apos;re going straight and they hear cars and they were flitzen , and they had a terrible crash that she has taken in that situation .
i thought that some reason had been the time , and only had family and friends .
for example , the understanding of molecular structures .
he took me to the tempeln of nikko .
can we say we could have discovered all the symmetries of the alhambra ?
i can &apos;t turn it because i &apos;ve built a little bit of a challenge , right ?
if i &apos;m going to put a magic move and then one , it comes out .
galois has set a series of rules for how these tables , these symmetries , interact .
one of these symmetry called 6-3-2 .
instead of all , i want to know how many digits the number of numbers .
i need to be the last , symmetrical objects , you know -- please , please , please , please , please me .
first , schlechtere diet , maybe shorter lebensspannen .
thomas edison would have been very wohlgefühlt in a museum of a company .
penicillin was discovered in the world , but even in the world , no commercial and medizinisch amounts of it .
it was the origin of the xerox-kopierers that had his 50th birthday last year .
for me , the lesson of unbeabsichtigten consequences that chaos happen to happen . let &apos;s make the best of it .
it works in every computer and the browser . minus minus , negative , negative and the text is going to be smaller .
they don &apos;t need to delete that .
and so , a kind of information source that i &apos;m inspired by myself , my real desk .
a means of it would be something like a rasteranordnung , so that you get the more traditional desktop , and the things are laid out on grid .
now , i &apos;m going to get to my music with my music , the heart of the people , and there &apos;s no boundaries .
but i think the point is , it &apos;s metaphor with the bite . and with such a bite , i want to suggest that we think about the role of contemporary mathematics a little bit -- not just finanzmathematik , but mathematics in general .
and he said , &quot; well , there are 2,000 physicists on wall street , and i &apos;m one of them . &quot;
you can find them here : this is a book that you might have on amazon nachgeschlagen .
these are not finanzdaten ; that &apos;s culture .
you can push it very , very far .
and it &apos;s not the money that &apos;s actually so interesting .
here we go . it &apos;s all the time .
i want to share a secret .
so , kreuzungen without traffic lights , so with stoppschildern , many lives , but there &apos;s a übermäßige of them .
the answer is to allow cars to get to the side of the street .
warren buffet had proposed this : honestly , to say what &apos;s going to work and what doesn &apos;t work and do this to an annual thing .
in fact , we see the only known disease that is , because of the only one that in africa , living people actually have been formed to avoid the malariatod .
this means that the economy is feststeckt in these areas because it &apos;s just prevents it so much .
but the only one is not a handlungsplan .
not only she was weak ; she &apos;s getting schwächer .
a teacher teacher top of the top of his grade -- measured in prüfungsergebnissen -- in one year , in one year .
but it &apos;s not a relationship to be a better teacher .
&quot; what &apos;s going on here ? &quot;
and these free courses could not only be available in the internet but you can also make available available everywhere so everyone can have access to a dvd-spieler that &apos;s very best teachers .
traditional vessels like this cup , eight to 10 hours , need eight to 10 hours .
the bildhauer richard branson talks about how he thought he was a young artist , he was a painter , and he lived in a school in florenz .
when i look at these photos , i &apos;ll put the smoke on my clothes when i went home to my family at night .
my parents were reagierten , they said , &apos; we know you &apos;re scared , but let &apos;s go tomorrow .
but is it so bad to keep us so powerful ?
this is a big general in boston .
the pathologe takes the sample , friert it , zerschneidet it , and it &apos;s looking at it under the microscope , and then you see the operating room .
so in this kind of zusammenstellung , a solution with these dreiteiligen molecules , combined with a grid , shown green , shown in the vene of a cancer patient , can &apos;t separate the tissues that molecules can be apart .
with farbmarkierten lymph nodes as part of our current behandlungsoptionen , the surgeon is a chirurg , the node node where cancer begins .
when nerves are damaged , they can cause them , and pain .
if we were zusammennehmen these two samples .
we know that this is practical , and we &apos;re determined to do this in a process of trying to do this .
and this cell is a thousand different zellarten of dna technology that we learn from .
it will affect the same circuitry as the ones who are the ones who want to fix them .
and one morning in the summer of 2004 , we tried it , and it was the first time .
we &apos;ve shown that already , a short aktivierung of these cells are enough to be able to do this .
and it goes . now .
i want to end with a story that we think might be clinical .
now you can see the animal actually meidet the walls and go to the little platform and then use his eyes .
buildings are kolonisiert with air microbes that hineingelangen through the window and over mechanical belüftungssysteme .
and when they &apos;re out outside , the air contains microbes that are associated with pflanzenblättern and schmutz .
obviously , i &apos;m a physically very strong person , as you see , so i don &apos;t have a worry about wearing this thing 20 blocks .
the same thing for the question of who after 9 / 11 was alive in my neighborhood ?
and you can get a list .
one of these things that i &apos;ve been experimenting is something called google , basically you just take a abstract term and you search for google afterwards , and then you search for someone to the name of someone .
this is britney spears . i mean , ok , interesting .
if you have the second side here , you link the most .
what was normal for us all 40 years ago -- the story of stories between generations -- is rarely .
now , in summary , the film is older than most of our members of our members .
was the story of telling the story ?
why don &apos;t we see that in the same passion as the read ?
they &apos;re sent to a warnhinweis warnhinweis , &quot; this product contains chemicals that are vom from the state of cancer , geburtsschäden and other fortpflanzungsschäden . &quot;
so perhaps we could develop a änderungsstrategie , to take humility , and for my career as an architect , it &apos;s an accident that the words &quot; bescheidenheit &quot; and &quot; architect &quot; for &quot; eternal quell &quot; had been mentioned in the same section .
i don &apos;t know if you remember your answer , but it was , &quot; the steinzeit ended , because we run the stones . &quot;
and this can be very fine for berlin , but we &apos;re habens on fire , and all the windows are closed . and with all the products that were obviously designed for the use in innenräumen , it &apos;s actually a vertical gaskammer .
if we look at the word competition , i &apos;m sure most of you are using it .
since we &apos;ve been doing the 4000 4000 , most of the most commonly most common , in database that we &apos;re going to be available in the public in six weeks .
now , we have a 160 kg of severe mechaniker on the internet .
we started to verflechten commercial and gemischte use of buildings so that all people have centers and places where they could stop .
and this is the berüchtigte nsa-datenzentrum in the utah .
and that &apos;s not true . let &apos;s tell you about anybody that we knew all this because we didn &apos;t know it .
for example , you &apos;ll give you the datensammlung at microsoft &apos;s 9 / 11 2007 , and yahoo on the 12th march 2008 , and then the other : google , facebook , skype , apple , apple and so on .
i chose sweden because sweden has similar laws , like the united states .
and whoever told you , he has nothing to hide with it just doesn &apos;t have been thinking about it .
their email were read , and she spoke in the un-hauptquartier and said , &quot; if there &apos;s no way to privacy , there cannot be real redefreiheit , and therefore there cannot be a good democracy . &quot;
a lot of people , when you see a new human brain , say , &quot; usually it looks different when you &apos;re showing a brain . &quot;
all these empty areas are the areas where the leitungen are through .
and the creature of a particular cell is to make its liegende biochemie , which is determines by which the 25,000 genes are turned on , and what they are on the ground .
now experts are going to play and do basic anatomische .
we take the markierte material , and put it on a so-called genchip .
so what can scientists learn from this data ?
they look at their entire genomes , and they try to find the aktivitätsherde that are linked to the genes .
whether that depends on the individual genetic background or their experience , we don &apos;t know .
we know how we can eliminate poverty , we just have to do more for that ?
so here are some more questions .
how can you know ?
so what &apos;s the problem ?
all right , it was all the same .
and it &apos;s been done many experiments that all came to the same outcome , so i &apos;m going to only tell you about one .
so what &apos;s the best part ?
we need this kind of information . we need more of them , and we have to steer politics .
and maybe we start small , with things , where we &apos;re certain they &apos;re going to work .
mildern is more mutmaßen than research and a lack of data on the effects of hilfsmitteln , throwing the question of how you go . but clark-medaillen-gewinnerin esther duflo says that it &apos;s possible to find out what entwicklungsmaßnahmen and what damage -- with help from randomisierter studies .
so , we start because africa is a certain way of the way in the world .
and the legende tells that alexander walked through this desert .
but you could say , &quot; invest in africa with over 1,000 languages , and it would move nothing . &quot;
so let &apos;s look at the countries , and the specific materials and data .
i want to talk about this from the perspective of the kapitalmärkte .
in tanzania , last week of the standard of ostafrikanische bioerzeugnisse , the standard of bioerzeugnisse .
when i had to ask you , &quot; what was the börsenmarkt of the börsenmarkt in 2005 , &quot; would you think about egypt ?
because there are fascinating possibilities .
god is the journey we all want to be to be inspired and feel one with the universe that celebrate life .
you put a switch on -- there &apos;s electric light .
i don &apos;t know why , but that thought .
i &apos;m going to leave it so you can just pick that up and i &apos;ll describe my reactions when i first saw this for the first time .
it &apos;s very .
ok , switch , raise your right hand .
kt : yes .
kt : no , no . i just look at the street .
i couldn &apos;t see through the augenbinde .
go again .
kb : how often did you feel that ?
let &apos;s close your eyes , in five , four , three , two , one .
it only when you want the pressure to go down , you make a aufwärtsbewegung , so , but only if you want the pressure to go down .
do you want to try it ?
you feel a certain emotion emotion , and when you feel that emotion , i want you to throw it into the bottle .
there &apos;s one thing i want to share with you .
ready ?
my hand is , here , in lebensgefahr .
kb : ok . think it &apos;s here , yes or no ?
first , keith barry shows how our brain can austricksen our bodies -- using a trick that &apos;s working with podcast , and then he refers to the audience in some amazing brain magic .
i &apos;m aufraffen .
this is not for the one of the legs . that &apos;s for all four .
i watched both religious and nichtreligiöse people who are equally obsessed with morality .
the basislinie is almost at zero if there &apos;s no stimulation to the ausschüttung .
they get the following message from the computer , &quot; person 1 has sent them to the amount of money .
we showed that the gift of oxytocin that großzügigkeit to großzügigkeit großzügigkeit for 80 percent .
i only found the molecule .
and he asked me , &quot; what are we supposed to do ? &quot;
in experiments , we were given testosterone .
that tells us that we invented this ritual to connect us with this new pair of emotionally .
and it &apos;s very easy to get a brain to the oxytocinproduktion .
to make the machine running , you need a lot , many people .
or should you like that ?
they said , &quot; you gave us a machine that &apos;s only working on english . so we taught ourselves english so we can use it . &quot;
i decided to destroy my own argument by making a ridiculous statement .
absurd , but i needed to follow the viktorianischen .
how will tomorrow be ?
we have to try and rückgängig this ungleichgewicht .
i think it &apos;s the focus .
i &apos;ve been asked to have incredible questions -- &quot; when was the beginning of the world ? how will it end ? &quot; -- in a nine-year-old .
and just one last thing .
maybe we should go to the next piece , because i just lost the thread .
shivdutt went to local katasteramt in uttar pradesh , and found that he was led in the official unterlagen as a passed .
so that &apos;s why this area is ungeordneter .
polygamie is in the privilegierten layer that &apos;s able to pay multiple numbers and run several households .
after these four children , you see , zumras young sister who are killed their children who are killed .
and finally , there was one person who was sitting for me and later his participation , so i had to verpixeln it to be unkenntlich .
at 16 , the children have to leave the orphanage , even though they can &apos;t go anywhere anywhere .
one of the interesting things is , of course , the combination of the naked hand on the instrument and the technology , and of course what he said about listening to our young people .
now my career could continue a longer .
and i said , &quot; well , how do you hear it ? &quot;
from him , the sound comes through the resonanzkörper .
or we do this , and think that &apos;s blindness .
rain . not bad . not bad .
take a single thing , but why can &apos;t i do that if i &apos;m learning a piece of music ?
in this steigernden demonstation , the dove perkussionistin evelyn evelyn glennie the hearing of music much more than sound waves to make his trommelfell .
and it became so big , until the point where it was a festwagen last year at macy &apos;s thanksgiving parade and rick astley rausspringt and &quot; &quot; millions of people on tv . &quot;
but that &apos;s not the interesting thing .
cp : you &apos;re lucky that it &apos;s not going to be live in live .
peace and love were mentioned .
cp : yeah , but you don &apos;t know what you &apos;re supposed to be .
this is 10 times longer than the mammals needed to reach its maximale body , and to be able to get all of these habitats .
we &apos;re looking at the dinosaurs very , and we &apos;re unusual in our zweibeinigen attitudes to live .
it &apos;s basically a country that had no containerverkehr in the beginning of our work .
this is an adult orinoko-krokodil in his jaw .
paul has never seen a fossil one .
these are all landtiere . there &apos;s a number of possibilities .
i became an artist , and i started to draw .
the question is -- and we &apos;ve been concerned with this question for centuries -- how to participate in the science of science .
now , bad news for derartu tulu -- some other läufer had the same idea , including the olympic goldmedaillengewinnerin and paula radcliffe , which is a hugely , the fastest marathon-läuferin of all times .
show me an animal with schwimmhäuten and kiemen , and then it has something to do with water .
we don &apos;t have our physical strength , because we are the largest memmen in the jungle .
now , emily baer -- one of 500 läuferinnen and läufern -- they ends up on the eighth place , under the best 10 , although she has stopped on all the erste-hilfe-stationen &apos;s time to keep her baby for stillen -- and besiegen denoch läufer .
that &apos;s all we could .
but maybe it &apos;s different .
it &apos;s listening to focus on the stadt-marathons where you failed when you need four hours .
the robot has always been talking about things , not with people -- with security , not to be a social species , which would be , of course , to take the robot , to accept robots as part of our everyday lives .
cookie cookie is very , very bad .
the remote-projektmitarbeiter was a experimentator from our group where they were using three of three different technologies to interact with the participants .
and with this technology , you can become an active participants in your grandchildren &apos;s life , in a way that it &apos;s not possible .
and the third possibility was a simple journal of paper and a pen , because that &apos;s the standard-methode , which is normally used when you start a diät- and sportprogramm .
another important idea is this idea of realitätsübergreifenden persistenz of the character .
i have a style , i &apos;m looking at , look at the real hard , because it &apos;s not going to be on the table , you know , but geseh &apos; n .
walk away , don &apos;t come far . i go out . i go , &quot; boom ! &quot; the narr falls between two geparkte cars .
when he wrote a broadway-show , i was in front of the door .
i &apos;m going to show a number of photographs and movies , but i &apos;m doing fernsehproduktionen , books and a bit of advertising , all with the same concept .
in photography , this teaser , it &apos;s going to be a lot of desire and voyeurismus . what you can &apos;t have , you want to be more .
and as you einschleichen into the collective consciousness , without knowing that we know that , and how that happens .
it &apos;s very commercial .
and then you turn the photo to take it , and suddenly it &apos;s going to be quite serious and maybe less accessible .
85 percent of global global health care systems is in developing countries -- not in the west -- and yet , 90 percent of the means in the west .
just treating you . look at the situation in the island of the island .
but when you tell them , we &apos;re trying to do the same thing in nigeria , all the fort .
it allows the existence of ländlicher centers , and we can use the experience very smart .
and so , we have to be a part of the solution -- that &apos;s important .
and we start a biomedizinisches engineering program that we can local local people who can fix the equipment .
autism has a very large range of a lot of massive -- the child is not developed language -- to the brilliant scientists and engineers .
freilich , i love the movie , like all of you , have my projects . that &apos;s the spinner .
now , what i learned early because i wasn &apos;t so gesellig , is to sell my work and not myself .
one other thing is the sensory problems .
in other words , a problem with the equipment of the equipment of a mitarbeiterproblem .
the movie is called a dr carlock .
i did praktika during the college , and i built things and learned how to do tasks .
another very aussichtsreiche idea is to teach children from some of the many pensionierten computerspezialist and en .
and so , i have a passion for the things that i do , which are improving the world .
it &apos;s a distributed reality that projections track and systems , or just a digital storyteller .
the fifth times , i &apos;m standing on this shore , the kubanischen , i &apos;m looking out on the far horizon and i think , again , that i &apos;m going to create it all the way across the vast dangerous wilderness of the ocean .
but it was deeper , and how much life is there ?
and then we have our grundregel , that you never really tells me how far it is , we don &apos;t know how far it is .
but quite frankly , all of these talks i had eingeübt , just to survive the schwimmtrainings , they were very different .
thank you very much , and much fun at the conference .
and that &apos;s perhaps the tragischste , he lost his sense of self-esteem .
he closes the army . the army gives him a rifle .
so , what happens when a medium suddenly brings a lot of new ideas in circulation ?
they had to quickly synchronisieren what other natural philosophers knew , otherwise , you couldn &apos;t have the right kind of discussion .
but there was a programmer who decided that this was not the best way of work .
each of them can make changes , and they can work at getaner work , even if they knew nothing about the existence of the day .
this is called &quot; diff , &quot; this thing right here .
something that can happen a culture is that they can acquire a new streitkultur , schwurgerichtsverfahren , abstimmungen , peer-review , right now , right ?
try not to improve what others do , which is a little bit better , because it doesn &apos;t get it very far .
and if you tell you that you don &apos;t do it , you don &apos;t hear it .
six to nine months at the year of the year .
but we &apos;ve tested these rovers now before we put it on it -- or this one rover -- and made sure that everything works .
so we &apos;ve sent a spacecraft on the way to mars , it &apos;s called the phoenix , and this probe will land in 17 days , seven hours and 20 seconds , so you can put your clocks .
and that would be bad .
we &apos;re talking here , as we &apos;re talking here , the next rover that we want to send to mars .
and i know , many of you have been able to have the last time that these are really cool things .
there were two trabanten that were very interested in us .
it &apos;s kind of like the cycle on earth , but because it &apos;s so cold , it can &apos;t be water because water would be frozen .
today i want to talk about how these exponentially growing technologies are .
so , what is exponentially growing technology affected .
this is an example of this paradigmenwechsels .
there &apos;s wireless waagen .
and i think many of these technologies will help us to be connected to our patients and take us more time , to focus on the important human elements of medicine , which are extended by this kind of technology .
the current trend in medicine is , but is exponentially smaller .
let &apos;s go to genomics , when we were doing the first human genom-sequenzierungen , and the cost of the cost of a billion dollars .
thanks to the places like patients , like patients , like patients , or how to do it , or the overhead health , you will more importantly , all of these opportunities in a way that way to do it .
we used the cells from bone bone to treat a patient with heart attacks , we realized a improved blood rate and higher überlebenschancen , the use of its own knochenmarks , regt cells , after a heart attack .
my poem is called &quot; schmutz . &quot;
their cats , god knows how many , they &apos;re pinkeln to their vorleger , their flure , a widerlicher gestank .
and as you cross the zersplitterten tiles line , the stage to the street , brummt , brummt , i didn &apos;t look at , &quot; can you help me ? &quot;
i was scared , a unterdrückter part of me , and i &apos;d be stuck in control , and i would always be stuck in the schockierenden &apos;s brodeln of her gestanks .
but i &apos;m afraid that ricky comes from and my own .
when we love to , it &apos;s holding me to me , all around me , i &apos;m there and not there .
we &apos;re looking for images that are paying attention to critical topics , images the grenzübergreifend , the religions , images that we &apos;re going to get to get up and do something , to do something , in other words , to act .
in the &apos; 80s , the stigma with this disease was an enormous obstacle to discuss and to discuss that disease or to mention them .
jonathan little : photos that changed the world .
i had read a lot of books and land- and seekarten .
i could see the flag on the stick , and i had a aah moment , a glorreicher moment , and the music was going to a crescendo .
finally , the morning of the day day , we got the startsignal , and we were beluden the helicopter -- two helicopter in the tandemflug -- the one at the edge of the packeises .
i knew there were more open water bodies , and i had a geheimwaffe .
i had known this one , but i expected it .
this was the view from my tent , when i got this schicksalsschweren call .
and only from the air i looked at the big picture .
and they were doing , and they wanted to go back to the coast , and all five died in the rückreise .
and this was a jewish man , so that &apos;s a lot .
but a few days later , we thought we had our students and we said , &quot; what would happen if this betrunkene guy would not have been in this state ?
one day , in 1819 miles , 5.500 miles in 1819 miles in one of the most remote regions of the pacific , saw 20 american seeleute in the sea are going to sink up .
but at some point , most of them learn , and they &apos;re going to give up the visions , and they become adults .
they have the same structure .
some of us tend to read their fears more than others .
right , fear is a very amazing gift of imagination , a kind of hellsehen of life , a way to a look at the future , if time is still to affect their appearance .
nothing happened . no violence . nothing .
we took them into every living room of the arab world -- international , global , by our english channel .
they were separated from their people , the masses and now we &apos;re going to see them , one after the other .
thank you .
because we discovered that it takes people and people want to be informed -- they were able to pick up the stream by the internet .
and the frankie said , &quot; i &apos;m a 22 , and i see the needle are coming on me , and there &apos;s blood everywhere .
you want a needle to share a needle , like you want to share a toothbrush , even with someone you &apos;re schläfst with .
so this is a überblick of hundreds of studies of all the hohen in the united states , and these are the studies that show that the nadel-austauschprogramme are effective , quite a lot of them .
so you can see these awful pictures from africa .
i &apos;m saying , oh , great präventions-strategie , great .
the ines is a transgender-nutte on the streets of jakartas . she &apos;s a girl with tail .
she was 105 years old when i made this photograph of her .
hey , hey , black-eyed susie , hey .
and a little bit of banjo . here &apos;s a little medley .
we were in the car with gatesville , texas , where i was living my early childhood .
and mother was just in the car .
let &apos;s try to do it with this old song . i sing : there &apos;s a long white robe in heaven , i know .
originally from the gebrüdern dopyera , who later built the &quot; dobro &quot; and a instrument with hölzernem body and metallkonus where the sound is emerging .
well , that &apos;s easier than done .
we weren &apos;t stupid : we put it into about five feet away , and a little bit of it would be made .
when drumsets were new , it came to me , why can &apos;t you take the oldest musikart , the hambone rhythms , and combine them with the latest technology ?
well , i think it works because scientists are also linked to an ethic in a ethic .
it &apos;s significant to show up the place in the room , because it &apos;s critical , not in terms of where other things are , but in terms of this absolute notion of space that was god .
and in a sense of a sense , the only possible explanation was that it has somehow created itself .
and you understand some things better than others , and therefore there &apos;s a dauerndes gerempel and giving and take the politics .
there &apos;s a different tedsters here who spoke two years ago , jonathan jonathan , who defined his work in three different levels .
and just let it all .
during five months , he schliesst to experiment with a complete küchenmannschaft .
it wasn &apos;t very successful . and so on and so forth .
or philip glass or lou reed or the chemical brothers that all played there , all had her own casa de musica logo .
after two weeks , three weeks , four weeks , five weeks .
a little bit of gemustert .
and it &apos;s a transition that has exactly the identity of the living of the living , as the memory of the dead .
but the büffelopfer and the most rituelle darstellung of wealth also shows the status of the deceased , and it &apos;s the family of the deceased .
if we could extend our definition of death to embrace life , we could experience death as part of our lives and perhaps meet death with something else as fear .
i wanted to finish my show .
their talk about the living apes in the water , and the context , the correlation between darwinism and the fact that we are all naked , less behaart , and we can swim .
ok , gordon , come on .
&quot; and now she has a kater . &quot;
eight years of american history , eight minutes of my show , just so passed .
and jack &apos;s said , &quot; i want to be a better person . &quot;
&quot; make the world a better place if you can .
so i give you the message ahead : trying to auszusterben .
where are the little ? &quot;
here &apos;s the people again .
how you can imagine it is a thing , a beinknochen aufzuschneiden , but when you go into a museum and say , &quot; it doesn &apos;t matter if i &apos;m aufsäge your saurierschädel , right ? &quot;
and you could think that &apos;s one of a clue .
so we &apos;re losgezogen and we &apos;ve collected some , and we &apos;ve found a lot of little animals .
so we now know that , in fact , that actually , in fact , that actually is a ausgewachsener triceratops .
it looks like it might even bigger .
we wanted to do a atmospheric architecture .
all the water of the world are served here , so we thought that after you &apos;re in the water , you move through water and breathe water , you could drink the building .
the drill was a roboterarm .
then you go up to this sort of gläsernen elevator .
before and after .
this is a guy from salt lake city . this is what they look like .
&quot; hineingezogen &quot; -- as if they were verführt to commit a gewaltverbrechen .
it &apos;s not sure that this would be so abgelaufen if the redakteurin wouldn &apos;t have been a woman .
by the way , wired , &quot; i took that too .
and analyzing the news , you talk about when something is missing , as people were doing in the new york times .
this particular plant of filtert formaldehyde and other chemicals chemicals from air .
m most of the time is in the morning when i &apos;m trying to figure out what &apos;s going to happen .
and then , remember , when condoleezza was carried on a event and kritisiert , kritisiert , kritisiert .
pm : are they in resistance when they did this to the grundprinzip of their foreign policy ?
when i was secretary of state , 13 women in other countries were foreign .
thank you for us today .
malaria : there are eight countries in sub-saharan africa who could reduce their sterberaten to 75 percent .
for daten-freunde , like us , this is a erogene zone , and it &apos;s fair to say that i &apos;ve been sexually erregt by this datensammlung .
to be right now , in your capital , some , in those cases , are cutting and lebensrettenden for the lebensrettenden programs like the global fund .
on the contrary , it could save a lot of life .
now , when we take this metaphor to a genome as a program , you have to remember chris anderson is a computer-erzeugter thing , like jim watson , craig venter , and all of us .
you design something like a cell phone , and in very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very ,
this is normal dna , which is holding normal dna .
we heat them up , add up some salt , heat it up to the siedepunkt and then kühlen it , and during the abkühlens , the short strands of the long , and it turns out a structure .
so that &apos;s really well , and you can build patterns and build patterns , ok ?
you go in , there &apos;s only four strands of dna , and you &apos;re sitting on your seats , you &apos;re sitting on your own building blocks if you fit on other tiles .
we have a very sensibles computer program where little changes -- tiny , individual mutations -- something that created a square of a size , and make something much bigger .
and the calculations are molekular , and to understand that , and get it better to the grasp , as feynman said , we need to build something to understand it .
but as we saw it before we saw , we had three kernziele : a world class ambulanzdienst , which has fully separate einnahmequellen , and universal accessible to anyone with a medical case is independent of its financial resources .
in modern time , where time is a very important , and the fight for survival is hard , the ordinary glücklose man is , and then the bribe will just get around .
in my last 18 months as a lawyer , the fight against small and large korruptionsfälle , the case of india &apos;s größtem , geschäftlichen betrüger .
sm : well , the anfallenden cost were less than 200 rupees .
this is the global footprint of the last four years that are formed around the world , new york to the small new zealand in the corner .
so , in a lot of content , we usually do a few things to make it easier .
so we &apos;re using these netzwerkmotive to find unique talks that are verschmelzen many different fields in the creative way , those who are essential to the subject , and those who are really creative between grundverschiedenen fields .
no wonder that it &apos;s my colleague , because the truth is hard to be .
the work of the hausmeisters could be as well in a leichenhalle , as in a hospital .
at ted , is brillanz .
how do things like this ?
second , for you , known for the modern american school , drehbuchartige , schritt .
and said , &quot; would you be willing to have a atommüll-endlager in your community ? &quot;
one way to do this . teaching more ethic courses .
why ? because they &apos;re happy to do something that &apos;s right .
bill gates spoke about the importance of education and in particular , the model that &apos;s providing the device . &quot; knowledge is power . &quot;
barry schwartz makes a passionate call for &quot; practical wisdom , &quot; as a antidote to a society , who lost themselves in the bürokratismus , and he argued that rules often fail , incentives zurückschlagen and practical , ordinary wisdom , will help our world to konstruieren our world .
&quot; by the way , dean , the arm &apos;s got to pay a 50 perzentil a frauengestalt , so 81 inches from the little finger , and he has to weigh less than four pounds .
it &apos;s going to take another nine to do it and make it useful . &quot;
he &apos;s what i asked the darpa .
boys and girls , you &apos;ve been given enough .
it was amazing , how positive they all were .
he wants to help . he told me that he wants to go back to help his kumpels .
how do we get out ?
she can look at war like a tragedy or a farce .
ford moved from . they spreizte a leg , and then the other .
in london , i lived on a glaskasten for a 44 for a 44 .
and i have gezittert . in my first attempt , i was holding my breath in my breath , i didn &apos;t even take it for a minute .
there are tiefenrekorde , where people are going to go down as deep as possible .
it &apos;s 1,95m big and weighs a 72kg .
because of the movement i &apos;m going to get oxygen .
then his hauptkonkurrent came and broke his record .
and there was no way to slow my heart rate .
after 14 minutes , i had these fürchterlichen kontraktionen of kontraktionen as this need to breathe .
as a magician , i try to show people that seem impossible .
so , thank you . and you &apos;ve finished the institution .
tamara , do you take that ?
even now , human beings is perhaps unwissend the weltklima by the abfallprodukte of his civilization .
in africa , people last year have been 600 million and two billion pounds of meat .
first , even if all the co2 emissions are stopped today , global warming would continue .
and then we saw one case at the east coast of the united states , and it moved to a little bit more westwärts .
now there &apos;s a different movement . the movement of saving the earth .
pharaoh ramses of the fifth , whose picture we see here , died of it .
i want to give you an introduction to a einführung , umd , which means what that change means : i want to explain to you what the implications of this change has for us and our diversity , but also how much of that change is affecting our culture .
and if it was only about that , that &apos;s really interesting .
and at this point , it &apos;s still a genetically bearbeiteter lachs that &apos;s a genetically bearbeiteter lachs that &apos;s made from the intersection of a gene &apos;s kreuzung , and a different speisefischs of the speisefischs , and that &apos;s how much it grows much faster with much less food .
these are actually kreuzungen and no real animals .
we &apos;ve taken his autonomy of this animal . &quot;
in other words , this was the first creature in the history of the world that had a computer as a parent -- it had no organic parents .
paul root wolpe : it &apos;s time to question about bio-design critical .
and darwin had only nasa .
so , melanin , in its various forms , probably has been around the earth for billions years . it &apos;s been around again , and over and over again , as many times .
and only in the last 5,000 years , with rising frequency and distance .
evolution helps us .
they &apos;ll go on .
so old and antik , too , he &apos;s his own , so it &apos;s very complicated and very simple -- and that &apos;s the same time .
then they measure ... and measure -- and measure ... and measure .
i kind of ertappt myself into a geometry of things that actually had no geometry .
they took place in time to 1925 , an extraordinary period of time in which the mathematics was about to break out of the world .
langwierige measurements , big brownsche movements , ... 1,33 .
and that &apos;s a little bit of what &apos;s going on .
and that was one of my favorite entdeckungen. , which is that these islands were the same as the großformatige , anyway , or less .
should you be able to cut the breast ? should you get them ?
right ? it has to be , it &apos;s koffein especially good .
anybody ? it &apos;s a lot harder .
this can happen in a medical environment .
and why not ?
a few months later , they go to the market when prices are at the highest , and they &apos;re called the magersaison -- when food is short -- because they have to feed their family and no choice .
that &apos;s what &apos;s going to be very high .
nearly three years ago , i decided to leave my job economist at the world bank at washington and zurückzukehren , and go to my geburtsland ethiopia , after nearly 30 years .
we build a system that acts to all the marktakteuren , the integrity , trust , efficiency and transparency , and the small farmers help to deal with the risks that i &apos;ve described .
we believe that this initiative requires large political will , and we need to adapt to the financial sector , also the it-sektor and even the underlying legal framework .
my answer is a sandsteinerne wall from through bacteria , verhärtetem sand that are erstreckt across the desert .
it &apos;s seriously bedroht the existenzgrundlage of millions of people , especially in africa and china .
a problem with the plants of trees is that people in this region are so poor , they &apos;re starting to go down trees to use them as a feuerholz .
and , after the einmaligen cost of 60 dollars for the bacteria that you never had to pay again , a square meter of bakteriensand would be about 11 dollars .
in a time , an unprecedented rate of growth and more and more nahrungsbedarf could be .
the world is showing me , and i chose .
our goal is a fundgrube veröffentlicher , so übersichtlich and fully that a single gebrannte dvd is a convenient dvd .
all these eggs , zysten , bacteria , viruses can travel into one gram of human exkremente .
it &apos;s a wonderful instrument to abfallbeseitigung .
you might think it &apos;s just good enough to get rid of it , but it &apos;s also economically economically , because it &apos;s a billion dollars every year .
and in the shock , she found that the family had no toilet .
at the pace , we &apos;re going to provide the goal to provide people with sanitation .
these reefs in discovery bay , jamaika , were for 20 years most of the world reefs in the world .
he took the slaves to put the slaves out of the antillen , the song &quot; jamaica farewell &quot; -- &quot; aki rice salt fish are &quot; -- is a sinnbild of the meaning of the stockfisches in the nordöstlichen canada .
and we &apos;ve been able to do this in the last 100 years .
i &apos;ve talked about a million times , but it &apos;s amazing .
the other species of the impact of climate change is the most ausbleichen of the corals . it &apos;s a lovely picture , right ?
that &apos;s not selling .
and yet , we are , according to our best knowledge , alone .
what i saw ? stars , satellites , blinkende planes -- typical himmelschrott .
and what would be behind these gummimasken when it was ?
and i was embarrassed by all of the time i was embarrassed , because i didn &apos;t read the novel &quot; dune &quot; at the time .
and it was so successful that it was even verfilmt .
faro is a living little city , and to come to the beach , she said , you need to take a bus and then take a boat .
one of them was called joseph , and he asked me what i did , and i explained .
and so we put in the case .
companies are providing goods for households -- that &apos;s us -- and we have income , and it &apos;s better for that , so we can spend those income for more goods and services .
the ersparnisrate , nettoersparnisse , was under zero in the middle of 2008 , just before the crisis .
you can hear the idea of the fünfjährigen .
and at the same time , the solution is clear because it doesn &apos;t require to change human nature .
we need to actually invest in the idea of a meaningful amount of money that will provide the opportunities that people are developing .
first , it &apos;s called economists never really , so it could be that you need to do something about your sound .
i was painting it directly to the man .
it was about space and light .
this photo was taken when i was visiting prudhoe bay in alaska in 2002 to see the minerals management of the test of the test of the ölteppiche in ice .
another thing is that it &apos;s spreading when it hits water .
and that &apos;s actually really pervers .
and then , of course , john designed .
she was also reason for the national umweltpolitik act , the clean air act , the clean water act .
they have abschlüsse in politikwissenschaft , in economics . they &apos;re entrepreneurs . they don &apos;t want to do what they do .
if you look at people who earn the 50,000 dollars in the years who have two children who might have three jobs or more , and then they have to go .
we need to get the whole thing like rationalisieren , and you can find more about these politics .
the first person is certainly familiar with you .
here she tells you in a filmbericht star star , like her friends were drängten , not to be in the way , and they said they will leave her friends to leave the democracy of the democracy .
last year , when i was here , i was talking about my swimming swim .
it feels like someone behind you , and you &apos;re going to have a hammer , you know , a hammer .
and there we put ourselves , and we besprachen , which went wrong . everest .
bloggt about this , tweetet about it , talking about a hundred percent , because there are only very , very few things that cannot be achieved when we apply our whole force for it .
this is a zustandsdiagramm . it &apos;s a very simple computer .
can we do a kind of selbst-replizierungs-verhalten ?
now what i &apos;m showing you here is that we can create a 2d-form , the b -- from a single set of components , which follow extremely simple rules .
that &apos;s three minutes .
and if you saw amy smith , she talks about how to work students with community working with communities in haiti .
and it may be that all the sensations of the world &apos;s reality is overwhelming and , connected , the variety of the problems we need to solve .
we &apos;re increasingly aware of that we don &apos;t even need to get the entire stadtfläche .
okay . i have one .
can we connect to the natural ecosystems around us , by putting rivers more and more renaturieren ?
as you can see , the death rate of total deaths per conflict , a year in the 1950s , to 2,000 deaths per conflict per year in this decade , so awful that &apos;s awful .
because we did something right , and it &apos;s really determined to figure out what it is .
they want to go .
if you don &apos;t , you have to get a copy of the two .
the developing world used soap and water , impfungen .
and now i have the prokopfeinkommen on this axis .
and you remember the beginning of the last century , which was very bad . until this is what &apos;s called the big jump .
see how it grows ? and how hundreds of millions and billions of billions of people get out of poverty in asia ?
here we are . we have a continuity in the world .
look at this . this is the world .
they get clean water . they buy food for the poor . they rotten malaria .
and we have to take the way we take the world with facts .
don &apos;t make africa . don &apos;t do a rassenproblem of it .
it &apos;s not sustainable . and it &apos;s not going to happen to a market .
and many of you heard the term &quot; memes , &quot; the evolution of technology is something that i give a lot of attention , so you know , one of the first things that you had was a little handaxt .
my argument is basically that , well , nicht-nullsummen-spiele , always , are always part of our lives .
and it &apos;s pretty new , and i think it &apos;s going to be much worse -- this possibility -- because of developments in the technology technology , in techologien , which are used as weapons , like biotechnology and nanotechnology .
i &apos;m doing my best , okay .
&quot; yahweh is our erlöser &quot; means &quot; he saved the people &apos;s volk , &quot; which was a pretty sophisticated sozialstruktur .
we only have in six countries , which means the media is only about six countries .
so , how should we put our money up ?
none of these countries , including africa &apos;s largest nation botswana , has ever ausgeschöpft its own .
as we were developing , we were the african to the edge of the development , the direction and the process of politics in our countries .
it &apos;s the administration , most of the time , costs 690 billion .
we &apos;d like to interview them . &quot; and i said , &quot; great . &quot;
and now 14 of the diseases , two of them , even heilbar .
in the last 10 years , and as hope for the future , we have the beginnings of a science of positive psychology : a science of what life makes .
and i think there are three different different -- and i call them different because they &apos;re for different interventions , it &apos;s possible to have one rather than the other -- three different happy lives .
but it showed that there was no sexual trauma .
you don &apos;t see it looks like debbie reynolds .
and what you find is that if you do something fun , the rechtwinklig is going .
when i was a therapeut of 30 years ago , i thought if i was good enough to make someone depressed , not afraid , not angry , i would make him happy .
a polar bear floating in the arctic , taken from paul nicklen .
but what you call &quot; the &quot; momentaufnahme &quot; is when all the parts are together and not just the event , but also my emotional connection .
nick -- again with a camera camera -- has taken thousands of photos of this .
sometimes you can tell a umfangreiche story on focused .
we want to find solutions .
and then all of the time go off and jump .
thank you .
and what &apos;s more important is because this is a fotometrischer process that you can pick in only three seconds : we can make emily in a period of less than one afternoon in several of different gesichtsposen and -ausdrücken .
emily : image &apos;s metrics is a markenfreie , leistungsgesteuerte animationsfirma .
i ended up involved in it .
the reserve there is a couple of beautiful primates .
but i was out of the west and worked in the east .
all the time , erze , all the time , are killed , animals , and the forest is cut , and so forth .
here &apos;s coltan abgebaut , and gold .
one day we met with the oberkommandeur .
the elephant verweste simple , and they took the stoßzähne .
i don &apos;t think anybody can do google because google do the right thing , even if people like al qaeda are using google to connect .
corneille ewango -- a hero of the regenwalds of congo
we have almost no notice , without noticed , from a market economy to a marktgesellschaft .
you don &apos;t have to pay it from your budget .
i should aufklären them , which happened with these experiments .
democracy doesn &apos;t need perfect equality , but it needs citizens who share a common life .
now , the united states , as a leader in 1900 , is where the line is changing .
we &apos;ve been back to this gift in the &apos; 70s and &apos; 80s , when women are in the erwerbsleben .
electricity was also helpful for women in the women .
an astonishing fact for technologie-optimisten is that in the first half of the 20th century , improvement in life expectancy is up three times as fast as in the second half of the 19th century .
this was the paper i was writing about 11 years and i got a 2 + .
i have some of the time that i thought was between five and 15 , to be my nebenbeschäftigung , and that led to a sense of failure .
so when i look at creativity , i think , there &apos;s this sense or the unvermögen to the zusammenhänge that i see in practically everything in life .
this is what &apos;s called a buddhist fishermen because they &apos;re not allowed to kill a living creature .
and they &apos;ll get more common .
and i had to find what fit in the story .
how are we going to festsetzen what the responsibility and the causes are outside of a dish outside of a dish ?
and you have to be in all the ways , including those who i never looked at before .
i hope you &apos;ll see me when i &apos;m going to see these examples , because i &apos;m actually talking about everything you might spend your time .
now there are magazines about water .
people pay the full price for both , and the only thing they have in common is that they have nothing in common .
the corners of abrunden to the center , that &apos;s the big market .
these guys are making the lauteste auto-stereoanlage in the world .
but you don &apos;t have to be ozzy osbourne -- you don &apos;t have to be completely überdreht .
so what you have to do is to figure out who is interested .
nine months later , i &apos;ll spend messages on tahrir square , and i was a picture that i saw in my newsfeed .
thank you .
most of the time , cultural legacy tends to be zurückzublicken and romantisieren the past .
my first story to national geographic , which i noticed that you can bring environmental problems in a story about the history of nature , i was dedicated to sattelrobben .
these are lions and tiger the ocean .
and because i love sharks -- i &apos;m kind of obsessed with you -- i wanted to do a different story about sharks , to talk about the need for sharks .
after i left bimini , i learned that this is a habitat planiert to create a new golfresort .
they also caught in fischereigerät .
but when the fish came back and wieder the sea and the population , forests grew up in the flat water .
she now lives in the dschungel of sungai wain , and this is matahari , her second son , the son of the second , the son of the second that i &apos;ve rescued , dodoy .
it was a biological desert .
and then you see the returns and start measuring what &apos;s coming out .
so how do we break this loop ?
and you need bacteria to bind the nitrogen , and without those mikroorganismen , there &apos;s no achievement .
the humidity is 10 percent higher .
so we can really change the climate .
in nord-suoahlisi , it &apos;s the genossenschaft , there &apos;s a democratic culture , so you can use the same way to protect the system in order to protect the system .
the spiralförmige strudel , who umwirbelt a paddel on a kanutrip .
i &apos;ll show you one .
reuben margolin creates kinetische sculpture , beautiful works , which are moving in the pattern of fallender regentropfen and vereinender waves . in nine minutes he &apos;s verzaubert with his meditativen art -- he was inspired by mathematics and nature .
every city has your own design .
23 years later , to come to come and weiterzuentwickeln this idea .
this is italian portal , the ukrainische park , the polnische park , the japanese place , the german park .
i &apos;m going to talk about consciousness .
either it doesn &apos;t exist , or it &apos;s something else , a computer program or something , but not in any case of science .
people always say that consciousness is hard to define .
you can &apos;t doubt about the existence of your own consciousness .
it &apos;s a digital computer program in the brain and to create consciousness , we have to just find the right program .
we constantly bring the objektivität and the subjektivität as properties of reality , and the properties of the standard .
... don &apos;t you find ?
but i also meet people who do what they do , and they can &apos;t imagine making something different .
we don &apos;t teach american history in the u.k.
teenagers don &apos;t wear a armbanduhren .
maybe later , not immediate .
no , she &apos;s not .
i couldn &apos;t make this thing to work , no matter how often i am .
but we have to switch from an industrial model to a landwirtschafts-modell model that every single school can flourish in .
and so , i wanted to find more about this .
the reason for this is that the historical report is being digitized at rasantem speed .
and there was a light on . she said , &quot; okay , so it &apos;s serious .
she led a group of students in protest in the streets of ranguns .
i stood up , i sat in a tea , sat down and everything , and now i &apos;m here -- still paralyzed , but here .
so peace direct stärkt them .
he wrote a book called &quot; the diktatur to democracy &quot; with 81 vorgehensweisen .
it &apos;s not such a kultisches thing .
and in fact , chris worried about , and said , &quot; look , show you , show you , you &apos;ll think you &apos;re still one of these crazy modern artists that don &apos;t do much . &quot;
it &apos;s an object for the mind .
and the solution i &apos;m anbiete to is the largest übeltäter in this massive sea of the earth through humankind , and the daraus destruction of the biosphere .
so i said , &quot; what would t go from the zähler -- &quot; what it &apos;s called the impact , in the denominator -- what we call it t2 , &quot; what &apos;s the impact ? &quot;
and he was a huge unterscheidungsfaktor on the market that has increased our revenues and profit .
we &apos;ve literally won marktanteile .
but five days later , back to atlanta , i got an email from thomas thomas , one of my people from the meeting in california .
so , frankly , many of us who are afraid of the business that the industry is threatened by technology and potentially entformt .
and truly , we need somebody to convey for us , so we have an experience with a mentally ?
the arts , whatever you do , are all the time you can do that if you &apos;re zusammenführen us , to look at our towards with großmut and curiosity .
the three sisters and the leidenschaftlichen hauchen hauchen with their passionate music video of the new life , and at tedwomen , they start with the fröhlichen and poppigen &quot; skylife &quot; by david balakrishnan . and then she would play a hinreißende , verführerische version of astor piazzollas &apos;s &quot; oblivion . &quot;
the manchester handwerker genossenschaft named after my neighborhood .
he makes a lot of money using the making of special furniture for the rich .
we &apos;ve taken over the lehrplan of the american kochinstituts , which is the harvard of the kochschulen harvard , and we kreierten a gourmet-kochprogramm for welfare mothers in sozialhilfe. in the middle of the inner center of the inner center of the inner center of the inner center of the city of the inner center of the city of the inner center of the city of the inner center
we &apos;ve noticed that you have to give them flowers and sunlight and the sunlight and food and expectations and herbie &apos;s music , and so you can heal the spiritual cancer .
these kids who are given up from the world that are flying from public school , and that &apos;s what they &apos;re capable of ; with affection and sunlight and food and the good music and confidence .
and it &apos;s worked very well until it .
and i will allow you to record the concert , and i &apos;m going to give you the music . and i should have you ever decide to sell you , you have to sign a deal that says that money is used to help the school .
this is a space that &apos;s built for nancy wilson that her album had taken on our school last christmas .
the brown building is which you &apos;ve looked at you and i tell you where i made my biggest mistake .
he came to me . he said , &quot; man , this is a fabulous story .
and so he zusammengetrommelt a group of people .
bill strickland tells a quiet and powerful story of erlösung with art , music and unusual .
and the transducer then , then , is going to get the ausgangszellen to the brain , and the result is a netzhautprothese that produces a normal netzhaut-output .
but there was the limitierenden factor , the problem with the code , and how you could get cells to respond to the code , to make normal reactions , and so that was our contributions .
it cover us with a invisible körperschutzhülle that fernhält attacks from the environment , so we keep healthy .
but when the bacteria grow and double and they all participate in to make these molecules , the number of these molecules are proportional to the zellanzahl .
now we know that all bacteria can speak together .
this is just a photo -- a mikroskopaufnahme of your skin .
bacteria have become incredibly arzneimittelresistent , which is what &apos;s going to return to that we kill germs .
the fact is that bacteria have a collective behavior , and they do tasks that they could never do if they were just to act as individuals .
it &apos;s a great honor to me to be able to get to this conference .
or the first ones to come in the hall .
but , if we think about justice , aristotle says aristotle says , what we need to think about is the actual character of fraglichen activity and qualities that are worth sie and bewundert and anerkennt .
what would you have for a reason ?
charlie , what are you going to say ?
here &apos;s how he auslegt it .
so aristotle has been to say , golfwägen , and the heftig frage question of homoehen recht. .
michael sandel : the lost art of democratic argument
a lot of people said , &quot; well , you know , städter don &apos;t tell us to rural guys to tell us what we should do with our time .
and i think that &apos;s good -- the future humankind must make a decision .
if that &apos;s like that , what does that mean ?
i &apos;d like to argue that the speed of the therapieverbesserungen will be enough .
i &apos;m saying that .
we know that there &apos;s this threshold because we don &apos;t get a altersbedingten of any of the world before we reach an mittleres age , and that &apos;s the damage since our birth was aufsummieren .
that means you have to do your homework to understand if that &apos;s true .
audience : hi . i &apos;ve read somewhere that in the last 20 years , the average life expectancy of practically all on the planet for 10 years .
not one of their media has been able to do it .
we don &apos;t care how we make our profit .
she went into the center of reykjavik and setzten frauenthemen .
but i can &apos;t have a design-argumente , which is the schlagkräftiger , which is the case i &apos;ve learned about economists , epidemiologen and umweltschützern .
the gesundheitsargument is a little scary , and you probably know a part of the arguments .
vierzehn americans die a day of asthma , the three times of the 90ern &apos; s , and almost everything comes from autoabgasen .
he had clearly had sense of humor .
politicians and marketing-leute are afraid to be vermarkten as &quot; lifestyle-entscheidung . &quot;
second , because we &apos;ve eradicated them .
so we thought , &quot; we &apos;re trying to do it . &quot;
there &apos;s some amazing animals .
immediately the government said , &quot; enough -- we &apos;ll go . &quot; and paying people for every abzuschlachten that they saw .
he might think he would have ever been born , he would have ever been born , so he might have some help from the outside .
i asked peter , if something changed , and he said , &quot; no . &quot;
we &apos;re now going to be on &quot; africa : &quot; the next chapter &quot; and it &apos;s like a healthy , more , more , more beautiful , more african .
but most of all , they have to be productive in their lives , and a kind of productive environment create in our countries that things can be done .
we can do that all together ?
we were on the side of the biafra .
i had to go through the legs of these people with my sister on my back to find a window .
you know , we need to use all well .
and i often don &apos;t see african staff under them .
the question is , how we can use to use , from all this good will , that will be against us ?
you &apos;re undiszipliniert . &quot;
we have ibukun awosika in nigeria with the stuhlfabrik .
and with this idea that artistic creativity is effective a product , i took this proposition to study them , so we can study them in the same way we can study any other complex neurological process .
the method has been applied since the &apos; 90s to study extremely complex processes .
i want to try to show this for you for a second .
and then i &apos;m in the room room , and here , play in the change .
how do you study a rap scientific ?
there &apos;s a massive activity of activity that &apos;s involved in bewegunsgkoordination .
i want to say , uncertainty and statistics , that &apos;s the mathematics of games and glücksspiele .
it &apos;s very zeitaufwendig and it &apos;s not pleasant .
but the idea of the entire time of eight seconds .
in play and virtual worlds , for example , their facial expressions can be used to control and intuitively , to control a avatar or virtual character .
otherwise it &apos;s very quickly , and without a stabiles grid , it &apos;s not possible , so children die .
another statement from esther was that we respond when it comes to a tragedy of haiti , but this is a andauerndetragödie .
it &apos;s produced by the malaria-parasiten , and it &apos;s a very interesting kristalline substance .
we have every street , every village , almost every square of madagascar .
in your bluray-player , a very cheap blue laser .
audience : yes .
so , interesting , although we have all the time , we never did it , we never did the air flügelschlag in the air .
this is the restaurant house house .
this orangenbaum you see here , actually , actually grows in a autoreifen , which was shot in the outside and zugenäht .
so , water is a more important point .
&quot; metal &quot; and &quot; earth &quot; are still .
the idea is not yet .
they don &apos;t enjoy the show .
thank you .
i could show you this animal here .
once it touches the water , you should hear how air comes out .
once we sequenced these two genomes , we asked ourselves , if this is the smallest genome of a vermehrenden species , it could actually be even more even more even more than even more even more than there ?
and we realized that , as soon as that worked , a real chance of a chance would have that if we could get the synthetic chromosomes to do it , it &apos;s the bacteria .
so , care is unumgänglich .
the last one is a quote from robert feynman : &quot; what i can &apos;t do myself can &apos;t understand , i can &apos;t understand that . &quot;
but in the northwest , we live in the northwest , very close to the actual notion of paradise , which 36 times as gardens , bewässert by running streams .
but the more you add , the more seems that seems to be lost .
and that number 72 is never .
this is a nest a wheels colony , and that &apos;s the nest entrance .
this is a colony which has been founded by one queen in the previous summer .
the patrouilleure -- it &apos;s supposed to be a lupe -- are an interesting group . they go out early morning before the first group is going to be .
it &apos;s more , and interestingly , it looks like about half the ant &apos;s just not doing anything .
the nest maintenance workers are just taking all the zahnstocher and put them to the äusseren edge of the nesthügels and they put it on there .
the nahrungssuchenden decide , don &apos;t get out .
and we did experiments that show that the longer an ant aufhält out , the more the simple hydrokarbone changes on their surface , and it smell different from the ants that they do different work .
they cover the entire earth , except antarctica .
here you see the cost of this for the world in about 89 million barrels of oil , and the annual cost of the year is three trillion dollars .
and that &apos;s what we do for four percent of the world &apos;s population .
that &apos;s not doing it .
i &apos;ve been thinking about where we can use natural gas .
and when i got to the windkraftgeschäft of the gas , the natural gas cost nine dollars .
why does you don &apos;t worry ?
it was just a 500 million vernichtet .
and it was never verschmutzt or anything like that .
tbp : i lost 150 million in the wind , okay ?
some have 5,000 . many have more .
there was dotcom-fieber . and there was goldfieber .
ourbeginning.com. is an event . you &apos;ll leave it to the world .
these are work in manhattan manhattan , where you built the first computer .
these were probably six different colors .
i mean , you didn &apos;t want this thing to go to the light light .
a friend of mine told me this story : the people weren &apos;t just and had to wait , but then the fachmänner had to be , when they were finally there , for third times , had to call someone .
so sometimes i &apos;m going to use a more clinical language , and so you may not be warm to your heart , as in other conversations , about compassion .
and here &apos;s the basic idea that migefühl is good actions for people who are going to be revanchieren .
basically , it &apos;s about if you &apos;re my enemy or my rivale , if you don &apos;t be my friend or to my family , i &apos;m much less less than that . okay .
so , the results raise up . that &apos;s a game game .
every form of the wechselseitigen dependence , nicht-nullsummen-beziehung , force one , the humanity of others .
and they &apos;ll tell you , the other people think that america is not being respected and they &apos;re actually going to dominate them and they hate america .
most of the diseases are related to poverty , but in the case of cancer in children , children who died from cancer mostly were from wealthy families .
a child died a child , but nothing changed .
because you don &apos;t just take that kind of energy and time , if it doesn &apos;t really care .
so he didn &apos;t really want to say something .
openness is not the end .
now the dominant krebstheorie would say that there &apos;s a single single single single single cell in a cell cell and that it makes you a krebsopfer .
what does that mean ?
we found a kind of zähflüssiges material that had the right extrazelluläre matrix , and we put cells inside and see , and it turns out , and within four days , they were umorganisiert and on the right , what we &apos;ve produced in a culture .
and of course , we &apos;re asking ourselves now , where we &apos;re going to go ?
and so i want to conclude with a poem .
we have a hochkarätigen journalist who was caught in the abschreiben ; a young star-autor , and his book had so many fingierte zitate , which was so many fingierte zitate , that you &apos;ve taken it from the shelves ; a exposé über buchrezensionen in the new york times .
it sounds like a strange book , but it &apos;s actually about new species of lying .
he wrote very , very positive about himself . surprise .
and you &apos;ve had four good friends of your personality .
that &apos;s really bad . why is it so bad ?
i can look at lying ; once , they were spoken and then on .
they were telling how big the bathroom was , or said , the einkaufsmöglichkeiten are so far from the hotel .
woman 2 : right . okay , glass , do a photo .
and also , you want to go through your eyes .
but it really opened my eyes , how often i have left from life for email , social networks and so on , even though there was actually nothing really important or dringendes .
i read peter and the wolf with this beautiful band of juillard .
and everybody who &apos;s going to go down , i went behind .
at least for me , because if i always do the same thing , i &apos;m very , very boring . i &apos;m very quickly .
i see myself as i &apos;m not -- i don &apos;t know what i see myself .
are you going to get nervous ?
im : do you worry ? you look so cute .
like , i &apos;m not saying it &apos;s good , but only that it &apos;s not langweilt , ok ?
if you have the sahne zu , it &apos;s going to be buttermilch .
i call it the era of the staatsbürgerschaft -- what humans are different groups of race or ethnic groups , but as citizens can be equal equal to the same .
in egypt , i was obviously discovered .
this was in london , in yemen , was educated and bestieg in amsterdam an airplane for america .
there are no ideas and narratives and leaders and symbols that are using democratic culture on the ground .
the anecdote , we can show that if poverty is the only factor , well , a family &apos;s family is one of the richest families , saudi .
what happened was a political conspiracy that was zusammenfand for a political goal , and that was to get the leaders .
these tools are only going to be socially interesting when they &apos;re technically boring .
it ermittelt the limits of the individual networks , and then färbt them .
and because of social networking , chinese students who studied the abroad , or companies the world &apos;s offices in china , there were people all over the world that was listening .
and the chinese is the chinese .
we &apos;re always global in media media globally , social , ubiquitous and cheap .
but all of you , i &apos;m going to look at the same way i was looking at it .
at my fourth abstecher everest , a comet moved on the mountain .
this view is up the eisbruch up , the first 400 meters of the rise of the base camp .
and this is in camp four .
and there were climbers on the summit ridge .
we also got the bad news that beck weathers , another climbers , collapsed in this storm in the snow and died .
it &apos;s so hard to work up , because i even even even even even put even even even in the clothes .
the climbers were schneeblind .
and i can only mutmaßen how he did that .
and so he &apos;s going to turn back into action .
these are the sherpas that light up .
and the fourth thing that i &apos;m extremely significant to me is , &quot; ideas that we need to participate in . &quot;
but today , after 60 years , by the unternehmerischen rise , entrepreneurs are becoming the models of the world , and they have to have a great impact in society .
it was enige people who wanted to make democracy because they bring the ideas to bring out of the universal , parliament , parliament and the constitution and so forth .
the third thing is again to the cities .
the second is the beschäftigungspolitik , which we have , which makes it so hard to create a job jobs in companies that 93 percent of indian jobs in the unorganisierten area are in the area of the area of the country .
so , if you &apos;re a young country , you have the opportunity to do a modern rentensystem , so you don &apos;t have the anspruchsprobleme , if you get older .
you have to have a clear strategy what matters for india and important to the world .
so government , the government , is going to choose to go .
although some people don &apos;t like to hear it at all the time , it was actually the revolution of the markets that ausgab the losung , &quot; the government has no idea . &quot;
they don &apos;t fear the masses .
so this whole konstruktive mistrust between the volksvertretern and the ones that they are represented .
dreiundvierzig .
each of those kohorten would be statistically by a statistically , for two years after the gefängnisaufenthalt .
david cameron has spent 20 million pounds in a social social fund , to support this idea .
toby eccles : investment in social change
i &apos;m working on . &quot;
why ? are you too tired to get to the wange ?
even when i &apos;m with my friend named jack , i say , &quot; i &apos;m going to get you , jack . servus , jack . &quot;
if you haven &apos;t found it , my name is tom thum and i &apos;m a beatboxer . that means i &apos;ve just done everything you &apos;ve just heard , only one of my voice , just with my voice .
and then , to the end , with this one , i can make my sound wieder- , wieder- , wiederholen .
our people had to try about 5,000 different mischungen to find the right ones .
don &apos;t hear the ones who say that can &apos;t be done . everybody can do it .
on the right side is a ultraschallwandler .
and i &apos;m going to give you some examples .
you see the blue beleuchteten .
his wife said it was &quot; the happiest day in her life . &quot;
many of these patients are pulling the strahlentherapie .
the results are better than the surgical .
he can stop the procedure at all right time .
canal street , i know .
and that &apos;s where they really take a lot of their creative inspiration , so it &apos;s an industry that &apos;s going on in directions .
and so they want to go to the next trend and that as quickly as possible .
and their jokes , like the modedesigns of a modedesigners , work really only within these aesthetics .
you need a lot of lawyers and a lot of time in trial , and the händler decided that that would be too expensive .
these are the two hauptsächlichen of binary gegensätze within the logic of the urheberrechts .
and i &apos;d like to really thank this point of jauriqui jauriqui for this point that they &apos;ve created this very modische presentation .
i took a boat to a remote fjord , and i noticed that the archäologen that i should meet , not aufzufinden .
i think this is one of the most stillsten and robustesten things on the planet .
there are numerous ancient eiben eiben on friedhöfen all over the u.k. , and when you &apos;re nachrechnen , you &apos;ll notice that the eiben of the churches were there .
here &apos;s the klonische creosotebusch , which is about 12000 years old .
i hope that by making these organisms , can help pay attention to their remarkable robustheit , and to help my part of protecting their fortdauernden longevity in the near future .
let &apos;s put it on something else .
20 years later , criminals are still using mobile phones , but they also create their own mobiltelefonnetze , like this , which is used by the drogenkartells of mexico in all 31 states .
what did they do with it ?
what could terrorists do today , using the available technology now ?
the fbi has been arrested in the united states , which wanted to be in the united states of the united states , which was going to be in the united states .
as we see here , we turn ourselves into a cyborgs .
now , the mortality rate is 70 percent when you get it , but it &apos;s hard .
it &apos;s going to be killing so many people that the only leistbare funeral can &apos;t be able to juarez beerdigung , like this , from ciudad , juarez .
but on the other hand , i hear people like fear , one of them is a aversion .
and in 1999 , she was working in 1999 when she worked in columbia with the u &apos; wa-volk , with the goal to preserve her culture and language , with two other colleagues of the guerillas guerillas and gefoltert and getötet .
and there &apos;s no group that would be more susceptible to this kind of manipulation as young men .
patient capital is awkward to people , the simple solutions , are leichte categories , because we don &apos;t think of it as a bloßes instrument .
but the entire community , all the different sekten , the shia and sunni , would be and pray . &quot;
because when she &apos;s full of the juice , she &apos;s beautiful , it &apos;s green , she &apos;s feeding the world , it &apos;s enough to the sky . &quot;
but no faces ?
okay , let &apos;s look at these three portraits .
i tried to make my wife a little pleasure .
why do i not ask my wife , local , regional pad ?
but here &apos;s the problem . because a company makes a pad of cotton and it works .
muruganantham : i see this thing in my hands &apos;s hands , &quot; why do you get a ekligen lappen ? &quot;
now , 110 countries can access it .
and it was so beautiful that i was over the last seven years .
and then i did a huge amount of training . i could go in eiswasser and forth .
actually , it &apos;s actually happened that the cells are einfroren in my fingers and ausdehnten it .
and my good friend david saw me , like i thought , and he came up to me and said , &quot; lewis , i know you since you &apos;ve been 18 years old .
the prospect that you could go out in 30 , 40 years , a very furchterregender , a very furchterregender .
england , america , japan , south africa , the congo .
it &apos;s about 380 trillion miles of oil oil oil , today , which can be erschlossen and gefördert .
now this could be the end of the story -- okay , we &apos;re just replacing it all with conventional , renewables , but i think that &apos;s a more than that &apos;s more .
all very special material that the abalone itself produces , millions of abalone shell , all the time , every year .
and the idea was , basically , i &apos;m the paintbrush in the hand of the great personalities that come and interview .
but i wanted to lead to interviews .
in fact , my first interviewpartner george abbott , who was 97 years old , and she was abbott , and i think it &apos;s full of life -- i think it &apos;s how you can define it .
we know the big sprüche , we know the great moments , we know what we don &apos;t want to share , and the point of the thing is to make anybody ridiculous .
when we were alone , i was her audience .
it wasn &apos;t the armdrücken , but it was a überraschungsmoment for my gesprächspartner .
and he said , &quot; but i understand that . i can understand that .
half the body was geschwächt , the other .
this is a säuglings-intensivstation in kathmandu , nepal .
i don &apos;t want to do a beautiful thing .
there &apos;s a certain kind of treatment , it &apos;s called austauschtransfusion .
it &apos;s not the painting we would have painted , but what we actually painted .
another example : again , stupid mother .
thank you .
no , we &apos;re talking about 10 million , 20 million dollars on the swiss bankkonten , on the bankkonten in liechtenstein , from the ministern of the presidents , the high public officials in the state .
she &apos;s zollten .
most of the major companies are now restlos , they have to have very strict policies , and so on , and so on , etc , bribe .
if you want to go to a restaurant , if you look at the card card , you expect it to be order to order all of your card ?
and that was the first time i thought that expression on your face is actually reflected on what she &apos;s holding it .
well , he &apos;s sharing his life .
this french painter painter painter in the 18th century , but it was painting , but occasionally humans .
now unfortunately , these waise are now spending most of the time with a series of other waisen in the archive , and some of them are beautiful paintings .
the first time i had it in a aufwändigen dinner that their parents gave us to honor .
&quot; i &apos;m going to take you to your bevorstehenden wedding , james .
my dad also lived most of his erwachsenenlebens in east africa .
i &apos;d like to show you six minutes .
lancelot imasen : but our movies , they are stories that we can identify with people .
so it &apos;s a young man out there , and it &apos;s got to be able to get some negative things to think about , and all of these , or some untugendhaftes behavior .
franco sacchi : so much to say , so little .
i think this is really the theme of this event .
you know , you &apos;ve described this as an drittgrösste film industry in the world .
it &apos;s basically a cd . a kompaktdisk .
now , the art critic . oh , that was fantastic .
that was really fantastic .
video games can be very profound , even though they &apos;re totally geistlos .
we show &quot; portal , &quot; because you &apos;re shooting at walls to create new spaces .
so time , space , aesthetics , and then , most important .
and i had to leave some bridges on the way .
it all refers to the bauherren and the students who were saying that they were going to be a place .
so i made some sketches to do the servietten -- little boxes and morandi-artige things i normally drew .
it &apos;s one of the most beautiful pieces i &apos;ve ever done .
this beautiful object , the swiss army army , is going to be a beteiligung .
and one day i had one -- oh , vice versa .
i had the verzinkung and the copper very thin , so it wölbt .
and that &apos;s my cafeteria .
and it reminded me of why i agiere things like my house .
she never finished .
the dome was a wish of the bauherrin .
it was an attempt , this narrow piece of land -- it &apos;s 30 to the 76 of the country -- to turn into a anwesen , which is trennte these areas and unterbrachte the home and the dining room in this room with a lot of it .
they call this &quot; plan coupé . &quot;
here is it .
the buildings in the background , it seems to be a vorbeigleitender iceberg in the mountains .
our client doesn &apos;t want to go to the galleries , so -- and when we met our new akustiker , he said that this was the right shape .
in the 1930s , i was asked to do a fish , we just work on it , to fuß the ritz-carlton-turms , which was built by skidmore , owings and merrill .
can we not make clean burning kochbrennstoffe ?
and one of the things that she found out was that she wasn &apos;t brannten .
and these are our hausgemachten briketts .
and he has the problem of the health effects of verbrennendem wood and coal .
it &apos;s a place where , for example , if this was india , in this room , only three of us would have three .
so you can &apos;t use the same concepts like in the united states , to get things forward .
there &apos;s a big difference .
after a surgery , everything .
now , that &apos;s not surprising . but we asked them to judge their honesty and intelligence , kindness and aggressivität .
he married . he had a son called jerehmia .
is this business with our external and our work with this westliches phenomenon ?
i want to tell you a little bit about the surgeries we &apos;re doing , how far we are and where we want to go .
we can replace the beneath of the ground , but we &apos;re not very far with replacing the replace .
my theme is food in schools , because this is about social justice .
and the next is bio-lebensmittel .
people are constantly talking about sustainability , but we should be figure out what that &apos;s at all .
you know , everybody think you &apos;d have to eat more and more food ?
and then they rausbekommen , hey , we can sell that stuff on children .
and this is a typical essensplan , a typical essensplan .
the things we might do at home and think about that , we need to teach kids to teach kids .
we need to raise the staff .
this 8 billion means two dollars and 1,500 cents -- so much money is ready for lunch .
when i was a little girl , my grandfather at a hot sommertagen mit me out in the sun .
when i go to a party and people ask me what i do , and i say , &quot; i &apos;m a professor , &quot; you &apos;ll be matt .
i want to know their selbstsicherheit , all about their innerstes creature , untergraben -- that you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know .
don &apos;t have the tension , i &apos;d rather want to be verzaubert .
it &apos;s a documentary of a documentary of consciousness about consciousness .
when i was closer , i expected to recognize all the details of most people , their clothes and so on .
where do you know that what they did ?
do you see it ? who you don &apos;t see ? it &apos;s going to help .
we &apos;re starting to start gemächlich . some examples .
this morning , jeff hawkins has described his efforts to bring a good , big theory in neuroscience .
and the verkehrsplaner in london said , &quot; what do you mean with you , &quot; who &apos;s in charge of london -- &quot; i mean nobody is involved . &quot;
now , congestion charges were introduced in stockholm on the number of january of january 2006 , and the first picture , here is a picture of stockholm , a typical road on the two of january .
so , we did this huge survey with a lot of the verkehrsbetrieben and trying to figure out who changed and where they disappeared .
then i went to 20 years , ostwärts -- from eastern europe to central asia -- the mountains of the kaukasus , mittlerer east , north africa , russia .
what do we know from the todesdrohungen of the taliban who are going to be genagelt to the doors of people who are going to go to schulen their daughters in balkh ?
the world changed .
i was in my office , my desk was a aufgeräumt , i had the blue trennwand-teppich on the walls .
and there were two of them .
there was really what .
how amazing is that ?
so i &apos;m going to talk about some other patients that all in their power do to do the health care system .
and then i realized that the page of google earth was reminded where we can fly to every address .
we are , they &apos;re most of the most important resource in healthcare .
umkehrosmose of seawater is a membranfiltertechnologie .
here &apos;s the resolution . a wonderful creature , right ?
they don &apos;t take their environment with sound waves . i &apos;m talking about the flughunden .
in the united states alone , the annual cost of geschätzte 22 billion dollars is a belaufen cost . so bats are bringen us in every case .
why should we be at age age at all ?
if you go out and look at the night sky and see this beautiful , flying animal , i wish you smile . thank you very much .
europe had to be gezerrt in economic development .
the boom of the resources are pumpt ungeahnte geldmengen in that , but it &apos;s a lot of countries from the bottom billion .
so what &apos;s going wrong ? why is it the so-called &quot; ressourcenfluch &quot; ?
and so the countries of the bottom billion need a very ausgewogene politics .
some economists came back in time and said , &quot; why don &apos;t you try to get a auction ? it &apos;s going to reveal the value . &quot;
in this moment , there &apos;s a billion people in the world , in poor or scheiternden countries , and how can we help them ? the economist paul collier shows a kühnen , compassionate plan that we can close the gap between poor and rich .
we have no container where they &apos;re made .
here he gives a englischsprachigen surgeon in africa that basiswissen this basiswissen , which is needed to do the durchführung surgery .
so what we did is , imagine , imagine that they thought it was a lecture and could talk to the people in their language language .
grundlagen surgery .
i was going to take the first time in this ordinary material , 14 years ago , fischnetz , which was used in the same way for centuries .
he asks me if i could build this as a dauerhaftes piece for the city .
so we &apos;re experimenting with little atomisierten wasserpartikeln to create a dry fog that &apos;s shaped by wind , and test it turns out that it can be shaped by people who can interact with this and move through without becoming a naß .
they were in their geschäftsanzügen in their geschäftsanzügen , watching the verändernden pattern of the windes next to people who didn &apos;t know , and shared the wunder of wonder .
and so i also realized that this is an enormous risk for our society .
when peter moves his arm , this yellow spot is the entsprechende place that you see in the activity that geschiet in the brain of mind .
when they do this , what will they control ?
and to say that these changes can be beyond death , even a claim to a fact that can be true or wrong .
now let me just clear what i &apos;m not saying . i &apos;m not saying science can be able to show this room , or that we will have scientific answers to every moral question .
now why would this not untergraben an objective morality ?
what &apos;s the probability of being the probability of human development ?
on the left side , you see edward witten .
we live in a world full of destruktiver technologies and these technologies can &apos;t be un-erfunden , it &apos;s always easier to break than to break them together .
but then we have to talk about well-being in a larger context .
and what is his natural enemy , what the means of the bio-kontrolle of the good käfers that we talk about ?
it &apos;s a parasite , no zweibeiniger , but a parasitäre wespe , two inches long , schlank , a quick and wendige fliegerin .
and if we put these good blumenwanzen for example in a paprika-feld , you go to the flowers .
in israel , for example , where we &apos;re on a thousand acres -- this is equivalent 10,000 israelischen dunams -- biological schädlingsbekämpfung in süßpaprika , 75 percent of the pesticides are saved .
third , to increase the awareness of farmers to the potential of this increase .
automobilretrofuturismus is one of my favorite ones .
it &apos;s still fun to make fun of the hirnlosen rich than any other than irgendwen , and i do it .
&quot; urban absurdism &quot; -- this is what the new york needs .
her name &apos;s name was fay wray , and this was -- i wasn &apos;t schlagfertig enough to say , &quot; take the drawing . &quot;
or even the collapse of soviet union had just several decades , perhaps within a decade after the time , to the soviet union was most powerful .
because there &apos;s 80 percent there out there that really eat insects .
they are at the beginning of nahrungsketten .
why do we actually do these balls in soup , it &apos;s still meat in the soup ?
it &apos;s 25 pounds per person per year .
so far , we decide for one , or to five pounds of output .
we can increase them a little bit at the cost of the regenwäldern , but there &apos;s going to be a limit there .
and you might think , well , they &apos;re not even available .
my three minutes is still not starting , right ?
he said , &quot; oh , we have to put them on the table .
and i saw a sign .
even if you &apos;re kanadier the system , they do it in a way that society is coming to benefit .
and in this book , the little lewis would find the big idea .
this is a linealwerkzeug . and on the back , some other spielereien , messwerkzeuge , and scales to make some of the calculations .
right . so , this is how the machine is used .
there &apos;s an quality of handwerkskunst and precision that is just amazing and remarkable .
so , the first robot i want to talk about is called the strider .
it &apos;s only going to be using cameras , or other sensors , because it &apos;s up , it &apos;s a half 80 size , you can hinwegsehen over obstacles of büsche and dererlei .
for example , in this case , although the left and the right wheel is connected to a single axis , and it &apos;s a very quickly , and it &apos;s pretty quickly .
welcome to romela , the robot &apos;s lab lab and engineering .
but the cool thing about this is the benutzerschnittstelle .
let &apos;s see how he &apos;s doing it . this was our first attempt , and we were tooooor .
but what &apos;s the secret of our success ?
but only to speak from a radio of imagination is not enough .
and so education is very important .
innenstädte that are going to be geisterstädten .
there are basically no pool of good teachers , and only eight percent of the county has a bachelor- or a higher degree .
there &apos;s a complete empty capital in bertie county .
the goal of the game is to have all the teammitglieder in the wheels , then won the team .
the last few decades , we &apos;ve been a lot of money that was determined for werkunterricht , completely .
and after out and the neighbors , they interview , what &apos;s going to buy and go from where and why , is a homework .
in this one , it &apos;s really impossible to create large kahle surfaces .
i &apos;d like to invite you to follow my journey of the umdenkens and exploration .
after four months of the year , it &apos;s a hervor and now , and it &apos;s eight months of dry .
here &apos;s a couple of results .
this global act is the same amount of climate change , as you can do fossil fuels , perhaps even more than those .
when i learned about these two things , i found this very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , for personal reasons for a scientific reasons
it has a very good ausgestattetes pediatrisches , which is partly mitfinanziert by the ronald of the director of the foundation .
after treatment , we &apos;re going to give the child a series of simple sehtests to see how his vision is to fit .
the answer is in motion . i want to show you the next video .
i had to discuss a long time with my wife .
we &apos;re tracking these forschungsrichtung , and hopefully we &apos;ll have more results .
and then , i have a leichtathletikveranstaltungen läufer , and i was thinking of these leichtathletikveranstaltungen for disabled disabled disabled , and i thought , oh , i don &apos;t know that , but before i judgments on that , i &apos;ll look at how that is .
but that was the fall &apos; 95 , and then when the winter anbrach , he said , &quot; you know , you &apos;re good enough .
ss : so , it &apos;s aimee to the paralympics &apos; 96 , and she &apos;s very excited . your family goes -- it &apos;s a big thing .
i was trying to do everyone i could , auszufragen against who , against the läufer , who are i performing ?
i had always won everything , and now i thought what ?
you can be 2,44m . take them off . &quot;
the one : aimee and the designers will be 2 , and we &apos;ll talk about the design .
she got someone who ended up and absägte the shoes .
but it &apos;s almost impossible , the actual losses of economics , unless we use math .
or to get the 75.000 jobs .
and another thing about mathematics : mathematics is sometimes looking like mathematics -- like mathematics -- like this , in this case -- and sometimes she doesn &apos;t -- like , &quot; am i drunk ? &quot;
in education , we use about 80 percent of the time to teach people how to do three by hand .
when people ask me , is that right ?
but the automatisierung of the car allowed to separate these things , so this is something different than building a car and the learning of its wartung .
completely verkehrt .
but i think we can do both here .
and one of the reasons that &apos;s so important -- so it &apos;s very important to do computers in the test .
it was in the winter of 2009 , and i was already blind for about a year .
i was particularly thinking of my dad , the dead passed was a result of complications of a surgical brain in the brain .
like , just by the grasp of the stocks , the verändernde shape of the soil can be ertasten , and at the time , it gives a sense of where you are and what you &apos;re doing .
but when i was erblindet and i was walking along the street , i was blessed in every corner .
if you design a city in the senses of the blind , there will be many , many jobs .
and to give you a sense of experience , the article was called &quot; i think you &apos;re a little bit of re . &quot;
and the rangierten of the famous i knew -- the 10 commandments , love your next , is fruchtbar and mehre you ...
you give money for a good purpose , and you &apos;re making emotional sense of purpose .
she &apos;s not a book that was written and herabkam off the sky .
so , for me , this is actually the key thing to be happiness , to remember that , on the way , the car &apos;s not überschlug , and i didn &apos;t go on the way down the stairs .
that was very inspiring to me .
so if we want to make this book , we want to make some meaning , we really need to be able to do it and ringen with him .
so we have this wonderful progress .
and the academics that this work with this work thought was to be unseriös , so we developed ernstere applications like this optik-prototypen entwicklungstisch that &apos;s going to be on a pappschachtel auf on a pappschachtel .
alex worked on a little , a little bit , independent kunstfilm called &quot; the name of &quot; minority report &quot; for steven spielberg , and invited us to develop the interface that should be used in the movie .
we &apos;re doing this boolesche operation because we like yellow and tapire on the green grass .
let &apos;s pull the one apart , i &apos;m bringing it into explosionsansicht .
we , as humans , are the ones who are designing things , and we should make sure that our machines are helping us and build on it .
john , thank you , you know , the way you could do it .
what okolloh did would not have been possible without digital technologies .
but here &apos;s the point . the albernste creative act is still a creative act .
but the facilities that are represented by this black line , said , &quot; we &apos;re changing this kind of abmachung .
they &apos;re created by the members of the community .
and as all the good seifenopern , it &apos;s going to take a jump of 20 years when the interest of the audience is changing .
it &apos;s not always been available for five days , so the changes in the changes were coming , and we started playing 50-overs-cricket .
india didn &apos;t want to be doing the t20-weltmeisterschaft .
the other was indisches cricket .
was this the new india ? this was a different world where you could get player from all over , as long as you got the best player for the best price .
we &apos;ve all seen games in calcutta , but we had never seen this before . shahrukh khan led the audience with a bengalischen song to jubeln -- for kalkutta , not for india , but for kalkutta .
could you imagine that day would come ?
hopefully i have made each of you to get a experience richer and the game is , and hopefully , the cricket-kommentatoren is a long time to work in this business .
and you know that the most popular dogs is because they have fast abgerufen in memory , how often they saw dogs and pigs on the rope .
why about everything in the world should anyone be lottery ?
on the other side , if you go to a developing country and buy a gourmet-menü for 25 dollars , it &apos;s a wucherpreis for a big mac .
would you spend 20 dollars a ticket ?
i &apos;ll give you an example .
and if the way to the other end of the city is worth 100 , it &apos;s worth 100 mice , completely no matter what you &apos;re going to be saved , but people don &apos;t think so .
now , in large and large , you &apos;re very impatient .
watch what happens when we auslassen einge .
dan , i &apos;d like to hear more . you say , our answer to the terrorism is , i mean , it &apos;s a kind of mental error ?
there &apos;s no guns .
and so some people look at economists as dumb people .
the subject and variation is one of these spielarten , which requires some intellectual activity , because you always compare the variation in the subject you have in mind .
&quot; in words , in fashion , the same rule as neu and alt is not the first thing new trials , and the last one of the old one has been for the old one . &quot;
and i woke up one day and i said , &quot; well , maybe it &apos;s not that ? &quot;
first -- my willingness to give me a critical audience , without suggesting i &apos;m sure to be safe .
it &apos;s my intention to go on to begleiten the poster , and i don &apos;t understand it .
so in large , and all of them , they are saving our survival .
jews often have a awkward smell smell .
if the room was stank , we could see people are äußerten more negative attitudes to men &apos;s attitudes .
it &apos;s like i &apos;m a heimgekommen to talk about what i &apos;ve done in the distance for these 20 years .
it feeds my mind and my soul .
they &apos;re shit .
there &apos;s a young director , hollywood director , with his friends , other filmemachern , and they talk about what &apos;s going to be .
without food , i got sick .
we don &apos;t need a problem more holt the idiots .
our government was corrupt .
so for me , the idea that we have all these children , it &apos;s a generation , we have a whole generation of children who had to go through so much psychological trauma or harm and africa has to live with it .
through the whole book , more than an hour of an hour of dokumentarischer and interactive animations .
what is the business ?
it had at least the point that you were , while you could , for the most , largely true .
so i thought , &quot; yeah , that &apos;s a good idea . &quot;
they still talk about it .
when i came from college , i worked in southern california , and you &apos;d gewöhnte the spanischen on the rooftops and these things .
rsw : what does his life look like ?
the mit-projekt -- they were interviewed to do this with me and sent their engineering hilfskräfte to bilbao .
it reminds me of it .
and the guy looked at me and said , &quot; so , what can i do for you , mr. gehry ? &quot;
if you want to go through three months of three months , the ideas will be more and more and more and more alive .
and one thing i wanted to mention in my danksagung , but somehow missed it was to thank all the companies that helped me get in .
but in the meanwhile , these things are going to gain momentum .
and this is 10 weeks later , by hand , demoliert .
you see the anzüge , the blumensträuße .
the kakophonie of stilen and things is remarkable , and this is what the villen are .
it &apos;s an incredible endeavor , 15,000 workers , i think , five , and the sixth are built here .
it &apos;s the ebene that &apos;s been working on the plane .
50 percent of the computer in the world are land into china .
it was quite unusual , so it was so designed that less than five percent of the advertising had a picture .
and wish is three : imax-film . i said i should do one myself , and i wanted to do something like this .
and it &apos;s increasingly more important that we find out how we can win these resources from these extreme complex abfallströmen .
the traditional ways to separate material work is not just to kunstoff .
the traditional way to make plastk , is going to happen or petrochemikalien .
at the end of this process , we have a mixed kunststoff-zusammensetzung , many different types of kunstoff and many different qualities of plastics .
now i see a lot of grinser out there .
and what we see is that people tend to commit mistakes in the same way , again and again .
perhaps we should study how monkeys make economic decisions and figure out whether they commit the same dummheiten as we do .
here &apos;s a mayday . it will take a single one and you &apos;re happy to take a car and wait happy , and you get your food .
it &apos;s a little bit a little bit a little bit a little bit a little bit a little bit a little bit a little bit like that the market is opening .
now imagine that i &apos;m putting each one of you a thousand u.s dollars in your hands -- so 10 knackige a hundred dollars .
you can either choose a riskanten loss -- so i throw a coin . you &apos;re going to lose a lot .
if we made the same scenarios in our little affenmarkt , they would be the same things as people do ?
the person on the left is a safe loss .
maybe it &apos;s not only people on the last stage of development that make stupid mistakes .
and that &apos;s the catch .
but when we think about buildings , they &apos;re all the time up four stories .
we need to make less with concrete and steel and we need to build up . we &apos;ve been working on 30-geschossigen holzgebäuden .
that &apos;s just as much as we would have been less than 900 cars in the streets .
kugelsichere curtains verdeckten my windows .
perhaps &quot; citizen , &quot; because recently they stood up to fight against the decline of the justiz , the citizens of these networks work together to help each other .
sberbank , the largest and oldest bank in russia , mostly in the property of the russian government , using it to employees and citizens to create innovation .
we &apos;ve heard about people on ted , about people who have their plants with an arduino , and mozilla works on the world who are doing young people , to create and spin .
and so i started thinking that the eternal mother always asks , &quot; are all the children there ? &quot;
that &apos;s compassion .
he asked them to be a message , and all of their own language was a central bekundung bekundung , which was a version of the golden rule , &quot; what you don &apos;t want to do to do you , the füg either other . &quot;
a pastor is to be taking those individual needs .
and we &apos;re doing this by some fallbeispiele .
there &apos;s 180 messages in washington d.c. , d.c.
it &apos;s going to take place to be the parks and the sculptures .
it &apos;s made out of silizium-beschichteter fiber .
there are also some constraints in terms of his lighting .
the bubble is a anti-denkmal .
i saw my aunt raped when i was only five .
one of the things i had experienced when i was trying to eat my friend , because we didn &apos;t eat , and we were the 400 .
as a child , young and zart , words i can &apos;t forget , not forget .
this is my story , shared in the form of a lesson .
my breakfast , my lunch , i &apos;m going to give me a foundation that i founded , because we want to build a school in sudan .
give us tools . give the farmers tools .
audience : yes .
third chapter is a more complicated rechtsverfahren called &quot; federal hebeas corpus proceeding . &quot;
that means more than 60 percent are for it .
we &apos;re doing this job by expanding the problem of death .
and even when that happens , it &apos;s not too late .
i remember nothing from the time when i was five years old .
santa santa knows whether you were artig or not . right ?
but , julie , you were so ready for school . you were so ready . &quot;
they looked at each other and they were feeling , in the sense , that was the right answer , and then they said , &quot; do you think we &apos;re all brothers and sisters on this earth ? &quot;
perhaps to cooperate and adapt to them ?
i think this film shows the hardest look at modern times , &quot; the road &quot;
in world war ii , we had to produce a lot of stuff .
but we can &apos;t forget that it needs a basic contribution , and that &apos;s how many resources of the planet we use .
but now , the good news .
it may be in latin america .
and at that point , the skeptiker and the leugner of climate change in the appearance .
we did a project for a few years ago . a big program , it meant -- the vorsorgeprogramm -- with many , many people -- many experts were involved -- everything on evidence -- a dicker wälzer .
a group of people ask them to spend on themselves , and the other group is to spend it for other people .
when they went from the first building to the second , all of a man , all of the time , were krümmte and stöhnte , and clearly help needed help . the question is , did it hold and help ?
the word is &quot; pizzled , &quot; a combination of &quot; puzzled &quot; and &quot; pissed off . &quot;
there &apos;s a wonderful book called the &#91; : &#93; : it &apos;s a little bit of stuff : the hidden life of life .
so , now , four decades now -- i &apos;ve been working with the best in this area , had the world , i &apos;ve been teaching , young and old , kreierte , kreierte , kollaborierte , choreographierte , and knüpfte a lot of the web of art , successes and auszeichnungen .
and i found this in my dance , my dance , my strength , my energy , my passion , my real life .
i was dancing between chemo- and bestrahlungszyklen and drängte to fit to my aufführungsplan .
well , it was the frustration .
that &apos;s what it was .
he put them together , combined it to something interessanterem , and then he turned it into this software that i think that she had been designed to be his son , and he &apos;s done this wonderful presentation .
and in these documents there &apos;s little vierecke , little boxes .
i want to suggest -- yeah , make a beautiful website . how could i say you should not have a beautiful website ?
now , you ask the linked data that you put now , 32 hits , which each one is of those properties and you can look at them .
and that &apos;s what linked data is .
all this will lead that every year two million children die less than the year 2000 .
and if it &apos;s like that , we &apos;re ready to collect feedback , to give feedback to make sure that the promise are really results ?
you just show one of the numbers that 5,000 -- is that the number ?
my brothers started to draw me on the drawing and paint .
and that &apos;s what i &apos;ve been fascinated to explore this area .
how many of you have a cow on the road , going to the road of bangalore ?
it &apos;s just as people are trained to perceive the reality that way , and that makes the importance .
and they said , &quot; go to fine .
can &apos;t you do anything , you &apos;re artists ? &quot;
this is a box of wellpappe .
because , if we see somebody who we see , we &apos;ll see the footprint .
what percentage of them have been the foreign direktinvestitionen ?
obviously he &apos;s been on a cave for the last 20,000 years .
so the auslandshilfe is actually quite designed to conclude , because -- if you think about it , i &apos;ve been told you about the under economists , unbestrittene , annahme , that most things are very binnenlastig .
this is the place i showed you at the beginning .
we &apos;re going to get a little bit more technical .
think about toyota .
you can &apos;t ankämpfen it , so you accept it and find them to work with it .
it &apos;s very hard to vote .
it &apos;s wetteifernd and zielgerichtet .
pizza , you get a pizza , if you hunger .
there are millions of different types of information .
so remember , when we think about sexual education and activity , you &apos;re out in baseball .
it &apos;s from the poet yuan chen and it &apos;s like , &quot; i can &apos;t bear the bambusmatte .
and that is , &quot; how much percentage of the day you think of this person ? &quot;
in the 175 societies , people have left people of this machtvollen gehirnstruktur .
they came to 60-80 percent of the abendessens .
and it was really becoming a strong force .
and i said , &quot; why do you think men are more untreuer than women ? &quot;
at no time on this planet , the women were so educated , so interesting , so interesting .
she &apos;s 23 she has been 13 .
i started to fagen why you &apos;re in love with one person in the other .
they will pass as long as the human race is based on what shakespeare called &quot; this sterbliche spiral . &quot;
but unfortunately , i know it .
most researchers believe that obesity is the cause of resistance .
perhaps we should ask ourselves if it could be that resistance is the cause of disease disease and disease disease -- at least in most people ?
others , it &apos;s too much nahrungsfett .
peter attia : what if our views were wrong about diabetes ?
my grandfather , henry ford , believed that it was the mission of ford motor company , and we were to improve people &apos;s lives and make cars affordable .
and the good news is that we are now taking the big problems of cars and environment -- not only in ford , but in total as an industry .
i think you can imagine it .
but what really inspired me is the possibilities we will have when our cars start communicating with each other .
we need an infrastructure that &apos;s able to support this flexible future .
this is a minute 59. .
i think , now my mother , i &apos;m kind of innenarchitekt .
the nurse need to put data on data .
that &apos;s really important . it &apos;s a lot . &quot;
so what &apos;s the coming out of this ?
and we were great for us , because we won a lot of awards .
i was infected when i was 17 , when a student student , i found adults who really believed me in my ideas , herausforderten me and drinking many tassen chai with me .
now it &apos;s just about the children . we don &apos;t zögerten .
and essentially , we gave the children a simple task .
for our auction , we have a couple wonderful images for them , for a really good purpose , the money that they give us , is used to buy the hörgeräte .
but what i never said and what i want to do is that umweltfreundlichkeit is cool .
in a way , in a way , in a way , in the elegant or the alternativ product , we have großzügigerweise , which is the maxin , which is a more different kind of development -- and inspired by the incredible kind of experience experience .
if you think about the change in our society , the zuzug of the country , the cities that has taken 200 years , the same process is going to happen in 20 years .
it looked at changes , even though they were still known .
so for example , we would put the models under an artificial sky .
i think reduction in altitude of 94 percent is in rein .
and how do we make a little bit of a lesbarer world , especially in some places i &apos;m talking about -- china , for example , which will build 400 new airports in the next 10 years .
and this is the focus of the 18-minütigen talk -- there &apos;s no lighting in the positive sense that is healthy and fördert our well-being , without appropriate darkness .
in contrast to the first office , i showed you at the beginning of the talk , this is a very famous office , which is that the white-gruppe .
behind you , you see the seagram building that later became a symbol of modern lichtdesigns .
i find what you see here is quite amazing -- how much light in the sky is strahlt and never reach the ground .
it &apos;s not very pleasant and behaglich .
they &apos;re not going to be gestört anymore .
when we have a few weeks earlier , a war in india , ankündigt war in a third of india , about 200 distrikte , the unregierbar , it &apos;s been missing the issue .
and one day -- i don &apos;t know what happened -- while i was on the office , i might see a honigbiene , or it came to me in the sense : could i be like a honigbiene , would be wonderful .
ag : but what is it for ? what was it used ?
to do what to do ?
that &apos;s the only place where they could express their creativity .
they don &apos;t want a second election of standards and qualitätsprodukten .
and that &apos;s what mansukh bhai prajapati made .
i had to my loved ones .
mr. kharai , who &apos;s a physical challenge , is only 50 inches tall .
assam , kanak gogoi .
this is erfreulich .
these are 3,2 billion people .
or skifahren . it &apos;s just fun and people love to do it and do fun things .
so we &apos;ve been very hard , but we knew that it wasn &apos;t so hard to develop the technology as the acceptance of what the acceptance is important and how technology can be used .
cars are not made to park each other ; they &apos;re wonderful machinen to drive with them between cities and forth , but think about it : we &apos;ve solved all the problems in terms of grasp and velocity .
so if we could put this box in a few years , we could have a solution for transportation , electricity and communication , and maybe drinking water in a sustainable package that weighs 60 pounds ?
so , implizit or explicitly is suggesting that people who die in the drug industry are somehow involved in the drug industry , and that &apos;s what we take the fact that they either tortured or professional or professionell or professionell or either .
los zetas are being represented as a bande of a psychopath , the fear and horror in cities and make the press the silence , and that &apos;s also true for most of the time .
in fact , in the united states and the united states , it &apos;s now to be a truly international organization that has been around the south and global partnerships in global distribution .
but also part of being a monatlich magazine -- you live in the future , and we have a long time .
and after you think under a critical price , you tends to be successful , in case you &apos;re successful , a critical mass of anzusteigen , a breakthrough .
but they become very , very cheap , and you look at the interesting effects . if you become cheaper , the brands are losing the sonys and the way , marktanteile and the no-names , the apexe , they win .
if you look at this , linux is in red , it &apos;s reached 20 percent .
open to open , is really , you know , the gift of the silicon world .
because of some of the technologies we &apos;ve been talking about .
patient capital works in between and trying to take the best out of the two .
and then , for the second , it had to be extremely cheap .
president obama understands that .
because one of the poorest farmers in the world have found access to a technology that has enabled him to change their lives .
and yet , these are the characteristics of the men and women are honored by all the generations .
they remember , during the wirbelsturms , msnbc berichtete in his blog on the wirbelsturm and aktualisierte it often . that was just possible because blogs are easy to use .
i like music , and i like banjos , and i think i heard steve martin play and i said , i can do that .
i wrote this post , and i took this to einstein .
and you see this one .
these little things .
and maybe i have to schluchzen , because i &apos;m running out of that .
it has been nachhaltig since history , except from our generation .
we need to use this procedure to get a better understanding of the way the oceans works .
we &apos;ve been studying these fish in a eingehend , but we had to learn how to keep them .
but it &apos;s only half the size of the greatest tuna we &apos;ve ever been labeled .
they come together . that could be sex under the thunfischen , and there &apos;s it .
you can auswerfen a lure -- it &apos;s teppichförmig like a seal -- and a white shark will go on it , a neugierige creature that &apos;s very close to our 16 foot on the side of the foot .
and then these animals actually give us an even one encore by helping us .
and the white shark .
i think he didn &apos;t think the records of my termine were so precise .
they said , &quot; apart from the one that we &apos;ve been talking about , are they among groups that want to harm the united states ? &quot;
you don &apos;t have to waste your energy .
now , who &apos;s looking at my bankauszüge , and i &apos;ve been there , and i know i was on the ninth may , in the safeway vallejo getankt .
all few moments i &apos;ll put a zeitstempel on my life .
when i started with the project , people said , &quot; why would you want to tell everybody what you &apos;re doing and where you are ?
now it &apos;s normal .
now , look at this heatmap of paris to see how incredibly fast growth is .
i &apos;ve looked at thousands of these marktplätze and trust and efficiency are always the ausschlaggebende elements .
how do we get to be built by face to face ?
i was sort of a mind in the system .
this side gets fünfeinhalbtausend , and 80 percent of them get precise answer .
i want to start with a paradox .
and here you see it in the relationship with the degree of inequality i showed you that i &apos;m going to come back again .
first with the rich , developed countries , and then in a second second , again , the 50 american states , in the same question , do the more unequal states on all of these scales worse ?
with a devastating impact that &apos;s going to be affected with the people &apos;s population .
and in our analysis of america , we find the same as opposed .
the social judgments judgments , and fear of these judgment .
or for example , the reason violence is more common in more unequal societies is because people are sensitive to become more verachtet .
one year , more than three million amputierte , a new knee or a ersatzknie .
you remember , as a kamal , the kamal was still the bambusstab .
if you wear it under pants or a rock , or a sari , it &apos;s very clear that you wear a prosthetic , and in societies , in societies , disability with a social stigma , people are very sensitive .
so thank you .
you want a dirty magazine ?
i even bought the vergoldete sondermodell , and there &apos;s a little paper paper on that says , &quot; use these saftpresse , to pressen juice .
these are the results from one to 20 times , &quot; it &apos;s just as many o &quot; google &quot; as a lot of time .
very fear of lähmt .
but if you always were in this state , work would never be done , because you would suddenly say , &quot; oh , i &apos;ve found a new way to do it . &quot;
almost everything we do is subconscious .
it &apos;s about being safe in this world .
if the theme of the park was a rostig and would fall apart , you would never go to a ride .
it &apos;s a very small sample -- you should not get the results .
i &apos;m going to talk to kids and self-organization and a series of experiments that led me to the idea of what an alternative education might be like .
and the night , this day , 70 70 children on the internet .
so i could actually choose a stichproben to meet a querschnitt that , in part of the world , is represented .
what you &apos;re obviously seeing is a kid who &apos;s operating the computer .
natural systems are all selbst-organisiert : galaxies , molecules , cells , organisms , organisms -- except for the discussion , about the theory of &quot; smart designers . &quot;
and it &apos;s about wiederentdeckung idealism in this whole .
i bought a nice suit and wearing shoes with ledersohle and i had this remarkable access that i had to weltereignissen .
but 2002 , when my tour went to the end , i decided i couldn &apos;t go back to the job that was waiting for me in london .
i felt something was destroyed .
and i went through . i went through those numbers .
and i went into kosovo and beriet the government .
independent diplomat is part of a trends that comes out the world , obviously , and shows that the world is fragmentiert .
it &apos;s terrible , that they &apos;re actually affected , not konsultieren .
this is the politics of the 21st century , and in a certain sense , independent diplomat diplomat this zersplitterung , this change that happens to us all .
&quot; hey , could you bring me back to me ? &quot;
because when we go back to the beziehungskrise , they understood that practice , that a simple mistake can tell you what you don &apos;t , or remember , can remember why you love something .
we feel awe , compassion .
here we go .
what &apos;s the number one ?
no . in the &apos; 70s , the richtungsweisende show was the sieben-millionen-dollar-frau show , the 1973 , 1973 in , followed by the top 10 , and &quot; three angels for charlie . &quot;
i can choose it from the island .
and i &apos;m very pleased to discuss with you , i &apos;m going to go and say , &quot; can somebody me tell me the way , and why that &apos;s so cool ? &quot;
next , this virus-dna stuff that zerstückelt the bakterien-dna stuff .
for a series of reasons .
or even worse , naturwissenschaftliche education is always going to be more like the guy who always says , &quot; actually , &quot; you know . &quot;
but we have so much work in front of us , and if somebody involved in science , i would like to join with me .
we climb up the staircase and we see a whole thing that changed .
so many books of war are the same thing , which is that nothing people are bringing together as well as war .
and durkheim believed that everything that united us , the seem of the heiligkeit .
he continued to say that &quot; selbstlose and streitsüchtige people don &apos;t be able to hold together and without zusammenhalt , can &apos;t be moved . &quot;
it uses the other .
once they were all in a same tribe , they could keep the benefits of cooperation for themselves .
it &apos;s about connecting to others , to make ethical ideas .
jh : thank you .
i realized , quickly , that männerbereiche is not just going to be inside .
and right next to the garage , he has his own trophäenraum , where he can sonnen in his achievements , which is a more important role in männerbereichen .
everything is always easier to design , and here &apos;s this riesenflughafen , and , my god , i just photographed it .
&quot; the end of print &quot; now is going to be printed .
this book is called &quot; probes . &quot; it &apos;s another word for a quote .
this is actually an experiment for a client , quicksilver , where we took a sequence of six photos and tried to bring people to the same medium on the internet .
they said they didn &apos;t like them .
an article about brian ferry -- a really boring article -- so i put the whole article on it .
somebody told me today , there are these things that are called the ordner , but i don &apos;t know what that is .
that &apos;s pretty high for most of the professions .
before that , obviously , no technology , but obviously .
this is not another planet . these are things that are hidden on our planet .
and i &apos;ll last end of these nacktschnecke .
this is niles eldredge- , and he was with stephen jay &apos;s gould mitentwickler &apos;s theory of the punktualismus .
we heard about japanern , who give up guns .
and i think that &apos;s really important . because if you can imagine mozart before the invention of the technology &apos;s technology -- what would be a loss for society .
and i was very young for the first time i was very young .
he &apos;s reaching again , takes a arm full of kies , let it go -- &quot; tschk tschk tschk tschk tschk ! &quot; -- the same thing .
but the point is : we were a month , and i wanted to get used to the animals so that we could see their behaviors , without stören them .
and when you go down to the bottom , the lovely blue water you leave them in the beginning has always been dunkelblauer and dunkelblauer .
but there &apos;s no sun down there , there &apos;s no photosynthesis . it &apos;s a chemosynthetische world down there that &apos;s a lenkt , and it &apos;s all so vergänglich .
but i also saw the exact opposite of the opposite .
everyone talks with each one . then it &apos;s not a isolierten dots on a map , and it &apos;s a network that we &apos;ve created .
she was a hausfrau , and she didn &apos;t go and i went to go like little girls , and she didn &apos;t buy a pink clothes , i didn &apos;t buy a pink clothes .
my parents had a child , and my sister was arrested .
cities are the schmelztiegel of civilization .
is edinburgh a horse ?
we &apos;re going to have our entire economy , so shown in the corner left : hockeyschläger .
the heart rate is rising , and they live longer , diffusion of sauerstof and nutrients from the membranes , etc . , etc .
and the most important thing is that the exponent , the equivalent to the drei-viertel-rate , bigger than one , is that kind of ungefähr .
they &apos;re rapidly growing and stop , part of our wiederstandsfähigkeit .
it looks like a hockeyschläger .
children in the 12th are less begeistert by political systems .
he had to speak to a high school in our near .
my students made this infografiken as a result of a task that we had put in terms of the oil oil .
this is my lieblingsfoto because it was tuesday when i was doing a tuesday when i was going to go to the students .
and with that one is .
actually , you could -- -- that &apos;s not a way .
it &apos;s a grobkonzept .
and he asked a very important question .
and i &apos;m going to show you the 15 million dollars of a picture .
you can see the stem cells out again .
many of these patients are hard burned .
the european union , the same .
and even though i have no patents , i &apos;m aware of that , you &apos;ll be able to meet some of my inventions today .
you know , of course , what that means .
and they have all of these progress in such short time . they &apos;re all so young .
thank you .
in school -- actually , i have an organization that makes a führungsding , you know , like you , you would like it , and that &apos;s how .
she was very schick too , but she was so full of ennui .
my daughter -- my daughter has written that , she told me , &quot; start your talk with humor . &quot;
i &apos;m a gay . &quot;
i want to hold your hand .
and then finally , i got a call that i should be speaking directly to j.j. abrams .
and i thought , if i could write books , where this world was tiny and connected , i could be maybe people in the problems that affect us all , and perhaps even move to improve the world .
and john said , &quot; bet on good people doing good .
there were no specific media companies focused on the public interest .
i thought the problem came to us in a more 30-50 years .
i learned that there &apos;s not just a right way to change .
what do you think like a lot of police are on this taxi ? well , three .
now look at this . this is the anästhesie-gerät .
yes , the medical advice of the vorstandsvorsitzenden , &quot; yes , i said you , they don &apos;t do it , that &apos;s not going to be , i &apos;m going to see it . &quot;
that &apos;s our first patient , just out of the intensivbehandlung , and now look at this chair .
that &apos;s the grundzüge of my apparates , or our apparats .
i need to serve . &quot;
this is in the parliament parliament .
they put them on a very special nährstoffreiche diet and they &apos;re using it with big care .
his app was first wiedereingestellt when he won the pulitzer prize .
but there were a lot of argument in tunisia , how to be mr. , you know , was going to be mr. .
so we have the situation in the world today where there are now more countries that are being trained to the citizens and the government of the internet , which is managed by largely private services .
rebecca maxkinnon : let &apos;s get the internet back .
they won &apos;t all the four years in the gewichtheben and the olympics . they were the big berühmtheiten of communism . with a great lifestyle that was associated with it .
the european union , which is the time of harvest the fruits of globalization . they &#91; the &#93; union &#93; became the richest konsumentenmarkt in the story of a total 500 million people in the history of total 500 million people .
in 1994 , for seven years , 20 of these boats were over the adria of montenegro , every single night .
let me get to the 1x1 of organized crime .
i &apos;d like to introduce you to mr. pringle .
they affect our bankkonten .
i mean , if i &apos;m a good darwinist , i have to believe that there is a reason for that .
this made him very unbeliebt . they didn &apos;t want to go back .
it has been since 1960 , when a alister hardy , a meeresbiologe , said , &quot; i think our ancestors may have lived for a while in the water for a while . &quot;
so absolute connection , it &apos;s only going to be in one direction .
and then the fact that we &apos;re in a stromlinienförmig .
for example , professor tobias . he understood it .
so when it comes , and when it &apos;s going to happen , who or what is it going to do ?
one : i want to make as an zeitig as possible .
yeah , i was hanging on a few google-typen .
you see , somehow , in the lives of other people and i have the feeling that i get a lot of inspiration from the user .
this is called &quot; atheist . &quot;
online , you &apos;ve seen a lot of seen .
performer and web-toymaker ze frank gives frank amüsante standup-show and tells us what he &apos;s passionate about : people help , with little suchterzeugenden web-programmen and interact .
the answer is quite strange .
so , point 4 : say to people , &quot; if you don &apos;t give me the information , i offer my help . &quot;
and every time i &apos;m talking about what i do , i at least want to respond to the reason why bodies are important .
so this particular instrument is called the auf-den-bauch-hörer .
they schrumpfen and melt at the same time -- and some are all disappeared .
it would be no big problem , because if we were in todesgefahr , we would be buried our streitereien , invest everything , which would be necessary and find a way to get them off .
this is data from the haushaltsbüro of congress , showing the realistischste prediction of what would happen when the current circumstances and trends continue .
the rocks is sacred , and when people circle together , they join together , they can trust each other , they become one .
so the bloods and the crips , which is the page to vote .
for a lot of reasons , the decades of reasons for the second world war ii a historic time .
there we are as a country .
we &apos;re going to be a nation with two classes .
this is really a social disaster , and the liberals are very concerned about it .
but that &apos;s not yet . so i have to make it .
they &apos;ve been since ancient times in the architecture .
you see that schaubildern , the protocell actually go off the light and move to the dark side of the light .
i &apos;ve been managed to do it for almost three decades of hospitals . i &apos;m most proud of it .
instead , i &apos;m a ordentliche professor of law , psychology and psychiatric at the usc &apos;s usc school of law , i have a lot of good friends and a dear husband , who &apos;s here today .
i quote from my writings : &quot; i had rebel with my kommilitonen and val val at the freitagabend verabredet , where we wanted to work on a assignment .
and then they banden me and they were fest legs at the bed .
i &apos;ve never met a psychiatriepatienten who would have agreed that view .
i could leave it immediately , and we could do it all over a diskret . &apos; ha ha ha .
the american state of the state are full of people who are hard to have trouble , and many of them are there because they never got a reasonable therapy .
so , at stanford , we decided to build another car car .
these are four billion hours that will be vergeudet in this country alone .
in short , there was plenty of water and not very many people .
the montana montana have already done a lot to reduce their water footprint , but they still use millions of people in water .
it &apos;s paid to leave the water in the stream .
i don &apos;t like to have a problem , without the anzuerkennen that work with the solution , so i want to highlight here , like &quot; mad men &quot; and movies like &quot; brautalarm , &quot; which is &quot; mad characters and hauptfiguren &quot; and vielseitig .
his name is a matthieu ricard .
i know there &apos;s other companies in the world with compassion , but google is the environment that i know because i &apos;m 10 years . so i &apos;m going to use google as a study .
well , it turns out google is a company with compassion because it &apos;s a googler that compassion is fun .
and you get the morning to work , and you have three colleagues who are going to decide to build a hospital in india .
there are three steps .
and i hope compassion will be both fun for them as well as a profit .
but one day the perfect case . it was a gemüseverkäuferin sitting in front of her house .
i met with one of the entwicklungsbüros , which was done the training of staatsanwälten and richtern , which is the normal tendency to the verteidigern .
people often tell me , &quot; you know , it &apos;s wonderful , but it &apos;s highly idealistisch .
in the same trance-zustand , you can sometimes experience when you &apos;re sitting in the new york subway and reading this light and light feeling .
different parts of the world have a händchen for different things .
and at the same time , the beautiful piece of takeshi ishiguro , who made these beautiful salz- and pfefferstreuer from reisteig .
but the objects erstreckten out of complete water minenräum-ausrüstungen at this kind of water sterilisierungsstrohhalmen , it was really , really wide gefächert .
even this chair you open and then sit down , so you get the abdruck of the world , and that beautiful series of objects that are considered design for me in the barcelona .
what has image to do with it ?
instead , they developed a very interesting approach to my education -- which is that they would send me to a school that they could barely afford .
my last story , and i have to go a little bit .
and he died when the krankenwagen was already on the way to get him to the hospital .
and so , you know , is a way of being a way to do that .
just jump .
and we need to start to question our leaders of our leaders .
my cousin couldn &apos;t afford to school , and she &apos;s very clever .
and if you don &apos;t take you , you know , you know , you know .
the country was divided of politics and religion .
so our political problems .
veränderer and future leaders were shaped .
he helped in a birth in a birth .
it &apos;s the heart of medicine .
i &apos;m going to sell these easy to the world .
now , when i got that , i was -- push the feststelltaste -- completely except for me , you know ?
now , a few weeks , a big girl will be a big girl .
and as you can see , the life expectancy was short .
life expectancy has gone up to 78. .
this is the absolutely best technology for this region : entsalzung .
let &apos;s start with the water .
but you have to share this with the world .
the generation of y seems to be anzuklopfen .
100,000 people gather up to a nonviolent march and an idiot or lockspitzel throwing a stone . guess if you &apos;re going to get the camera down and the camera . this guy .
and it &apos;s also about humor , humor is such a strong force that can turn the game , and he also played a very large role in poland .
now , the 1-million-dollar-frage : how will it go on in the arab world ?
and she said , &quot; i saw your talk in live .
i said , &quot; if 500 to 1,000 or 2,000 , my life is over . &quot;
there &apos;s nothing more than that .
and i see it .
and everybody broke up in round and he said &quot; yes ! &quot;
i know your dad was never in luxembourg , he was sing in sing .
the other thing you need to know about shame is absolutely organized by gender .
i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
we want to be with them and to them .
and when we jump and abschlagen ...
if i had an ant in rice , i couldn &apos;t see it .
this helped us create a very ethical and very strong organization , and a system that &apos;s supported it .
we have a simple camera camera in a retinalkamera , and we can do this way in that way that a doctor can be done by a doctor for any patient .
our revenues are clearly more than the way we have a healthy profit , and that although we treat a lot of people .
that &apos;s a difficult job .
for example , we can add digital content with physical mass .
wouldn &apos;t that be a way to make cell phones intuitive ?
it was like they couldn &apos;t see me as if i was invisible .
and also , no one ever heard a unterwasser-rollstuhl or seen , and this is an act of the same way that means the creation of the new ways of being , being , and knowledge , because now they have this concept in their mind .
like bp , the hole will put out the hole , at least , but not without a huge price .
don &apos;t be ashamed of it .
and it &apos;s also the story of modern capitalism , because it was the wealth of this country that created our system that &apos;s built into our system , a system that can &apos;t survive without stetiges growth and endlosen supplies of the planet .
oil is not liquid .
now you may have seen more headlines like this .
great show . man , that was good .
bf : ... as well in the left .
dh : all right , please stand here , please .
rm : can i hold it ?
dh : power , you know , you know ?
dh : you go .
dh : the french judge .
dh : i have it -- -- to put the keule down there with my grasp of steel .
bf : from six to seven . dh : this is the world &apos;s record . bf : really ? dh : dh : for us .
he &apos;s less known than the two , because he had this idea to build mechanical rechengeräte and never built one .
but if you were , you would see something that &apos;s very similar to this .
this is from a paper that you &apos;ll übersetzte .
there are plans .
you know the problem that we don &apos;t want to believe what we know .
we don &apos;t want to believe what we know .
second romeo and julia , sassi and panno , dodi and diana , heer and ranjha , that &apos;s love .
13 years after i &apos;m in a wheelchair , i have made more in the wheelchair in a wheelchair than outside him .
in generations , we have been raised our children as much as millions of other species of other species .
but it &apos;s not a regular movie .
but if i took a base on every screen of this screen with the resolution x x , x distributed , we would need 3,000 screens to be able to look at the genome .
what does this mean for medicine ?
and so he sequenced the genomes of his children .
it &apos;s because there would be somebody in the audience who would be willing to stop .
imagine in the year of the year , the only kandidatin of the world &apos;s not only published their four years of steuereinnahmen , but their personal genome .
and so i &apos;m going to ask you all to aufzuwachen and join and the genomische revolution that &apos;s happening around you .
and we have a flexiblen , angetriebenen , katheter , with a special drahtschlaufenspitze , which is within a solid part of the ice and moving the edges of the hip .
hopefully , this technology will allow us to see the future of this survivors .
on the stick , what the rehearsal abstrahlt is , the switch of the gas and schrödinger the schrödinger .
so exciting . it can make the difference of the early possible possible possible , so we &apos;ll be able to detect some new particles .
the most famous charge is the electric .
they tell us what changes are allowed .
but that &apos;s what unified theories work .
it &apos;s a lot of keeping it for the most beautiful structure in mathematics .
the only way to get your mental health , in the midst of the uncertainty , and experience happiness is to keep balance and a perspective in life .
the patterns of dots i showed you , actually describe symmetries of this höherdimensionalen gebildes that verbiegt , moving and dance on the erlebbaren space-time .
and we &apos;ve heard about the story , from the family of humankind , by genetic dna-profilierung .
in the schimpansengesellschaft , we find many , many examples of compassion , for love and real altruism .
most important , i think it &apos;s to work with small groups of women , to give them the opportunity for the recording of mikro-krediten .
and you know what i mean . i &apos;m talking about pollution .
take the ziegelmauer for all the problems we have on the planet , in terms of environment and social . it &apos;s a message of hope .
and ungewollte schwangerschaften and similar things that young people hear better from other teenagers than adults .
this change , this change , change that is necessary to see if we care about the future .
working with the plastic , about the first eight years , some of my pieces started to fall apart and break into smaller plastikstückchen .
recycling . everybody finished about his book about erträglichkeit ecology with the idea of recycling .
so i &apos;m here , and i &apos;ve been going to show our recent recent attempt trying to go in the middle of development .
the author of the book is juan , our vorheriger referent . it &apos;s going to be done by amazon .
at that time , we knew that was a political thing .
at 15 years , i lost a child , a second when i was 16 .
i know what it means , and when a crime is happening , a person should be beurteilt and punished . &quot;
but what if it wasn &apos;t that ?
after a few misslungenen prototypes , i finally thought of this , which is the lifesaver-flasche .
add that . you know .
okay . the lifesaver-flasche is used by thousands of people around the world .
or we could use one of these .
mao tse tung described her as the european civil war , and that &apos;s probably a more accurate description .
i think , by the way , ladies and gentlemen , that &apos;s probably not that the world &apos;s gründung possible .
they &apos;re starting to see the world &apos;s hervortreten world .
but this is not the case .
the wechselbeziehungen of nations , now we &apos;ve had it .
but now one last thing .
but if you ask the durchschnittsamerikaner , what the optimal formula for a long life is , he may not be able to tell you .
it reminds me of my college .
and the research shows that these years are largely free of chronic disease , heart disease , cancer and diabetes .
they have what we want .
we &apos;re currently in half .
and for a while , we looked at the prärien minnesotas , where there &apos;s actually a high percentage of 100-jährigen .
instead , they talk about the next trip in nature , trade recipes , and yes , you pray .
it &apos;s been successful at nine herunterzubrechen .
they tend to feed their food supply .
for the little example that i &apos;m holding in the hand , we used a berührungssensor that responds to my skin by lights up this little light .
so often , amateurs , no experts , the inventor and verbesserer of things like mountain bikes , halbleitern , computer , flugzeugen , airplane .
and then , the computer was still big , big things that were only interested in the world , and nobody just dreamed of having a house at home .
you just have your eyes to get there .
i mean , i mean , he &apos;s been seen .
and so we did this driver and look at the driver .
and i said , &quot; i can &apos;t bring them , but i can put them in the zero zero , zero g. .
we had four notfallärzte and two nurses on the plane .
and actually , you can now show some images because i don &apos;t want to see on the screen .
no life , from the smallest life to all of us here , would be able to do this little mikro-maschinen .
i duschte on campingplätzen . i was eating food .
i didn &apos;t change my i.q. . my i.q. was not down .
i was a writer .
so , no one would be planning to accept family planning if your child didn &apos;t survive .
and then we decided to use why not use religion , because in the philippines , the catholic church was quite strong , and thailänder is the buddhist .
we did the first mikrokreditprogramm , and the women who were organized it , and they said , &quot; we just want to borrow in family planning .
you can call it the coca-cola of a coca-cola , if you like . it &apos;s the same thing .
and then aids education in all schools , started in university .
and then here , the american flag , &quot; don &apos;t go home . &quot;
these are things that are made by the world .
can you imagine , you can get condoms , you can get condoms ?
it may not be scary or scary .
so i &apos;m going to take a picture .
so you can simulate this behavior in the browser , which romo is right now on the left .
i want to tell you about my four minutes of the ted .
people like you all here in this room .
she was elegant , like a giraffe savanne , the flag on her shoulder . i was joggte on her shoulder -- -- on the zehenspitzen , the flag with his arms arm , so my head disappeared under the damn thing .
i &apos;ve been working with women and women .
and what &apos;s going on is that the only solution is to draw the teeth .
she brings the women to plant new trees and to wässern , drop in drop .
women and children , especially the poor , are the bottom .
if you sell to early , you get the profit , but if you wait for a long time to sell , all the time , the course .
you can see the peaks .
the challenge for the uninformierten player is whether he believes , the other is fair or that it &apos;s not going to be geboten to it so that he thinks only one or two dollars in the available are available .
now i &apos;m going to show you some of your relatives .
we can try and do it . maybe we &apos;ll .
so what do we have learned to do ?
about 10 calories , it takes about 10 calories to produce food that we consume in the west .
so how did you feed a city like this ?
and in the middle of the middle east , in cheapside , they &apos;re offered to the sale . that &apos;s why it &apos;s called poultry .
and at that point , our relationship changes completely , both to the food and the cities .
the word &quot; utopie &quot; using thomas moore &apos;s .
dampfende piles of humus .
we need to understand that the world is also what we eat .
she &apos;s the source of all morality , this fantasievolle act of einfühlung , putting themselves in the other place of another .
and i see that it requires a scharfe intelligence , not just a schnulziges feeling .
in the current fertigungsindustrie we have wolkenkratzer -- two and a half and a half to a million parts , pretty complex , new and exciting technologies from steel , concrete , glass .
the next project is about asking the passive nature or the passive attempt to do rekonfiguration programmierbar .
so basically , you have a chain of elements .
when i was in beloit , wisconsin , i was a public talk to a group of students in middle school .
often , we &apos;re looking for erregern of atemwegserkrankungen like flu .
there are unbekanntes everywhere around us , and it &apos;s just waiting to be discovered .
could we now switch off the lights , so we can see it ?
so we &apos;re chemical ausblühungen that are different . our kind of chemical ausblühung has a allgemeingültigkeit .
but i have to say , and i &apos;m asking for him , richard -- that i never liked biological exkursionen , and i think we &apos;ve been able to do a few hundred million years in the few few hundred years .
everybody &apos;s talking about doing services , a reduction of abgasmengen , to get any price .
he realized that it &apos;s possible to make different laws that the economy enable small profit to have so incentives to win more customer .
both are dark in comparison to puerto rico , which has half the other people as haiti or the dominikanische republic .
one of these zones next to hong kong is a lot of shenzhen .
people can come to live under the freibrief , but nobody is forced to do it .
a lot of those people have understood the idea of the sonderzonen that people can participate in rules .
how would we write such a abkommen ?
you thought in genomics a little bit more than 10 years ago , you could have sequenced this year to the end of the year between three and five genomes , and they &apos;re already hundreds .
if there &apos;s a lot of chlorophyll , it &apos;s a much green light .
the number of common genes have a little bit of the time we &apos;re going to do a intrazellulären parasite , and it &apos;s been bigger , if we focused on certain genes of genes , in about 310 .
it adds its genome after radiation through the chromosomes broken into small pieces , and then again , within 12 to 24 hours .
let me end with ethical and political research .
of course , the wait for the wait for you to be marshmallows .
we call them &quot; zukunftsorientiert . &quot; they &apos;re focusing on what &apos;s going to be .
and it &apos;s also me . i grew up as poor child a child &apos;s family in the south bronx , and everyone lived in the past and in the presence .
let &apos;s take the area of medicine .
here &apos;s a beautiful picture of the andromedanebels , the largest spiralgalaxie in the unmittelbarer near our milky way .
it &apos;s cold , gespenstisch and neblig , maybe it rain , and maybe it &apos;s on the bank of a michigansees randvoll with farbverdünner .
i can &apos;t tell you how this was , the first images of the probe of the probe of the probe of the surface of the surface , and this was what we saw .
so here we see a movie of the titans äquatorregion that shows these dunes . these dunes are 100 feet up , and they have a distance of miles away and erstrecken and erstrecken and meilenweit .
until now the earth is still the only planet , where we know it &apos;s full of life .
they had lost 40 percent of their country and would have been umringt , so they had no free access to the rest of the west .
demonstrant : this is a friedlicher protestmarsch .
so we organized a performance .
and it only took me four days .
and then , like the rest of the brain , it &apos;s made of neurons .
in the eingängen of the area , you actually find cells which are in the same area that are very sensitive to the limits of borders or edges in a particular distance and direction to the rat or the mouse , if you &apos;re studying the environment .
and this would be represented by the firing of the grenzortungszellen .
he wasn &apos;t the only man who had a amerika with a bürgrechte , and he was not the only great person in his time .
and why should be interested in this ?
people don &apos;t buy what they do , but why they do it .
the neocortex is responsible for all our rational and analytischen thoughts and language .
they &apos;re always the same three things , so we look at it .
and if you talk about what you believe , you will get the attract , who believe you believe .
the reason that people bought an iphone in the first six hours of hours were in the line , their worldview , and her will will be , everybody sees them . they were the first .
people don &apos;t buy what they do , they buy them why they do it . and what they do is just as evidence as evidence of what they believe .
and , by the way , he thought that &quot; i have a dream &quot; -rede , &quot; i don &apos;t have the plan . &quot;
i will never forget how cartoons in cartoons to rauschten .
when this office office for wirtschaftsförderung in washington , d.c. , the geigers clinic , they were wutentbrannt .
and we decided to use recipes to this purpose .
what if we had a waiting room where you don &apos;t just just get a herumsitzt , if you &apos;re sick , but you get to get healthy .
and they leave with the belief , the ability and the efficiency , our most fundamental hopes in public health .
i think that &apos;s when we evaluate our health care , not to the kranken who have been cured , but it &apos;s been being stopped by the disease that were preventing .
the piraterie now is a real danger in the world , but this is in indian ocean .
we caught it with this low-tech-floß . we &apos;ve got six tons of cocaine .
85 percent of you can &apos;t read when you enter the afghan afghan .
multiply this 400.000-mal. that eröffnet cooperation with sicherheitskräften , which is completely different from the world .
i really do .
remember , this is a fun of me , when the floridawahlen were , you know , count the dots for gore , count the points for bush . count again .
the circles represent the countries .
some countries have statistics on it .
but we need to go through the united states a whole bit of the united states to find the same health that we have on the philippines today .
and that &apos;s what happens to happen .
this looks like a happy story .
what you earn here -- you know , what you live in your life is , it &apos;s the same way .
it &apos;s about having food .
it &apos;s this stupid concept of the developing world that we did , argentina and the mosambik , 50 years ago , and said that the u.k. has been able to evolve .
governance . a working government -- that &apos;s led california from the misere of the 1850 .
and i showed the approach , as the seemingly impossible will possible .
and the enemy was quite weak .
we are -- despite skepsis -- einmarschiert with leichtigkeit in afghanistan .
&quot; it &apos;s not an ideal world . &quot; &quot; and its government also brings us not .
what would a set of rules look like ?
and what we need to do is a kompetente sytemadministratur .
do you want a better system ?
and the doctor told him he should just not move .
&quot; who attacks us , is the end of the world . &quot;
the force force is only rarely left out of the gehege .
it &apos;s hierum .
air force , strategic luftbrücke .
thomas barnett shows a new way to peace to peace .
i don &apos;t want to be too much too much .
here you see the pinatubo in the early 90-zigern , which led a lot of sulfur into the stratosphere with a kind of a atombomben cloud .
this report ended up on president jonsons &apos;s desk when i was two years old .
but let &apos;s say , you have sunlight , which hits the particles and it &apos;s ungleichmäßig .
i don &apos;t think that &apos;s going to happen . it &apos;s not very likely .
because we continue to take ourselves on this scenario and take away from the current climate .
not just how we do it better , but what are the risks and side effects ?
here you see a fish with a leuchtenden , pulsierenden eyes .
it &apos;s really incredible . there &apos;s two males .
and so i came to her freundliche invitation to just two days ago from the himalayas .
but if you look at the literature in east and west , you &apos;ll find incredibly different definitions of happiness .
well-being is a deeper sense of serenity and fulfillment , a state that actually durchdringt all the gefühlslagen and zugrundeliegt. and all the pleasure and worry that we can do .
we know from experience that we can be something that you call &quot; a little paradise , &quot; and that &apos;s a completely unhappy .
the mirror allows this , but the mirror is not going to be able to be , it &apos;s not changed by these images .
if you &apos;re always doing that , your slope will be up to the anger , with every time you get rid of it , geringer .
of course , we do that with the training .
we &apos;re ready to be aufzuwenden for 15 years for our education .
it &apos;s really a riesenproblem for us .
it &apos;s a schätzenswerter place . it &apos;s good designed .
you can see exactly what &apos;s going on , at night at three times the planungs-meeting .
not just blumenbeete , not just a cartoon of the sierra nevada .
this is actually a tv set that the show is normal , &quot; we &quot; are normal . &quot;
we &apos;re going to -- we have a eisenbahnnetz that would be ashamed of the world .
one last note -- that &apos;s been worried about me for years , but i think it &apos;s particularly important for this audience .
at this point , we &apos;re about two days from the entrance .
this is atmungssystem with geschlossenem &apos;s tape .
the ice can be deep in between five and 25 kilometers .
the sensorstrahlen at the same time look at the front , so it can do new sondierungen , while it &apos;s still going on in the eye , which has been behind .
for that , they would pay 10,000 dollars in orbit .
they say that you &apos;re going to move 10,000 foot per second , as you actually want to go back to the gas station .
and the right support , in seven years , can be done in seven years .
i &apos;m going to take you to go from the bühnen , because they asked the question .
they also formed a few company , where the brand doesn &apos;t work so well .
rb : no , no .
we have a video that shows what they &apos;re planning , and the virgin galactic in the air .
he wanted to jump , or he said , &quot; i &apos;ll go away . &quot;
ok , that &apos;s not hard .
i mean , here are many people who have children , and we have this dilemma , how we should educate them .
rb : our kronzeuge argumentierte , that it actually , &quot; forget the priest , here are sex pistos . &quot;
15,000 people would take our paper paper and said they would try it .
no , i want to live my life in all the wealth .
