you know , one of the great vernügen of the reisen , and one of the joys of the joys of research , in the people who are still going to remember the old days , they still have to feel the past , they &apos;re touching the wind of steinen steinen , they &apos;re touching the bitteren blättern of plants .
simply that jaguar-schamanen is still the way that jaguar-schamanen is still the way of the basic idea of the ability to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be the buddhisten of the anthropologie of the anthropologie , but the way that the buddhist world is going
and of course , we all share the same anpassungsnotwendigkeiten .
we &apos;re born all of all . we &apos;re going to bring children to the world .
we moved through the initiationsrituale .
we need to have the unaufhaltsamen trennung through death and so not surprise that we &apos;re all going to sing , and we can do all the singing and art .
but interesting is the unique side of the liedes , the rhythm of the dance in every culture .
and it &apos;s not a matter whether it &apos;s about the penan of grass , or the warrior in the anden , or a karawanserei middle in the sahara , or a karawanserei in the sahara , and this is not the colleague of the kollege , which i was in front of the desert , and even a yak-hirte on the outside of the qomolangma , everest , the
all of these people teach us that there are other forms of other ways , other ways of guidance on earth .
and this is a idea that if you think about it , just to make a hope .
together , together , the most unzähligen cultures of the world are a network of spirituellem and kulturellem , which is the earth &apos;s earth and the most important thing that is important as the biological lebensnetz that you know as biosphere .
you can imagine this cultural lebensnetz as a ethnosphäre , and ethnosphäre can be transformed than the gesamtsumme of all of the thoughts , and dreams , and intuitionen , and intuitionen , and the dreams that are being made by the human imagination , and the träume of the human imagination are defined by the human imagination .
the ethnosphäre is the great legacy of humanity .
it &apos;s the symbol of all of what we are and what we &apos;re capable of as amazing species .
and just like the biosphere , it was abgetragen , this was the ethnosphäre -- just with greater speed .
no biologist would be like saying , 50 percent of the species , and more than any species of the species that 50 percent are just right before the extinction , because it &apos;s just not true , and yet this -- it &apos;s not just the apokalyptischste of biological diversity -- is not what we &apos;re known as a optimistischstes in the field of cultural diversity .
and the key effect is that the extinction of languages .
as any one of you in this room was born , in the earth , were talking about the earth .
now a language isn &apos;t just the full of the vokabulars or a series of grammatikregeln .
a language is expression of human mind .
it &apos;s a means that the soul of a particular culture is to find the physical world .
each language is like a altbestehender forest of mind , a wendepunkt , a thought , an amazing possibilities .
and by these 6,000 languages today , we &apos;re sitting here in monterey here , exactly half of the children are not going to be more in the ears of children .
they &apos;re not going to be taught , and that means that if nothing comes to be done , they &apos;re actually dead .
what could be be to be the silence of being the silence of being a final voice , one of the people who speak to your language , who are talking to your language , the wisdom of the ancestral views of the ancestral , or the hope of the hope of the world ?
and yet , this horrible destiny , in the earth , about two weeks , because of all two weeks , because every two weeks , you die , a elderly man and takes the last silben language with the grave .
and i know some of you say , &quot; isn &apos;t it better ? &quot; wouldn &apos;t we have a better place , &quot; if we all have a better place , if we all have a better place , &quot; and i say , &quot; well , let &apos;s say , &quot; well , let &apos;s say , &quot; well , let &apos;s say , &quot; well , let
let &apos;s go out . &quot;
and then suddenly you would suddenly recognize how it would be if you could not speak your own language .
so i want to remind you today about a journey today , through the ethnosphäre , a short journey through the ethnosphäre to try to make them understand what actually has lost .
now there &apos;s some of us , who are the kind of gewissermaßen that i say , &quot; different ways of being the subject of the existence , &quot; really different ways of my own .
for example , for example , this kid in northwest the northwest state of the amazon , the people who are the people who are the milchfluss of the anakonda , the people who are mythologisch the milchfluss from the east from the east from the east to heiligen snakes .
this is a people which cannot be cognitively between the colors between the colors and green , because the himmelszelt of the forest , which is the people who are dependent .
they have a eigenartige language and a heiratsvorschrift called the linguistic exogamie , you have to marry someone who &apos;s a different language .
all of this is happening in the mythologischen , the eigenartige of these big houses in which due to the great houses in which the mischehen or seven languages are never going to hear someone who learns a language .
they just hear and start talking about it .
or one of the most fascinating strains i &apos;ve ever lived in the northeast of ecuador , a remarkable people that was in 1958 , the first time in 1958 was given in the year .
in 1957 , five missionare kontakt , and made a schwerwiegenden mistake .
they threw the fall of the fall of the air , which we would be able to judge as an extraordinary body , and they forgot that these people have never seen anything in their lives .
they took these photographs from the forest , trying to see the face , and the character that the character , and schlussfolgerten that this is the business of the devil and killed the five missionare with the spear .
but the waorani killed not only with the speer .
they &apos;re durchbohrten each other .
54 percent of deaths have been geschahen by durchbohrungen .
we went back to the geneaologie eight generations and found two instances of a natural death and when we were asked people with a few of the people that were so old about this , and he gave them to be a old person that he died and we killed him with the spear .
but at the same time , they had a clear kenntnis of the forests that was amazing .
their hunters could have been able to smell the urine of a tieres schritten , and determine what &apos;s happened to this animal kingdom .
in the early 1990s , i got a really astonishing job , when i was interested in harvard , and i was going to infiltrate the secret societies that were the foundation of duvalier and tonton macoutes , and the poison were used for making the gift to make sure .
to give this sense of the sense of a sense , i had to have a sense of a sense of course , and i know something about this remarkable faith of knowledge and voodoo is not a cult of the black magic .
in the opposite , it &apos;s a complex abstract .
it &apos;s interesting .
if i would ask you , the great weltreligionen , what would you say ?
christianity , islam , buddhism , judaismus , or whatever .
a continent is becoming , because the guess was that there was no religious religious belief in sub-saharan africa , and of course , there &apos;s a and voodoo , and it &apos;s just the natural überbleibsel of this very functional religious , that during the tragic diaspora of the tragischen diaspora .
but what makes it makes it interesting is that , this is the vibrant relationship between the living and the dead .
the living is going to be a geister .
the spirits can be heraufbeschwört from underneath the great water , answers to the rhythm of dance to provide the soul of living in the living , so that the akolyth for a brief moment for a very long moment for god .
deshab sagen , the voodooisten likes to say , &quot; your whites goes into the church and talk about god .
we dance in the temple and become god . &quot;
and because you &apos;re obsessed with you , you &apos;re going to be used by the mind , how can you get hurt damage ?
and you see this amazing thing : voodoo-akolythen in a trancezustand , die coal without combustion without verbrennung , a amazing one of the capacity of the mind that the body is so much to affect the body of the mind , if it &apos;s going to be a state of extreme arousal .
well , from all of all people i met , the kogi aus was kogi from the sierra nevada de marta , who was most of the most außergewöhnlichsten .
the old tyrannischen civilization that grew up to colombia and a consequence of the conquest of the conquest , the people in a isoliertes vulkanisches massiv , which is going to be aufsteigt over the karibischen küstenebene .
in a blutbefleckten continent , these people were the only ones that never had been completed by the spaniern .
until today , you &apos;re going to be a ritual priesthood , but the training for the priesthood is very extraordinary .
the young akolythen of three and four years of the darkness , in a schattenhaften world , at least in the fuße of the glaciers , two periods of years , for 18 years , we chose to be able to buy nine months of pregnancy , and two periods of the schwangerschaft , which they were nachzuahmen to the nine months of the leiblichen of the leiblichen of the
and during this time , they &apos;re introduced culturally in the values of their society , values that sustain the claim that their prayers , and only their prayers , the cosmic -- or we might say that the ecological thing .
at the end of this amazing initiation , you &apos;re going to be taken out to the first time in their lives , and in this kristallklaren moment , you know , the sun is in the hänge of the first time , and in this kristallklaren moment , you &apos;ve got to see a sunrise , and the priests goes back in the abstract , and the priests is
it &apos;s so wonderful . you &apos;ve got to protect it . &quot;
they call the older brothers and say that we are the younger brothers , the destruction of the world are responsible for the destruction of the world .
now this level of intuition is very important .
whenever we think about race and landscape , we &apos;re either rousseau and the old side of the noblen gerücht of the noblen wilden of the noblen wilden of the noblen wilden , which is a rassistischer idea , and say , these people are linked to nature , as we are .
so , they &apos;re not sentimental , they &apos;re going to be geschwächt from the nostalgie .
it doesn &apos;t matter much in the malariaverseuchten sümpfen of asmat or the cold winden of tibet , but they &apos;ve been still a geheimnisvollen nimbus of the earth , but it &apos;s not based on a very basic level of earth , but to be a widespread intuition , the idea that the earth can only exist because they &apos;re going to be able to be hineingeatmet in the
now , what does that mean ?
it means that a little kid from the andes that the mountain is a apu-geist , which is a very different person , and a different relationship with this resource , and a different relationship with this resource , and a little bit of a child that &apos;s going to be a little steine , that &apos;s a mountain of a pile of steine that can be abgetragen .
whether he &apos;s a aufenthaltsort of a mind or a bunch of erz , is irrelevant .
the interesting thing is the metaphor , which is the relationship between the individual and nature .
i grew up in the forests of britisch colombia and believed that these forests are being gerodet .
and this was a other person than my friends and the freunde , the forest of the kwakiutl , who believe that these forest der of hukuk and the kannibalischen geister , the kannibalischen geister , the kannibalischen of the world , the geister of the world , the geister they would participate in their hamatsa-initiation .
well , if you start looking at the idea that these cultures can create these cultures to create these cultures can create some of their extraordinary discoveries , and that &apos;s what this plant here .
it &apos;s a photograph that i just took last april april in the northwest of the amazon .
this is ayahuasca , which many of you have heard , the most powerful psychoaktive präparat of the repertoire of the schamanen .
what &apos;s fascinating is that what makes it fascinating is , not just the most fundamental potential of this präparats , but it &apos;s actually going to be a hölzerne halluzinogen , which is actually a series of different sources , which is actually a series of zwei , birgt , birgt , birgt , and this is a blauer trüber , but it &apos;s going to be a blauer
this plant a lot of strong tryptamine tryptamine the serotonin , dimethyltryptamin-5 and methoxydimethyltryptamin .
if you &apos;ve seen the yanomami , as you &apos;ve got this stuff , these substance , that substance that they &apos;re also making from various ways .
this is a powder &apos;s talking about being able to get something like a gewehrlauf machine , gesäumt from barocken , and the landing landing on a ocean of electricity .
it &apos;s not going to be a distortion of reality , but the resolution of reality .
i even have my professor , richard evan , who was the psychedelische pilze of the magic mushrooms in mexico , and i said that you couldn &apos;t see these tryptamine , and i said that you can &apos;t feel that tryptamine , because in the moment you &apos;re going to be able to know what the effects is to experience .
but the thing about tryptaminen is that they can &apos;t be repeated to be oral , because they &apos;re natürlich by a human player , of course , enzym , enzym enzym , denaturiert enzym .
you can only do in conjunction with some other chemicals that the mao denaturieren .
now the fascinating is that the betakarboline that are in the liane , mao-inhibitoren , mao-inhibitoren , from the kind of kind of thing that are necessary to potenzieren the tryptamine .
how can these people from a high school of 80.000 plants , plants are not even to find the two morphologisch of plants that are combined , if you can create a kind of biochemischer version , so that all of the greater than the sum of its parts ?
we use this great euphemism , trial and error , what &apos;s going on as a meaningless .
but then you say the indians say , &quot; the plant is talking to us . &quot;
so what does that mean ?
this tribe , the cofan , 17 varieties of ayahuasca that they all know at large distance in the woods that &apos;s kind of like a kind of kind of thing .
and then you ask them how they could put their taxonomie and say , &quot; i thought you &apos;ve thought about some plants .
i mean , you know nothing at all ? &quot; and i said , &quot; no . &quot;
so it turns out that you &apos;re all the 17 of the 17 variants in the 17 and they sing into a different tonlage .
now , that doesn &apos;t get a ph.d. in harvard , but it &apos;s much more interesting than a stamina .
well , the problem that &apos;s the problem that the problem is that even those of us who have the ability to be able to be able to be able to be the sympathie of the native services , they &apos;re sort of ansehen , but they &apos;re sort of on the past , whereas the real world , in the world .
so , the fact is that you &apos;re not remember the 20th century , in 300 years , but rather than a ära innovation , but rather than a era that we &apos;ve been focused on , and the massive destruction of the biological and cultural diversity of the biological and cultural vielfalt of the biological disease or passiv akzeptierten , so the problem is not the change .
all cultures have been involved in the dance with new lebenmöglichkeiten .
and the problem is not the technology .
the sioux-indianer stopped not to be less to sioux than they were bogen and pfeil tasks when americans americans stopped american , when they were pferd and pferdewagen .
not change and technology , technology threaten the integrity of the ethnosphäre . it &apos;s power . that &apos;s the ugly face .
and wherever you &apos;re in the world , you know , that these cultures are not going to be the untergang of the kapazität , which is the ungeheuerliche of the schlamm , which is the ungeheuerliche of the schlamm , which is the bereit of the schlamm , which is willing to be the ungeheuerliche of the schlamm , which is the bereit of the schlamm , which is
or if we go into the mountains of tibet , where i &apos;m going to go through a lot of time , you will see the ugly face of the political dominance .
you know , the genocide , the most enterprising extinction of people , the phyische of people , but the ethnozid , the destruction of the people , the destruction of the people , not only verurteilt and vielerorts as a part of a entwicklungsstrategie .
and you can &apos;t understand the suffering of suffering , if you don &apos;t have it in unterster level .
i went through a young colleagues from chengdu meilen by südost-tibet , and i saw the face of the statistics of the statistics that you saw , and then i saw the statistics of the statistics that you &apos;re hearing , and 6,000 holy monuments , and they were transformed in the rubble of the kulturrevolution , which were murdered during the cultural revolution .
the father of this young manns was identified as a tag of the panchen operation .
this meant that he was killed during the chinese invasion of the chinese invasion .
his uncle fled his holiness in the diaspora , people were going to nepal .
his mother was imprisoned , when punishment was going to be the crime for crimes .
he was in the age of two years in the prison , to hide itself under her rockzipfel , because they couldn &apos;t live without him .
the sister that these brave were did was beging in a erziehungslager .
one day , they stepped out of a armband maos and for this übertretung for this übertretung , for seven years , for seven years .
the suffering of suffering can be unbearable , but the most vulnerable minds of humans is something more .
and at the end , we really are really a choice of choice , we want to live in a monochromatischen world of the monotonie or a polychromatischen world of the diversity of life ?
margaret mead , the big anthropologist said that it &apos;s a single biggest idea that we &apos;re going to be in a thread , gestaltlosen , generischen worldview , we can &apos;t just see the entire bandwidth of human imagination , but we would have to wake up one day from a dream , and forgotten that there were no other possibilities .
and it &apos;s part of that , that our species might have existed since the last year .
the neolithische revolution , the farming and we &apos;re going to take us into this moment in this moment , the cult of the saatkorns unterwarf , the poetry of the priesterschaft ersetzte and hierarchy , specialization and überschuss -- found only 10,000 years ago .
the modern industrial world , as we know it &apos;s not 300 years old .
now , this shallow story tells me that we all have answers to the challenges we have to stand in the ensuing millennia .
if we ask these unzähligen , the meaning of the human questions , you &apos;ll answer 10,000 different voices .
and in this song , we will be the opportunity to be the possibility of what we are : people with the conscious conscious minds that are aware of the importance of the importance of the people and to make a space to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to
here &apos;s a photograph that i took the northern finish in the northern hemisphere of the baffin-inseln , when i went to inuits on the narwhal-jagd , and this man , told me a wonderful story of his grandfather .
the canadian government is not always very good with the inuit , and during the 50iger years , the etablierung years of our domination , they forced forced to pull in settlements .
the grandfather of this old man refused to be refused .
the family , the fear of his life , he took him all the guns and all the tools .
now you have to know that the inuit is not afraid of the cold , they use their benefit .
the gleitschienen of their sled was originally originally from fish , who was made in karibu-haut .
the grandfather of man &apos;s the arktischen treaty wasn &apos;t before the arctic night or the wehenden storm .
he schlüpfte out after out , and he took his pants out of seehundsfell and defäkierte in his hand , and when the feces started to start the beginning , he shaped them into the form of a messers .
he sprühte out on the sides of the fäkalien-messers and when it was completely frozen , he was erstach a dog .
he enthäutete the dog and the improvisierte a piece , the skeleton of the dog and a sled , a sled , spannte a schlitten , spannte , and entschwand on the eisschollen of the ocean .
so you can &apos;t do anything anything .
and this is a symbol of the resistance of the inuit and all of the native in the world .
the canadian government gave the inuit of the inuit of the complete control over a field , which is bigger than california and texas together .
it &apos;s our new home and called nunavut .
it &apos;s a independent area . they &apos;re all control of mineralvorkommen .
an amazing example , like a nation , a state , the wiedergutmachung , to seek the wiedergutmachung and reach .
and finally , i think it &apos;s pretty obvious , at least for those of us who are the distant goals of the earth , they &apos;re not going to be at all .
they are the heimatländer of someone .
they represent parts of the human imagination , which are in the past several times , and for all of us , the dreams of these kids , like the dreams of our own children &apos;s the geographie of hope .
what we &apos;re trying to do at national geographic is that we have never going to do anything that i never do anything .
we think that polemik -- we think that polemik isn &apos;t persuasive , but we think that storytelling is not a good job , and we &apos;re probably probably the best institution in the world . our website are 35 million dollars every month .
the other nations is send our fernsehkanal .
our magazines are read from millions .
and we do a series of trips in the ethnosphäre , which we have to take our audience in the other way , one of the other things that they &apos;re going to do to the other people who have been going to be a really lebensmöglichkeit in the world that we can find a lebensmöglichkeit in a really multicultural quest to find a really lebensmöglichkeit world in a really
thank you .
what i first do is you &apos;ll first , as quickly as possible , is a new technology that we have as part of a year ago , and it &apos;s a umgebung that is seadragon , and it &apos;s a environment where they &apos;re either locally or compared to huge amounts of visual data .
we see many , many of many of the things that you have here , which you &apos;re going and fortwährend , schwenken , schwenken , to all the way .
and it &apos;s no matter how many information we look at how big these collections are or how big the visuals are .
most of them are digital photographs of a camera , but this is one of the beispiel of the kongressbibliothek and it &apos;s in a field of 300 megapixeln .
it makes no difference , because the only thing that the performance can be a system like this brain , is the number of your screen on your screen on your screen , and it has a very flexible architecture .
this is a whole book , an example of nichtbild-daten .
this is bleak house from dickens . every column is a chapter .
to prove that it really wants to be a text and not to be a picture , and we can &apos;t really show something like that , that this is a real colored of the texts and no image .
maybe this is a artificial way to read a e-buch .
i wouldn &apos;t recommend it .
this is a realistischerer case . this is a copy of the guardian .
every big picture is the beginning of a abschnitts .
and that &apos;s what gives you the pleasure and the good experience , a real papierausgabe of a magazine or a newspaper , which is a kind of medium with a kind of a kind of thing with a kind of medium .
we also have something in the corner of this special copy of the guardian .
we have a false ending with very high resolution that &apos;s much higher than a normal display , and we added additional content .
if you want to see the functions of this car , you can see it here .
or other models , or even technical spezifikationen .
and this is really what they really do is , these ideas , these limitations for the available place to the screen .
we hope that this is not a pop-ups and other nonsense -- that should not be necessary .
of course , the mapping is a really obvious application of a technology for a technology like this .
and i really don &apos;t want to spend a lot of time , except for saying that we are too much of that .
but these are all the streets in the united states in the united states .
übereinandergelagert on the top of the erdräumlichen picture of the nasa .
let &apos;s just get something else now .
now , this is live in the internet . you can do it .
this is a project with the name of photosynth , which really connects two different technologies together .
the one is a seadragon , and the other is a very good research , which is from noah snavely , a universitätsstudenten of the university of washington , under the advice of steve seitz of steve seitz at the uw of the uw .
and rick szeliski was done by microsoft research . a very good collaboration .
so this is live in the internet . it &apos;s powered by seadragon .
you can see that if we create these kinds of views that we can do by pictures and make this experience of the mehrfachen .
but the spatial anordnung of the imagery is actually in the fact .
the computervision-algorithmen have these pictures together so that they were making these pictures in the real space that they &apos;ve been doing in the kanadischen lakes , which is all nähe in the canadian rockies , and you see here elements of stabilisierten slides or panoramischer bildverarbeitung and these things were all in relation to each other .
i don &apos;t know exactly whether i &apos;ve got to show you some time .
there are those who are much more egalitarian .
i would like to show you a originalen architect of noah , and this is from a early prototype of photosynth to show you that it &apos;s really the punchline behind this technology , which is really the pointe behind that technology , and this is not necessarily that obvious , if you look at the environments that we have on the website .
we had to worry about the lawyers of the lawyers .
this is a rekonstruktion of the cathedral , the ausschließlich of flickr , who are just a notre dame to flickr in flickr and they &apos;re going to get up to the bilder of men in flickr and on the universitätsgelände of the city , and on the universitätsgelände , each of these orange , represents a picture that was discovered as to this model .
so this is all flickr-bilder , and they all are in the relationship with this way .
and we can navigate it in this very simple way .
and you know , i &apos;ve never believed that i &apos;m going to work at microsoft .
i &apos;m very thankful for the reception department here .
i guess you can see that this is many different types of cameras : everything is about the handy-kamera of professionellen slrs , a very large number of them that are all in this environment .
and if possible , i will find some of the weird .
many of them are from faces and so many of them .
somewhere here are a series of photographs -- here &apos;s it .
this is actually a poster of notre dame , which was really recorded .
we can change the poster from the poster to a physical view of this environment .
the point is that we can do things with social environment , and it &apos;s now going to be collected from all of the collective of the world -- from the entire collective memory of that , like , visual the earth -- and everything is connected to each other .
all of these photographs are connected together , and it &apos;s something that &apos;s bigger than the sum of the parts .
they get a model that &apos;s going to take out of the earth .
look at this as the sequel of the work of the work of the work of the earth &apos;s fortsetzung .
and this is something that &apos;s been using the complexity , which is growing , and they use it to use the user interface with the users of application .
your own photographs are going to be with metadaten beschildert that has a different person .
if somebody has done the pore and all of these sacred movies , and you can have a set of foto , and i can use them as a starting to be in these raum , and i can use them as a starting to dive into these space , and so that &apos;s a kind of übergreifender of übergreifender people &apos;s experience with the use of social experience .
and of course , the great idea of all of the things are the most exciting things of every interesting part of each other part of the earth that not only have been just not just talking about überflüge or valued and so on .
thank you .
and i understand it right ? your software is to say that your software is to say that the next thing that &apos;s been used by someone in the world in the world in the world in principle ?
yeah . they don &apos;t do anything else as a discover .
if you want to put them up in the pictures between the pictures .
and she &apos;s doing this because of the content in the pictures .
and that &apos;s really exciting if you think about the abundance of the information information that many of these images have .
how if you take a websuche for pictures , where you &apos;re going to write sentences and the text of the website is much about the information about that , which is a picture that &apos;s a picture .
but how would it be if you look at all of your pictures ?
and then the volume of the semantischen querverbindung and the abundance that make it , really , really enormous . it &apos;s a classic netzwerkeffekt .
blaise , that &apos;s really incredible . thank you .
thank you very much .
i &apos;m going to tell you some things about my book , like i &apos;m hoping to hope in the lab with other things that you &apos;ve heard about . and i &apos;ll try to make some connections , if you &apos;re not going to be noticed .
i want to start with what i call &quot; offizielles dogma . &quot;
the official dogma of what ?
the official glaubenssatz glaubenssatz of all western societies .
the official official dogma works : if our goal is to maximize the image of the negative of our citizen , this is especially by the freedom of the freedom of the individual .
the reason that is this is that freedom is good , valuable , is to make a unverzichtbare voraussetzung of human life .
if people have freedom , then each of us is , each of us is , each of us is to do the things that we can use and no one of our civic senses and no one has to decide .
and the way the path is to maximize choice .
the more choices people have , the more freedom , they have more freedom , and more freedom they have , the more of the more people have .
this is , i think , is so deep in our wasserversorgung , that it would be a sense of wonder , it would be to question .
and it &apos;s also deeply in our lives .
i &apos;ll give you some examples of what makes us modern progress .
this is my supermarket . no big .
i just want to say just a little bit about salatdressing .
there are 175 dressings in my supermarket , if they were nicht the 10 different extra dimensions of the extra dimensions of the extra , and 12 balsamico-essig , they could make a big number of our own lettuce , in the unlikely case that no one of the 175 of the 175 is right .
so that &apos;s how the supermarket is .
and then they go to the verbraucher-elektronik business business to zusammenzustellen a stereo -- speaker , cd-player , radio , radio , verstärker , verstärker , and in this one electronics , there &apos;s so many stereo facilities .
we can eliminate 6.5 million different locations , from the components that will be offered in this one .
you have to admit that that &apos;s a big selection .
in other areas -- the world of communications .
there was a time when i was a boy , because you could have any telephone , you wanted to have a telephone that you wanted to go from the ma bell .
they rented your phone . they didn &apos;t bought it .
one of the one thing that was never had ever broken .
these days are over .
we have almost a unendliche selection of telephones , especially in the world .
these are the mobile of the future .
my favorite is the middle -- mp3-player- , nasen-haar-trimmer and crème fackel .
and they should not have seen that until now , you can &apos;t see in her business , you can be sure they will soon .
and what it does is it &apos;s leading to do people to work and ask them to ask this question .
now , you know what the answer is to this question ?
the answer is no . &quot;
it &apos;s not possible to buy a mobile phone , that doesn &apos;t do too much .
in other aspects of life that are much more spherical than the buy of a kaufen , the same explosion of choice .
health health care -- it &apos;s not the case of the fall in the united states that they go to the doctor and the doctor tells you what to do .
instead , they go to the doctor and the doctor tells you , we could do a little or we could do b .
a guy has this benefits and risk .
b has this benefits and risks . what do you want ?
and they say , &quot; doctor , what should i do ? &quot;
doctor says , a has this benefits and risks and b has the benefits and risks .
what do you want to do ?
and if you say , &quot; if you were me , doctor , what would you do ? &quot;
doctor says , &quot; but i &apos;m not her . &quot;
the result is -- we call it &quot; patient autonomy , &quot; which is a great deal of the burden of making decisions about the burden of the verantwortung of the world &apos;s worst of the doktor -- to someone who knows nothing -- and that &apos;s why not a good thing to do , and therefore , is not a decision to make a decision -- and that &apos;s
there &apos;s a tremendous marketing for people for people who are and me , and i think , if you think about it , no sense , because we don &apos;t buy them .
why are we advertise to us if we can &apos;t buy ?
the answer is , you expect to be a doctor &apos;s doctor and to ask a change in the morning .
something like our identity is now a question of the choice , like this slide show .
we don &apos;t get identity , we invent them .
and we invent that often we want .
that means that every day , if you wake up the morning , they decide to decide what kind of person you want to be .
in marriage and family , there was a time in which the standard-annahme was that almost every one had had a one , and they had so quickly as quickly as they could , and then they got so quickly as quickly as they could .
the only choice was &quot; who , &quot; not when , &quot; and not what they did .
now , it &apos;s just all right .
i teach wonderful intelligent students , and i &apos;ll give you 20 percent less than i did .
and that &apos;s not because they &apos;re less clever , and not because they &apos;re less carefully .
it &apos;s because they are all with other things , you ask yourself , &quot; should i marry my hope or not ? should i marry ?
shall i marry me ? should i have children , or just a career ? &quot;
they are all kinds of einnehmende questions .
and they &apos;re going to answer these questions , whether that means all the tasks that i &apos;m going to do with you and i don &apos;t have good grade to my class .
and indeed , they should do this . these are important questions .
work -- we are blessed to predict how carl sagan has to be about how carl sagan , that we &apos;re trying to work each every day of every day of every day of every day of every day of every day of every day of every day of every day of every day of every day of every day of every day of every day of every day of
there &apos;s one corner of the way that i &apos;m not going to tell you about the wirelesslan .
i &apos;m not going to tell you , because i want to use it .
so what it means , these unbelievable freedom of choice we have to make decisions , again and again , whether we should work or not work .
we can play our children playing football , and we have our mobile phone to a hip , and our blackberry of other hip , and our laptop probably probably matter on our lap .
and even if you &apos;re all of the neighborhood , every minute in the process of a fußballspiels , we ask , &quot; should i accept this call ?
should i respond to this email ? should i write this letter ? &quot;
and even if the answer to the question , &quot; no , it &apos;s certainly going to be very different from their children &apos;s experience of their child &apos;s very different than it was .
everywhere we &apos;re looking at , big things and little things , material things and lifestyle , is a question of choice .
and the world in which we saw this way galaxy .
so i want to say , there were some choices , but not all the choice was the choice .
and the world in which we now look like this .
and the question is , is the good news or bad news ?
the answer is &quot; yes . &quot;
we all know what good is about , so i &apos;m going to talk about what &apos;s going on .
all these choice have two effects , two negative effects of human effects .
a effect , paradoxer , is that he &apos;s going to be able to get the lähmt .
so with many options that you can choose , it will be very hard to choose to be very hard .
i &apos;m going to give you another drastisches example of this , a study of investment in volunteers .
a colleague of mine had access to investitions-akten of vanguard , the gigantic fondgesellschaft of about a million employees and about 2,000 different parts .
and what she found was a 10 investmentfonds investmentfonds that anbot the employers , took the participation to two percent .
they provide 50 investmentfonds , 10 percent less likely to be part than if they were only five to five . why ?
because there are 50 investmentfonds that are on the selection , it &apos;s so hard to decide that they &apos;re going to choose tomorrow .
and then tomorrow , and tomorrow morning , tomorrow , and tomorrow , of course , is never come .
you know that that &apos;s not just that , that &apos;s not just the people that are eating food , because they don &apos;t have enough money to the retirement , it means that they make decisions that they &apos;re going to miss big investitionsangebote of their employers .
and by the way , not the participation is not going to be 5,000 dollars a year on the arbeitsgeber , who would have been happy to reproduce their contributions .
so paralysis is a consequence of many choices .
and i think it &apos;s what the world looks like .
they really want to get really right if it &apos;s all the time for everybody , right ?
they don &apos;t want to be wrong , you know , the wrong salatdressing .
so this is the effect , the other effect that even if we get the paralysis and a decision , we end up with a very interesting , less happy with the choices , when we would have given the opportunity to decide to decide to decide to decide to decide to decide to decide to decide to decide to decide to decide to decide to decide to decide to
and there &apos;s several reasons for this .
one of them is , as you can do , and it &apos;s not perfect by buying a big auswahl , and it &apos;s not perfect , and it &apos;s perfect , and what happens is that you have perfect choice , and what happens is that you have to have a different choice , and that &apos;s what happens is that they have to be able to make the
the more and more , the simple , it &apos;s not the easy to do anything that &apos;s going to be disappointing for the choice .
secondly , what economists call oppertunitätskosten .
dan gilbert has been doing a great point in the morning today , he was telling us how much that we do things that we &apos;re doing is what we compare .
well , if there &apos;s lots of alternative to remember , it &apos;s just profound features of alternatives that they use , which makes you less content with the alternatives they chose .
here &apos;s an example . for those of you who are not new yorkers , i apologize .
but here &apos;s what you should have thought .
here &apos;s a couple of a few on the hamptons .
very expensive immobilien .
the speed . great day . they have it all for themselves .
what could better be better ? &quot; &quot; man thinks &quot; it &apos;s august .
everybody in my manhattener neighborhood is gone .
i could shut directly straight to my house . &quot;
and he spends two weeks from the thought that he has missed the opportunity to have a great parking lot of time .
oppertunitätskosten lower happiness that we get through our selection , even if we &apos;ve chosen to the end of the time .
and the more ways there are choice , the more attractive qualities of these selection will be able to use in the oppertunitätskosten .
here &apos;s another example .
now , this cartoon makes a few of the speech .
he makes a message in the now and maybe it also slow things .
but a important point that he is doing : always who they &apos;re doing : they &apos;re not going to decide to do other things .
and these other things may have learned many levels of traits , and it &apos;s going to be doing what they &apos;re going to do to make less .
third : eskalation the expectations .
this has made me when i wanted to replace my jeans .
i &apos;m wearing jeans , almost all the time .
and there was a time in the way a way to get a jeans in a way , and they bought them , and they &apos;ve been schlecht schlecht , they were incredibly unkomfortabel and if they had long enough , and often , you know , they &apos;re starting to be sich .
so , for new jeans , after a lot of the old years of the old , and i said , &quot; i would like to have a few jeans , here &apos;s my size . &quot;
and the sales said , &quot; do you want to be schlanke , slightly anliegende or a weite ?
do they want buttons or reißverschluss ? stone or a acid ?
do they want to do it with holes ?
you want to cut down down , kegelig , blah blah , blah blah , and so on .
my dad was down , and after i was going to hear , &quot; i would like to have the way that was the only way that we had to be the only way . &quot;
he had no idea what was that , so i spent an hour to all this verdammten jeans , and i &apos;ll get them to do the business -- and i say the truth -- with the most important thing i ever had .
i had better . all these selection allowed me to do it better .
but i felt bad .
why ? i wrote a whole book to try to explain it .
the reason i was really felt was bad , with all these available ways to do what a good deal is going to be tall .
i had very low expectations . i had no konkreten expectations when it was in a kind of kind of kind of .
when they came in 100 species , i think , one of them should be perfect , perfect .
and what i got was good , but it wasn &apos;t perfect .
and so i got what i was expected to what i was expecting , and what i had was able to do was to be expected .
the addition of possibilities in life is increased people who are helping people who are going to be good for people .
and this leads to less satisfaction with the results , even though the results are good .
no one in the world of the marketings knows , because if you would not know what it &apos;s going to do here .
the truth is more like this .
the reason that was all happened to do was better than anything worse than anything was worse , it was for people to make the people who were a pleasant self .
today , in the world we live in the world we live -- we &apos;re wealthy , we &apos;re wohlhabenden , and perfektion , as an expectation , the best thing that you can hope is that you &apos;re going to be good as you &apos;re expecting .
they &apos;re never going to be angenehm angenehm because your expectations , my expectations , are haushoch .
the secret to the glücklichkeit -- this is what they &apos;re all about -- the secret to the glücklichkeit are low expectations .
i want to say -- a short autobiographischer moment -- which i &apos;m married with a woman &apos;s married , and she &apos;s really very beautiful .
i couldn &apos;t do it better . i don &apos;t have a niedergelassen .
but , niederlassen is not always a bad thing .
finally , a series of the kaufens of a bad age , if it &apos;s just a kind of bad , if you &apos;re a kind of kaufen , and they &apos;re wondering why they &apos;re in , and they &apos;re wondering why , who is responsible , the world is responsible . what would you do ?
if hundreds of different species of the jeans are available , and they buy a enttäuschend , and ask why , who is responsible ?
it &apos;s also clear that the answer is to the question : you .
they would have done better .
with 100 different types of jeans in the jungle , there is no excuse to type .
and so , if people make decisions , and even if the results are good , you feel disappointed about it , you &apos;re accusing themselves .
clinical depression is written in the industrial world in the last generation .
i think a signifikanter -- not the only thing that the only thing that &apos;s the only thing to be the explosion of depression , and also , in the selbstmord , is that people are going to have the enttäuschend , and then if you have to explain this kind of thing , think it would be their fault .
and so the bilanzergebnis that we &apos;re getting better , and we &apos;re going to feel lousy , and we feel bad .
so let me remember .
this is the official dogma that we &apos;re all going to do is completely wrong , completely wrong . it &apos;s not true .
there &apos;s no question that makes something better than not , but it doesn &apos;t matter better than something more choices .
there &apos;s a magic crowd . i don &apos;t know what it is .
i &apos;m pretty sure that we &apos;ve missed this point for that point , and we &apos;ve missed this point in the selection of our own .
now , as a ridiculous question -- i &apos;m almost done -- as a ridiculous question , which is a ridiculous question about the thing that all these choices are doing in the industrialized societies , is the material .
there are many spots in the world , and we &apos;ve heard many of them , whose problem is not the big selection .
your problem is that they have too little .
so the things i &apos;m talking about is a sonderbares problem of modern , rich , western societies .
and what &apos;s so frustrating and so is steve levitt , i told you about this expensive and heavy car seats , and it &apos;s a waste of money .
what i &apos;m telling you is that these expensive , complicated decisions -- it &apos;s not easy to help them .
they even hurt .
they &apos;re worried that we &apos;re not going to be in the bad .
if something of what makes the people to make the people that are making decisions to the societies in the societies that people would have to be in the poor choice , not only the lives of humans , but our dignity would be improved .
economists call this a pareto-verbesserungs machine .
einkommensumverteilung is going to worry about it , it &apos;s going to be doing all better -- not just the poor -- because all of these big choices are plagt .
finally , you read this cartoon , and , one of the things that &apos;s , &quot; ah ! what know ?
you know nothing can &apos;t do in this goldfischglas . &quot;
verarmten fantasy , a kurzsichtige view of the world -- and that is the way i read it first .
and the more i thought about it , the more i got to the point of the fish that the fish know .
because the truth is that if you break the goldfischglas , so it &apos;s not possible , they don &apos;t have freedom . they have a paralysis .
if you break the goldfischglas , so that it &apos;s possible to be able to do it .
they increase the paralysis and lower the satisfaction .
each needs a goldfischglas .
this is almost with synthetic safety to limited safety -- possibly for the fish , definitely for us .
but the abhanden of a metaphorical goldfischglas is a recipe for misery , and i think , is disaster .
thank you very much .
you know , i &apos;ve been talking about some of these projects before , about the human genome and what that mean could mean , and over the discovery of the discovery of genes .
in fact , we start from a new point : we have the biology of digitized and now we try to get the digital code into a new phase of biology , and build a new life of biology .
we &apos;ve always been asking very significant questions .
what &apos;s life ? it &apos;s something i think many biologists tried to understand and on different levels .
we &apos;ve tried to use different approaches to simplify the amount of components .
we &apos;ve been very close to the 20 years . when we sequenced the humangenom , the transition of the world &apos;s shift is the wechsel world of biology .
now we try to wonder whether we can live life or whether we can make new life , from this digital universe ?
this is the map of a little organism , mycoplasma geitalium , the smallest genome of a species that can be freely in the lab , and we &apos;ve tried to do this with a more smaller genome .
we &apos;ve managed to get a hundred genes from the cover of the 500 or so that &apos;s here .
but if we look at these metabolic map that &apos;s very simple , in comparison , it &apos;s very simple , and if we all look at this genes , we can look at one of the genes that we would have to be able to take a living in the other way that this is going to lead to a living cell .
so we decided that it &apos;s the only way to solve this chromosome , which is actually what we &apos;re doing is to use the individual components and so some of these fundamental questions .
and so we started with the question we can cause a chromosome ?
it enables the chemistry of that really big molecule to the really big molecules , which hasn &apos;t been done before ?
and if we can that , we can start the chromosome ?
a chromosome is just a piece of inertes material .
our steps in the natural world were exponentially .
our ability to write genetic code , but nevertheless , it &apos;s very slowly , and our final point would be put on an exponential curve .
we started to start 15 years ago .
it took a few years ago , a few years ago , we did a bioethischen club before we did the first experiments .
and so it turns out , it &apos;s very difficult to be very difficult .
there are tens of thousands of machines around the world that the little bits of dna can make up the little bits of dna , but it &apos;s a degenerativer process , so the longer you do a piece of a piece of doing that , the more of the more things that are happening .
so we had to develop a new method that we &apos;re going to create these little bits and correct the mistakes .
this was our first attempt to be starting to do with digital information , the genome x 174 .
it &apos;s a little virus that kills bacteria .
we used little bits , and we made a fehlerkorrektur , and a dna molecule of about 5,000 letters .
the exciting thing came when we took this piece of inerte chemical chemical and a bacteria , and the bacteria started to read and made the genetic code .
the viral particles were planted from the cells and came back and killed the e. .
i recently talked about the oil industry , and they said they were exactly this model right .
they laughed more than her here .
so we think that this is a situation where the software is actually built hardware in a biological system .
but we wanted to go far more further , and we wanted to build a whole bakterielles chromosome . so we did it more than 580.000 letters , we &apos;re going to build it in cassette of the virus that we could actually vary the size of the virus that we have to understand what the individual components of a living cell .
design is the key , and if you want to launch with digital information in the computer , that digital information really needs to be really going to be really fehlerfrei .
when we sequenced the genome first , we had the fehlerrate fehlerrate at a mistake .
we found 30 mistakes . if we had used the original sequence , it would never be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to do it .
part of the design is , to make the pieces of design , and the 50 letters are long and connecting with other 50-buchstaben to build smaller sub-einheiten , to build the kleinere sub-einheiten that we have to build this .
we &apos;ve taken unique elements here .
you may have heard that we &apos;ve got waterzeichen .
think about : we have a 4-buchstaben code : a , c , g and t.
triplets of this letters -- these letters are about 20 amino acids , and here &apos;s a single purpose of all this amino acids .
so we can use the genetic code to write our words , including , thoughts .
we just started to capture it .
some people were disappointed that it was no poetry .
we &apos;ve just done the pieces so that we just could easily run them with enzymes , and there are enzymes that are enzymes that they were going to come together .
and we started making pieces of pieces , starting with these fünf- to siebentausend buchstaben , the fügten of buchstaben , the study of these funds to make these again , to 72.000 these again .
in each step , we &apos;ve produced these pieces in the surplus so we could sequencing them , because we sought to create a very basic process that you &apos;re going to see in a minute .
we tried to get the point of the automation .
so , this looks like a basketball-playoff .
if we get to this correctly , and over 100,000 , it &apos;s not just wachsen in the e. coli , and it &apos;s all the way that we &apos;re growing in the modern molecular biology , and so we &apos;re so wandten ourselves to other mechanisms .
we knew from a mechanism called homologe rekombination , the biology uses to fix dna that can get to the pieces of these pieces .
here &apos;s an example of this . there &apos;s a organism called deinococcus radiodurans of the three million rads of radiation .
you see in the upper field that his chromosome just just drops apart .
12 to 24 hours later , it has been zusammengefügt as it was so zusammengefügt .
we have thousands of organisms that do .
these organisms can be totally dried , they can actually live in the vacuum .
i &apos;m absolutely sure that life in space exist and moving , it can move to the quest to aquatischen conditions .
in fact , nasa has shown that there &apos;s a lot of them out there .
this is a series of the molecule that we &apos;ve made this processes in the molecule , we &apos;ve actually used this processes -- actually we have just hefe-mechanismen hefe-mechanismen with the right design of the pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces , we &apos;ve got it eingepasst .
this is not a elektronenmikroskopaufnahme elektronenmikroskopaufnahme .
it &apos;s such a big molecule that we can actually see it with the lichtmikroskop .
these are footage over a long period of six seconds .
that &apos;s the way we &apos;ve done recently done recently .
these are about 580.000 letters , code , and it &apos;s the largest molecule with definierter structure that was ever created .
it has a molekulargewicht of 300 million .
if we deal with a schriftgröße of 10 and without valuable , it would be 142 to umfassen , just to put it on this genetic code .
now how do we start a chromosome ? how do we do it ?
clearly , it &apos;s obvious that it &apos;s very simple , it &apos;s much more complicated with bacteria .
it &apos;s also easier to be easier , if you &apos;re doing it in eukaryonten , as we are : you just take the nucleus out , and that &apos;s exactly what they all heard about cloning .
in archaebakterien , the chromosome is in the cell , but we just recently have shown that you can use a complete transplanting one of a person from a cell to another one of another , and can activate this one .
we reinigten the chromosome of a mikrobenspezies , and then , these two , these two acts of how humans and mice , we would choose to disrupt this chromosome , and we gave it to be a few more complex to disrupt all the proteins , and it &apos;s very amazing to the cell -- and they &apos;re going to be schätzen our very ausgereiften language here -- and
the new chromosome went into the cell .
in fact , we thought that here &apos;s the end , but we &apos;ve tried to bring the process .
this is the hauptmechanismus of evolution here .
we find all species of species here who recorded a second chromosome or a third of irgendwoher , every time thousands of charakteristiken in a second , every time you have a species .
so , people who imagine evolution as a gene that is a very much better one that &apos;s going to be much of biology .
there are enzymes called the restriktionsenzyme that are actually verdauen dna .
the chromosome was in the cell , neither of the chromosomes we &apos;ve already have .
it was exprimiert in the cell and then recognized the other chromosome as a foreign material , and so we just had a cell with a new chromosome .
it &apos;s verfärbte , because of the genes we had .
and after a very short time , it had all the characteristics of species , and konvertierte completely linked to a new species based on the new software that we have in the cell .
all the proteins changed the membranes change -- when we read the genetic code , it was exactly what we were going to have .
it may sound like the genomic alchimie , but we can do the software-dna , things really dramatic .
now i &apos;ve been suggesting that this is not the genesis -- that &apos;s based on a 3.5 billion billion years ago , evolution in evolution , evolution in evolution .
and i &apos;ve been suggesting that we may be able to create a new form of the cambrian explosion in the es of the kambrischen new artenbildung of the digital design .
why should we do that ?
i think it &apos;s pretty obvious in terms of what we need .
we are from nine billion people in the next 40 years .
to ask it in my context , i was born in the year .
today , three people on this planet is in the year &apos;s year , in the year &apos;s year , within 40 years , it will be four .
we have trouble with food , with private and water water , medicine , treibstoff , to people .
it &apos;s going to offer a challenge for 9 .
we need about five billion tons of coal , 30-plus billion billion oil , and that &apos;s a hundred million of the day .
if we think about biological processes or any process to replace that , it will be a huge challenge .
then , of course , there &apos;s all the co2 from this material that &apos;s going on in the atmosphere .
we now have from our discoveries from our discoveries , a database of about 20 million genes , and i want to believe that these are the most designkomponenten of the future .
the elektronikindustrie had a dozen components and see the diversity of the line .
we &apos;re in first line in the limits of the limits of biological reality and to the one of our idea .
we have today technologies today because of these fast synthesemethoden , to do what we call kombinatorische genetics .
we now have a big robot to build a big robot that can make millions of chromosomes .
if you imagine this 20 million different genes to produce these processes to optimize these processes to produce oktan or drugs , we can change a little more molecular team than the last 20 years .
and it &apos;s just selection selection . we can selektieren out of lebensfähigkeit , production of chemicals or treibstoffproduktion impfstoffproduktion and so on .
this is a photograph of the wirklicher of the wirklicher that we &apos;re actually going to sit and actually put new species on the computer that we use to design the computer .
you know , we don &apos;t necessarily know what it is . we know exactly how to look like this genetic code .
we focus on the fourth of the fourth generation .
they &apos;ve been going to be mais corn , and so , just a bad experiment .
we have treibstoffe treibstoffe and third generation , the relatively soon will be quickly , the much higher are going to be a lot higher rates , like oktan or different kinds of butanol .
but how we think the only way to think of the most powerful influence with food or limitation of their availability , if we see co2 as a no-brainer , and so we &apos;re working on cells that go down the way that they go to the way that we &apos;re going to go to the way that we &apos;re going to go to the way that we &apos;re going
and we think we &apos;re going to be the first with the first generation of the fourth generation , and that &apos;s about 18 months .
and co2 are a method -- a method .
but in our discovery of the world , we all have different kinds of different ways .
this is a organism that we described in 1996 .
he lives in the deep sea , about ein-einhalb miles deep , in almost nahezu wassertemperaturen .
it uses carbon dioxide in methane to use hydrogen sulfide , hydrogen of hydrogen as a source .
we investigate whether we can use gespeichertes co2 to use co2 to be able to be able to be able to get produktionsplätzen , the co2 in fuel to fuel that process .
within a short period of time , we believe we could be able to solve the basic questions of life .
you know , we really have -- moderate goals like the substitute of the entire industry industry , right . right , if you couldn &apos;t do that at ted , where else ? a hauptquelle of energy .
but the same work we &apos;re working on this same thing for the development of the evolution of vaccines .
they &apos;ve seen this year with flu , we &apos;re always a year and over a year , and you have a little bit more , if it &apos;s about the right vaccine .
i think that &apos;s the way that we &apos;re going to be able to do by rekombinante impfstoffe in the vorhinein .
this is how the future might be potentially might be able to be able to be able to be able to accelerate changes today , today , today , today , with synthetic bacteria , archaen , and perhaps eukaryonten .
we are light from the people from people . our goal is that we have a chance to survive long enough to survive that possibly . thank you .
at the last ted conference , i was going to have a introduction to the lhc .
and i promised to get back to you to explain how the machine works .
so it &apos;s like this . and for all of those who were not there , the lhc is the greatest scientific experiment that ever was in the diameter .
his job is to create the conditions that less than a decade second after the universe , and that &apos;s what we &apos;ve been in 600 million times a second .
it &apos;s just breathtaking ambitious ambitious .
this is the machine underneath the holocaust .
we take pictures of this mini-urknalle in detectors .
and at this work , i &apos;m going to work . he calls atlas -- 44 feet in the latitude , 22 feet in diameter .
this is a spectacular image of the atlas in the construction , so you see the scale .
on september september 9 / 11 year , the machine was first time .
and this painting was taken by atlas .
it &apos;s got a huge impact in the front .
it &apos;s a painting of the first strahlenpartikels that the entire track of the lhc , then , with a part of the lhc to put a rain from the detector to the detector .
in other words , when we saw this image at 9 / 11 , we knew that the machine works , which is a big triumph .
i don &apos;t know whether this is the largest jubel factors , or as anyone who went to google and the front page .
it means that we have a cultural impact next to scientific science .
about a week later , there was a problem with the machine that had to do with this conference -- this golden drähte is the goldenen of the hier here here .
these wires are leiten ampere , when the machine goes on .
well , the engineers are going to be looking at them and say , &quot; no , no , they &apos;re small wires . &quot;
you can do that because if you &apos;re very far , you &apos;re going to become a supraleitern .
so in minus 271 , colder , when the space between the stars , that can be overcome the tension .
in one of the connections , between neuntausend magnets in the lhc , there was a manufakturdefekt .
so , it turns out the wires of the wires and 13-tausend begegneten begegneten widerstand .
this was the result .
now , this is still even more than that , if you think about the magnet that the magnet is weigh over 20 tons and about 30 inches in the beginning .
so we &apos;ve been given about 50 of the magnet of magnets .
and then they had to remove what we also did .
we konditionierten them , they reparierten .
they &apos;re all back to her way back to her way .
at the end of march , the lhc will be become the canary .
we &apos;re going to turn it , and expect first data on june or july , and we &apos;re going to get our journey to figure out what the building blocks of the universe are .
well , of course , in a kind of secular liberal , the debate is to take the value of science and ingenieurskunst to these borders . it &apos;s easy to do something like this .
i think the fact that it &apos;s so hard to get the fact that we &apos;re going to take our limitations of the limitations of things like the lhc .
i &apos;m going to announce my abschließenden words to a english scientist , and humphrey davy , who was the nutzlosen of the human mind , which is , &quot; nothing is the nutzlosen of the human mind , which is that our scientific minds , that our scientific minds , that our scientific ideas are , that our scientific ideas are , that our science are , that our
thank you .
i &apos;m a writer .
writing books , my job is , but it &apos;s more than that .
it &apos;s also my big , romantic love and fascination .
and i don &apos;t expect that that &apos;s going to change .
but , in fact , this is a little bit of weird in my life and my career , which was going to be brought me to be completely überdenken my work .
this particular event was that i was written a book -- a biography called „ eat , love , love , love , love , which was different from the world , and a big mega-ereignis , and a big mega-ereignis , international internationales .
the result is that i &apos;m going to matter where i &apos;m going to come back , i &apos;ll be treated as if i was going to be the untergang .
seriously -- the weird geweiht !
for example , they come across me and say , &quot; don &apos;t you say that they never have to be a success ?
have no fear that they &apos;re going to put their whole life and never create a book that &apos;s going to be interested in the world ? never again ?
okay , that &apos;s really the real thing .
it would be worse if i didn &apos;t remember about 20 years ago when i was a teenager , when i was first told that i wanted to be a writer , that was the same kind of angstbesetzter response to the same time .
people said , „ did you feel frightened of ever have success ?
did you feel frightened that you &apos;re going to do the humiliation of a absage ?
did you feel that you &apos;re not frightened of your life , and you never do something that you &apos;re going to die and you &apos;re going to die in a schrotthaufen geplatzter , your mouth would be filled with the bitter of the versagens ?
so , it &apos;s about it , you know .
the answer -- the short answer on all of these questions is : „ .
yeah , i &apos;m afraid of all of these things .
and i always got .
and i &apos;ve got a lot more of the more things that nobody would have .
how algae -- and other things unseen things .
but if it &apos;s about writing about writing , i &apos;ve been thinking about this , and ask me , why ?
is that wonderful ?
is it logically that by someone should be expected to be afraid of doing the work that he feels to do ?
and what &apos;s happening is that it &apos;s going to go into the creative approach that they &apos;re going to be doing us about the greater chinese people -- in a way that other jobs don &apos;t do ?
my dad , for example , chemist , and i can &apos;t remember the situation in his 40 years as chemist , in which he asked if he was afraid to be chemists .
with your chemiker-blockade , john -- how do you get ?
it didn &apos;t matter , you know ?
but to be fair -- the group of chemist have not been talking about the reputation of alkoholsüchtigen people .
we seem to have some of these kind of call , but not just the writer , but the creative of all of all of these genres , they seem to be mental to be happy to be happy .
all you need to do is to get the bitter todeszahlen of really , really great köpfen of the 20th century , the young and often died of their own .
and even those who don &apos;t actually have to be suizid , seemed to be really neglected .
norman mailer said before his death in his last interview : „ , every my books has been killed me a little bit more .
one thing that you can do about your own .
but we don &apos;t even think if we &apos;re going to say somebody , because we &apos;ve been hearing somebody , because we &apos;ve been hearing this kind of long time , and we &apos;ve been able to think of the notion of that as diverse and collective accepted that creativity and suffering and leid , and that art -- always leads to the end -- always leads to the
the question that i want to ask here today is , is this idea for you ?
feel that you &apos;re comfortable with it ? because with only one inches distance -- i don &apos;t think of this notion .
i find it .
and i think it &apos;s dangerous . and i don &apos;t want to watch the next century .
i think it &apos;s better than we can make our big creative creative .
and i know i know that it was for me -- in my situation -- in my situation -- very dangerous , to start , this kind of dark path of the vermutung , and especially in the field that i &apos;m in my career .
that means that -- i &apos;m going to see , i &apos;m pretty young . i &apos;m just about 40 years old .
i may have another 40 arbeitsjahre in me .
and it &apos;s very much that everything i &apos;m going to talk about now from the world as the work of the work , which is going to be after the abgefahrenen success of my last book , right ?
i say it &apos;s geradeheraus because we &apos;re all sort of friends -- it &apos;s probably a very likely to me that my greatest success is .
oh , jesus , what a thought !
these are the kind of thinking that can get somebody to get 9 a.m. in the morning , to drink , and i don &apos;t want to .
i would rather keep going to do this work i love love .
so the question is : how ?
after some time , i think , for some time , i think , to write , to write a kind of schützendem psychological konstrukt .
i have to find a way to find a way to find a safe distance between me and my very natural idea about how the response to be the geschriebene .
and while i was looking for models for models of models , and i &apos;ve been trying to do that , and i &apos;ve been trying to find out , in the past , and i &apos;ve got to see some other societies , and we &apos;ve had to help better , as we can help creative , with the emotional risks that are linked to creativity .
this quest to me and the old griechenland and the old rome .
please follow me because the circle will end up again .
but in the old greece and rome , people didn &apos;t believe that creativity of people , okay ?
they thought creativity was a kind of göttlicher diener-geist , who was from a distant , unknown source to the people -- from unerklärlichen , unknown .
the greeks have called this divine diener-geister of creativity dämonen .
from socrates , he &apos;s been shown that he &apos;s got a dämon , who would have a dämon that &apos;s going to be mitteilte out of the distant distance .
the roman had the same idea , called this kind of körperlosem , a „ genie .
this is great . the roman thought that a genius was a great individual .
they thought that one of the kind of terrifying göttliches was , from the believed that it &apos;s been sprichwörtlich in the walls of a künstlerateliers , and it &apos;s like dobby , like dobby , the rauskäme , the rauskäme , the rauskäme and the artist of work in the work of work was actually gewissermaßen assistierte and the outcome of work .
this is brilliant -- there &apos;s the distance that i talked about -- the psychological shows that you protect you about the consequences of your work .
and everybody knew that it worked so that it worked ?
the artist &apos;s artist &apos;s artist &apos;s artist &apos;s artist &apos;s künstler , like , like , for instance , too much more unusual , right ?
if your work was brilliant , you wouldn &apos;t have anything to do you , everybody knew that you &apos;ve had this körperlose genius that you helped .
if your work is floppte -- not completely your mistakes , right ?
everybody knew , your genius was a little bit .
so the people in the west has really thought about creativity .
and then the renaissance and everything changed . and this big idea was , and this big idea was , so , let &apos;s see the human individual in the center of the universe -- and there &apos;s no room for the mystic creatures , and there &apos;s no room for the mystische creatures that make the orders of the divine .
it &apos;s the beginning of the rational humanism and the people who started to think that creativity was completely completely by the own individual .
for the first time in history , you hear people or the artist &apos;s or the artist &quot; or the artist &quot; künstler &quot; instead of having a genius .
i have to tell you : i think that was a big mistake .
you know ? i think , one of the person who thinks he thinks he thinks he thinks he thinks , or they think it &apos;s the same and the essence of all the time , unendlichen , unendlichen , unendlichen , unendlichen , unendlichen , unendlichen , unendlichen , to a fragilen , to be a small verantwortung , human psychology .
it &apos;s like somebody to ask the sun .
the entstellt and the whole egos and it creates all of these unerreichbaren expectations .
i think that this erfolgs-druck has been our artists in the last 500 years .
and if that &apos;s true , and i think it &apos;s true -- is the question .
can we change it ?
maybe to a sense of understanding the relationship between humans and the mystery of creative .
maybe not .
maybe we can &apos;t put this gedankengut from 500 years , not just in a 18-minütigen talk .
and there &apos;s certainly people in this audience , which would be really berechtigte scientific doubt , they would be anmelden about the notion of -- -- feen , people &apos;s nachfolgen and feenzauber on their projects .
i &apos;m probably not going to take all of them on this journey .
but the question i want to do is to take the long thing , why not ?
why not think about this ?
because it makes no sense of how everything that i heard about , if it was that i was going to explain the absolute verrückt launenhaftigkeit of the creative process .
a process that -- like everybody knows that it has tried to do something -- so in other words , everybody &apos;s always going to be always superior .
indeed , he can feel sometimes geradezu .
i had a lot of begegnung stone stone , who was going to be a 90 dichterin , but she told me that she was in the dörflichen virginia outside the virginia out in the dörflichen virginia , and she said she was going to feel and hear how a poem about the landscape .
she said it would be like a donnernder train from air , from air .
the country would be zurollen on her country .
she felt when it came to , because it would take the earth under your feet .
she knew that they could only do in a moment , and that was -- in their words -- „ race like the devil .
they ran out like the devil during the house , and it was only about that they had been going to be quickly , and then it was about that they had to get quickly enough to a sheet of paper , so they had to get it through it , and capture it through the sheet , and capture it on the sheet .
in other paint , they didn &apos;t quickly get quick enough , and they ran the house and they had the poem by the house and they said it was going to pull out over country and -- she said -- and -- as she said -- „ after another poet .
and then there was this moments -- the part i never forget -- she said that it was the private people that they were almost .
so , you &apos;re walking to the house and take the poem out of the paper and the poem goes through it , and they put a pen than it through them and -- she was like it was like it was as if you put your hand up and get it to the other hand .
she took the poem to his tail and pulled it back into her body and took it on the sheet of paper .
and this opportunities came to the poem and stop the intakt on paper -- but backward -- from the last word for the first word .
when i heard this , i thought that &apos;s actually a measure of the way , that &apos;s exactly how my creative process .
this is not like my creative process -- i &apos;m not the canal !
i &apos;m a maultier . and to work , i have to get every day to go to the same time and sweat , and really schwitzen me and really unangenehm .
but even i &apos;ve got this thing in my maultierart , sometimes i have this thing .
and i guess that many of you have done this .
even i &apos;ve had worked or ideas that made me from a source of hindurchkamen that i really can &apos;t really identify .
what is that for a thing ?
and how do we get to lose our minds without losing our minds , but to actually do it in the contrary to the contrary ?
for me , the best living example of how you can do this , you can make a musician of tom tom waits . i was a few years ago .
we talk about this subject , and you know what ? most of his life was tom , tom &apos;s embodiment of modern modernen , who was trying to dominate this unkontrollierbaren creative impulse that was fighting in him , and to them with them .
but then he was older and quiet . he told me that he was going to los angeles on a trial in los angeles , and then everything changed for him .
he went with high speed , as he suddenly got a little fragment of a melody , which is , as it &apos;s a little fragment of a melody , which is difficult to be difficult to him , and he &apos;s going to have it . she &apos;s prachtvoll , but he can &apos;t grab it .
he &apos;s not a piece of paper , he has no pen , he has no kassettenrekorder .
so he starts to think these old beklemmung in him , like i will lose this thing and will become verfolgt by this song .
i &apos;m not good enough , i don &apos;t do it .
but instead of panic , he just stopped .
he ended up the entire thing and did something completely new .
he just wrap up in heaven and said , &quot; sorry , you can &apos;t see that i &apos;m driving my car ?
i see that i could see as i could just do a song ?
if you really want to really exist , come on a moment of time , if i can take care of you .
if not , quäle today , today .
go and quäle cohen cohen .
his whole arbeitsprozess has changed after that .
not the work itself . it &apos;s always often often as dark as it &apos;s as much as it did .
but the process , the prozess beklemmung that surrounds him , was , when he was doing it as a anger and he was going to be herkam , and he was going to get back to him , and he realized that it was not a verinnerlichtes thing .
it could be a eigentümliche , wundersame , wundersame , bizarre , a kind of conversation between tom and the fremdartigen , the more complicated thing that wasn &apos;t quite tom .
when i heard this story , it also has a little bit of the way i worked and it was already going to .
this idea was taken me when i was in the middle of „ eat , pray , love , love , love , and i fell in a series of zweifels , love , and i was going to be doing something that we &apos;re going to work on and it &apos;s going to be a disaster , that &apos;s going to be a disaster , that &apos;s going to
not just bad , but the worst of all times .
i started thinking , i should just einstampfen the project .
but then i remembered how tom to talk about the free sky , and i was trying to .
so i quit my view from the manuscript and spoke my comment in a leeren corner of the room .
i spoke to say , „ plays , you know , you know , you know , and i know that book is not brilliant , that it &apos;s not completely my fault , right ?
because you see that i &apos;ve got anything i &apos;ve got to do , you know , i don &apos;t have more than that .
so if you want to have better , you have to be here in the middle of the conversation .
okay . but if you don &apos;t do that ... you know what to do with the devil .
i &apos;m going to keep going on , because that &apos;s my job .
and i want to give you to be able to be in my part of my job here .
because ... &quot; ... &quot; in the end , it &apos;s like this . we &apos;ve got a lot of nordafrikas people with sacred tänzen and music , who were versammelt , the hours of abgehalten -- to dawn .
these are always great , because the dancers were professional and they were fantastic .
but it goes back and , very rare , something special happened . one of the performers was actually überweltlich .
and i know you know what i mean , because i know that they &apos;ve seen this kind of performance .
it was like the time the time of the time , and the dancers of the dancers through a kind of pforte , he did not have anything else as he ever did before , and it &apos;s just a thousand nights before , but all of it was together .
and all of all , he didn &apos;t even get more longer in human .
it was erhellt by the inside , and from down down , and all of it was erhellte by a göttliches fire .
so as something that happened , people knew what was that . they called it in his name .
they put together together and sing the hands together and started singing : „ allah , allah , god , god , god , god , god .
that &apos;s god , you know ?
interesting historic fußnote : when the mohren südspanien took them to take this practice with this practice , and they &apos;ve changed the way that they were going to „ the walls of „ allah , allah “ , allah “ , olé “ , olé , which is still at stierkämpfen and flamenco-tänzen .
if a performers went into spain , something magical has done something magical : „ allah , olé , allah , großartig , großartig , bravo , bravo , bravo , and it &apos;s a flüchtiger look at god .
and that &apos;s great , because we need that .
but the tricky part of the next morning , when the dancers of the dancers itself wakes itself and recognizes that there &apos;s 11 o &apos;clock in a tuesday -- and he won &apos;t just have a sense of god in himself .
it &apos;s just a alternder sterblicher with schmerzenden knees , and maybe he &apos;ll never again to go back to this little level .
and maybe somebody &apos;s never going to call somebody &apos;s name , if he &apos;s spinning . but what would he do with the rest of his life ?
that &apos;s hard .
this is one of the most schmerzhaftesten korrekturen of a creative life .
but maybe it doesn &apos;t have to be full of pein if they didn &apos;t believe that the most of the existence of them would be .
if you may just think they &apos;re a loaner -- from a unvorstellbaren source for a quarter of your life that will be someone in somebody else &apos;s time , when they &apos;re done with it .
if we start thinking about this , that &apos;s what all of it .
so i started thinking , and so i think about safety , as i was going to be in the book , which is going to be soon as the dangerous , the dangerous , strong , erwartete successor to my abgefahrenen .
what i have to say to myself , if i &apos;m going to go about it , i &apos;m not going to be crazy .
didn &apos;t work .
just do your job .
it &apos;s still going to be a contribution for your contribution , whatever it is .
if your job is dance , dance .
if you have a dumb designer genius , which is to be a very short moment for a brief moment to show your head , then dann olé ! “ !
and if not , dance is missing your dance .
and „ olé ! “ for you for you .
i believe that and i feel that , we should teach this .
„ olé ! “ for you , just for you to just take it for the mere human love and the eigensinn that you have to be there .
thank you .
thank you .
olé !
last year , i showed these two slides to illustrate that the arctic eiskappe that has been going to spend three million years of the size of the lower of the lower states , to kill 40 percent .
but this may not be very strong enough of this special problem , because it &apos;s not the thickness of ice .
in a sense , the arctic eiskappe is the smashing heart of our global .
it grows in the winter and the schrumpft in the summer .
the next slide i show you is a zeitrafferaufnahme , which is going to last over the last 25 years .
the dauereis is a red marks .
as you see , it &apos;s going to be markierte on the dunkelblau , this is the most fundamental ice ice in winter ; and it was in summer .
the so-called dauereis , five years old or older , almost like blood , which is from the body .
in 25 years , it &apos;s going to be gone from here .
this is a problem because the warming is the frozen of the arctic ocean in the arctic ocean , where there are great amounts of gefrorenem carbon , which is wenn , which is to be used to methane from microbes to methane .
compared to the entire amount of betrag in the atmosphere , could double this amount of time , if we &apos;re going to go to the point .
now , today , today , in some recycled of the shallow lakes , in alaska , in alaska , alaska from itself from the water .
professor walter walter in columbia in alaska , with another flachen lake in the winter winter .
wow !
you &apos;re fine . the question is , how will it ergehen us .
and one reason is this enormous wärmespeicher erwärmt erwärmt from the north .
this is a jährlicher tauwasserfluss .
but the volume are much bigger than ever before .
this is the most kangerlussuaq river in the southwest greenland .
if you want to know how the sea is through the sea by landeisschmelze , you put them into the ocean .
these rivers are getting very rapid .
at the other end of the planet , antarctica , antarctica , the biggest eismasse on the planet .
last month , researchers , the entire continent has now a negative eisbilanz .
and the westantarktis that &apos;s been on a few unterwasserinseln , is particularly powerful in melt .
this is 20 foot meereshöhe , such as greenland .
in the himalayas , the drittgrössten eismasse , you see new lakes that were in a few years ago .
40 percent of all people get in the world , half of their trinkwassers from this schmelzwasser .
in the andes , this glacier is the trinkwasserquelle for this city .
the wassermengen have turned out .
but if you versiegen , it &apos;s also going to be the most of the drinking water .
in california , a 40 percent reduction of the sierra verringerung .
this is the speicherbecken .
and the predictions , as they read them , are serious .
these austrocknung in the world are leading to a dramatic increase on fire .
and the disasters all around the world have actually been a really ausserordentlichen and never launched .
so many times in the last 30 years , as in the vorhergegangenen , the last 30 years , in the last 30 years , in the last 30 years .
this is a completely unhaltbares entwicklungsmuster .
if you look at this in the historical context , you can see what it is .
in the last five years , we &apos;ve produced 70 million tons of co2 , all of the 24 hours of a 24 every day in the oceans .
look at the area of the eastern pacific , and i just look at the american continent and beiderseits of the indian subkontinents , where there &apos;s a drastischen decline of the oxygen in the ocean .
the biggest factor of the global warming , next to the global warming , deforestation , which is 20 percent , is burning from fossil fuels .
oil is a problem , and coal is the most important problem .
the united states is one of the two largest verschmutzer , together with china .
and the proposal was , many more weitere kohlefabriken .
but we start to see a change .
here are the ones who were introduced in the last few years , with some green alternatives that were proposed .
trotzdessen is a political argument in our country .
and the kohleindustrien and ölindustrien have spent a $ viertelmilliarde letztes last mile to promote clean coal , which is already a contradiction in itself .
this painting reminded me .
around christmas day , at the day , at home , at home , a billion tons of kohleschlamm .
they &apos;ve seen it in the news in the news .
this is in our country &apos;s entire country of america .
this happened to be christmas .
one of the commercials of the kohleindustrie in christmas was this .
frosty der is a vergnügter , happy .
it &apos;s in the skin and abundance in america , and he helps to grow our economy .
frosty , the kohlenmann , the kohlenmann will clean every day .
it &apos;s affordable and liebenswert , and workers stay in education and bread .
this is the source of most coal in west virginia .
the most powerful bergarbeiter is the director of massey coal .
let me say one of the one thing about a whole clear , al gore , nancy pelosi , harry reid , they don &apos;t know what they &apos;re talking about .
so the alliance for the climate change was going to be in life .
this is one , part of her .
in the coalergy , we see climate change as a serious danger for our business .
so we &apos;ve got to put it up to the top of the top , a beträchtliche geldsumme to bring a werbeaktion on the path to get the truth of coal .
fact , coal is not dirty .
we think it &apos;s clean -- and also smells of good luck also , and also smells of good news .
so , they don &apos;t worry about climate change .
and then , they leave us .
saueber coal , they &apos;ve heard a lot of it .
so let &apos;s give you a tour of this modern , clean sauberen .
fantastic ! this machine is quite loud .
but it &apos;s the sound of the sauberen .
and yet the burning of coal for the global warming is the global warming , the remarkable clean water that you see here , change .
look at it , this is the today , clean saubere .
finally , the positive alternative is the same with our economic challenge and our challenge of our history .
america &apos;s in a crisis , the economy , the national security , climate crisis .
the red thread that all together , our dependence upon kohlenstoff-basierenden is the dependence on top of coal and ausländisches oil .
but now there &apos;s a bold , new solution to get us from that misslichen .
versorge america with 100 percent of electricity , within the next 10 years , within the next 10 years , within the next 10 years within the next 10 years within the next 10 years within the next 10 years within the next 10 years .
a plan to bring america to work , to make safer safer and help the global warming .
finally , a solution that is big enough to solve our problems .
versorge america . find more .
this is the last one .
it &apos;s about a neuversorgung of america .
one of the fastest ways of old , our dependence of old , and they &apos;re going to be able to map our world .
the future is here . wind , sun and a new energy system .
new investments to create good jobs .
versorge america . it &apos;s time to accept reality .
there &apos;s an old african saying , &quot; if you want to be quickly , you go .
if you come far , you go to go . &quot;
we need to come far , and we have to quickly .
thank you .
i want to start to ask them to ask her time to your childhood when they were playing with bauklötzen .
while they realized how you get your hands out and zugreift the klötze and moves klötze , and they actually learned to solve and solve problems with understanding and change .
the spatial think of intimately is deeply related to the most part of our surroundings .
as a scientist , inspired by the kind of our interaction , zusammen , and my colleagues , i would like to wonder , what if we were to use computers , which would be like a digital fingerspitze , which would be like a digital fingerspitze , and what if we could use computers , and what if we could make a digital physisch and make data and make
this question was so striking that we decided to explore the answer and siftables .
in short , a siftable is a interactive computer in the size of a kekses .
you can get with the hand , you can perceive each other , you can adjust your movements , and they have a screen and a funkempfänger .
much more important : are physically , why you can just get them as bauklötze and access to the hands of hands .
and the siftables are an example of a new generation of hilfsmitteln to the manipulation of the digital data .
and if these tools are going to be a bunch of physical and awareness of their movements , each of them and the intricacies of our umgangs are able to perceive , we can start with the exploration of new and entertaining .
i start with some simple examples .
this is this siftable , for the videowiedergabe konfiguriert , and when i put it into a direction , the video will be abgespielt , if i put it into the opposite direction , it &apos;s backwards .
and these interactive portraits are taking each other .
so if i put them side-by-side , they &apos;re interested in your interest .
if they &apos;re voneinader , you can also notice that and can be nervous .
and they &apos;re also feeling as their movements and neigung .
a interesting episode of interactions that we began to recognize was that we could use everyday gestures on data , like , like , like , as you do with it , how to do this with it .
in this case , we have three siftables and i can use them to push color into the center of the center where they &apos;re going to be able to get them down .
if we overdo it , we can make a little bit more .
there also also also some nice ways of the arts like languages , math or logikspiele , where we give people the opportunity to give the people the opportunity to the fast of the fast and the results immediately want to see .
here &apos;s me -- this is a fibonacci thing that i have with a simple gleichungsprogramm .
this is a game with words that &apos;s a kind of mixture of scrabble and boggle .
basically , you get any round of siftable buchstaben and while you try to form words , they &apos;re going to be a wörterbuch .
then , after about 30 seconds , and you &apos;re going to try and create a new buchstabenkombination and new opportunity .
thank you .
these are some kids that come to the media lab , and i could move them to try and get it and taken a video .
they really loved it .
a interesting thing about this kind of applications is that you don &apos;t need to give people many of the instructions .
all you say , &quot; &quot; form is &quot; &quot; the &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; and you know exactly what to do .
here &apos;s some people who test it .
this is our jüngster beta-tester down there .
it turned out that he was just stack the siftables .
so for him , they were just bauklötze .
this is a interactive trickfilmanwendung .
we wanted to develop a lernmittel for sprachlerner .
that &apos;s a little bit of .
he can bring new characters in the scene by looking at the siftable from the table that shows this character .
here he goes the sun .
the sun is going on on the sun .
now , now he puts a tractor in the scene .
the orange .
good job ! yeah !
by laying the siftables and they can put each other , he can &apos;t use characters , and he can &apos;t use the characters ...
... his own story .
hi .
it &apos;s a story with the lower end , and he can decide how they evolved .
flying cat .
the last example i &apos;ve got to point is to show it , is a musik-sequencer for live-auftritte that we &apos;ve developed recently and in the siftables as a sound , like führungsstimme , bass and schlagzeug .
each has four different variations , you can select what you want .
and you can put these notes into the sequence that you can put in the form of patterns .
and you put them together by just a ton-siftable an .
there are effects that you can change live , like hall and filters .
you put him with a particular note and tends to make him on the end .
and then more effects , like the speed and the volume that you &apos;re going to draw on the whole sequence .
so we &apos;re looking .
we start to get the führungsstimme into two sequenz-siftable einspeisen and these in a series , it &apos;s expanding and a little more of the voice .
now i add a bass .
now i &apos;m going to do something more doing .
and now i &apos;m going to sleep the filter with the drums so i can drive the effect of the effect .
i can accelerate the entire sequence , by putting the pace into one or another direction .
and now i &apos;m going to sleep the filter out of the bass , for something more .
i can wash the sequence during your own .
and so , i don &apos;t need to plan them in the middle of the line , but it can improvise , and they were more likely to be prisoners .
and finally , i can ausblenden the whole sequence by looking at the lautstärke-siftable .
thank you .
so , as you can see , my desire is to develop new mensch-computer-schnittstellen , which better to the fit that we work with .
and today i had time to give you one part of this new design-welt and some of the ways that we &apos;re working in our lab .
the idea that i want to leave you with the way that we &apos;re going to be at the cusp of the interaction with this new generation of interaction with digital media that information into our world that are our demands .
thank you very much , thank you very much .
i &apos;m excited to talk to you all with you .
yeah , good afternoon .
i &apos;m delighted to me that i &apos;m there .
so , yeah , what should be biohacking ?
i &apos;ve got to just a little bit , and i &apos;ve got to sich with the modern molecular biology .
i study molecular biology and a few years , i &apos;ve been doing with a few years , and i started to get a lesson because i was just going to know , and it &apos;s just a lot of what i &apos;ve learned in the study of the study .
so , that was my primary motivation .
so it was a curiosity and i wanted to sort of closer to the matter , so that .
i think the molecular molecular biology now is now , generally , generally , the general talk to be , all of what you count , synthetic biology and so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on
extremely important is now important , and more importantly , much more importantly , much more .
there &apos;s so much about how much things like this whole life cycle is to the äckern .
now , craig venter &apos;s now in the u.s.a , trying to make biofuel herzustellen , so gas from algae .
and then there &apos;s also things that are totally happening in everyday , which is totally true in everyday , but most people are not aware of the most waschmittelenzyme , for example , that allow us to wash 1,500 degrees of laundry , are also gentechnisch .
and the list can continue to be the other person .
and so this interest in this technology , i &apos;m going to go beyond that .
so what &apos;s now going to happen ?
most people know that from the softwarebereich .
computers and then , it &apos;s going to be , and then it &apos;s going to be , in the media , yes , the hackers gets hanging out and so on .
this is sort of very sad , because that &apos;s not what they actually got to actually , and what &apos;s actually going on .
and it &apos;s the software-hacker , in the &apos; 70s , achtzigerjahren with computerbasteln and it &apos;s also the internet .
and it &apos;s about a spielerische , creative , creative , originelle way , a problem .
and problem , this is not just a technological problem , it can also be a long problem , it can also be a zugangsproblem problem , so that can be a beliebige , so that you can crush a question , and how can you make it a different way or how can you do that .
and it &apos;s been halt , it &apos;s halt , but there &apos;s also a whole bastlerszene that &apos;s also a whole bastlerszene that &apos;s going to make all sorts of things .
and now , in biology , i want to get this metaphor , and i want to take this metaphor , which is actually a informationswissenschaft code , which is , that &apos;s actually a informationswissenschaft code , which is not quite a deep code , which is not quite a very good code , because it &apos;s the matter because it &apos;s real matter , and not just cyber
but it &apos;s also a code , and you can also code and push it to you , and so i found it , and i find that , and i find that i really intriguing amazing and i just wanted to get a lot of deeper .
it actually has really zweitausend eight , eight of the world , these networks .
there &apos;s hackteria dot , which is originally from switzerland , which is originally from switzerland , and with a cooperation in india , the but now , members of members or active people around the world .
this has a more artistic problem , so there &apos;s many artists , and philosophers are a lot of artists and philosophers , and in collaboration with scientists , with these technologies and ask them , there &apos;s museumsausstellungen and yes , all kinds of things .
but it &apos;s really about to find a lockeren access to a sanitary pad that has to have a sanitary pad .
and then there &apos;s do-it-yourself-bio dot , d.i.y.bio .
this is from the u.s.a a network , which is actually more like a kind of forum where you &apos;re going to go and talk online and online .
they &apos;re a little bit of a technical experience and a little bit of businessmäßiger , and then you &apos;re going to ask , that &apos;s what i &apos;m going to ask you .
and from these networks that made the whole thing has made a scene that i &apos;d like to go back to .
here &apos;s one of the image on the top left , you see , you see , this is a hackerspace , so basically a kind of school , a private school , a nonprofit , god &apos;s , is the verein of the world .
kids , old , all kinds of people , they just go to your own , you just have a lab and look at what can you do when you do that .
the left is a group in indonesia , house-of-natural-fibers , which is , but that &apos;s what &apos;s been quite a very long .
it &apos;s longer than those other two networks .
and the key thing is also in such a artistic aspect of biological materials , and , yeah , elektronikbasteleien , and combine that is kind of abgefahre .
a group of natural ankara , which i &apos;ve been to have to have a studentengruppe that would like to be able to learn what they were learning to learn to learn what they were learning in college , and they have so much to explain what they &apos;re doing so much of what &apos;s going on .
and i &apos;ve got a lecture in the other image in the other image in the other image in the medical museum in the medical museum in the medizinischen museum in the medizinischen museum in the beginning of a show .
and this is , well , that &apos;s quite a young people , but the only thing that &apos;s what is all of the entire world , is that fascination of technology .
and what you can do to do with it , and to ask yourself , and to ask , all right , so what you know what you want to do , what are you going to do with it , you &apos;ve got to be interested in that ?
so , o.k , to hack biology , you have to kind of material .
you need biological materials , and you need tools , and that &apos;s a laboratory .
what you usually do is understand among a laboratory , which is kind of abgefahrene machines , extremely expensive , extremely high , for fachpersonal , ausgebildete akademiker , and so on .
and our approach was to say , o.k , that actually doesn &apos;t have to do that .
it &apos;s not necessary because each every single person has actually developed , it &apos;s actually developed , most of the most laborgeräte , that &apos;s really what the most of the most laborgeräte .
and it &apos;s reassuring with this premise , for example , this premise , for example , this premise , for example , brian degger , a minimallabor zusammenzustellen , and then you have a dampfdruckkochtopf , and you know , so suppenbrühe , and then it &apos;s gezüchtet , and then it &apos;s gezüchtet .
so each one of the one is , one soup , which is a soup that he has gone to long , even before .
i &apos;ve tried to spend this in my lab , trying to go out and i &apos;ve got a little bit of time , and i &apos;ve got a little bit of d.n.a analysis , trying to make a vaterschaftstest , so that &apos;s so much more d.n.a , so on .
that &apos;s actually not going to be a joke , but .
here in the image , you see the lab , in anführungsstrichen , so , as a zugestellte garage , so that &apos;s so much possible , so much of the things that the university has been ausgemistet , which is really what has been doing and pretty much really interesting to it , and i &apos;m also very interesting to do a project .
and this is biocurious , who also mentioned erwähnte , this is a kind of volkshochschule in principle for molecular biology .
and so , you know , it &apos;s relatively relatively heterogen , so that &apos;s a little bit of people who are doing it , and so , it &apos;s a halt , so far more complete organizations that are doing more formal , which is already affecting the more formal .
but always the approach that it &apos;s just going to be simply and to be accessible to be available .
the first project we &apos;ve done as international group , as we were trying to be aware of our own minds , and we &apos;re now going to be here as a real science writer , and we &apos;re online , and we &apos;re just not know that people &apos;s always and so on .
and then , from the do-it-yourself-bio org website , the founders of the founders , and i &apos;ve got to have said , we &apos;ve got to make a real time , and then we have two events , one in london , a live , zweitausend 10 , and just in san francisco in san francisco .
and then it was about , yes , who are we , who are we , what do we want , what do we want to do ?
and what are our values and what are our power of our usual , our foundation ?
and then we have a code-of-conduct ausgearbeitet .
this was quite intuitive , so everybody has just its wishes , his arm , and that &apos;s what it does , then you move .
there came , i think , is a good code .
and we then have the idea of the thing , but that &apos;s not , but i think , i think , is relatively good , people are quite convinced of such as so .
and then we tried to try that , and they also have to zurückzubringen the academic world , but there &apos;s no way that it &apos;s not as well .
so i think we &apos;re actually going to be a step more step than the academic world .
well , what do we do now ?
a project i did with the hackteria-netzwerk in switzerland , was that we had a camera optische or optical basteln .
this is , if you focus a right , on a space , you can use little particles in the air , so you can move little particles in the air , so that &apos;s where it &apos;s in the focus , so that &apos;s what a traktorbeamstrahl is like a traktorbeamstrahl .
this is really , really , in the academic setting , and we &apos;ve got to have , o.k , which we might have , and then , a webcam , the lens , the lens , the lens , and you have a microscope that &apos;s called a microscope .
you see that down there .
and then we have a d.v.d brenner auseinandergeschraubt and the brenner brenner , and then trying to focus on this camera .
and that hasn &apos;t been in , but we &apos;ve learned a lot of it .
so another project that came from the french group from paris , which has been done , that &apos;s pretty cool .
and it &apos;s so much like this , so a hirnwellenmessgerät , so e.e.g , so e.e.g , so it &apos;s going to be with neurobiologie , his nickname is sam neurohack .
he then turned this one that you would get out there , and in cooperation with the museum , the way that &apos;s the museum .
there was the visitors in the room , in these chair , sit on these chair .
then they measured their brainwaves , and depending on what they thought , or how they thought , is different lights in the room .
it was quite a pretty schickes project .
another thing from the united states that has also has to do with this vaterschaftstestgeschichte , is the p.c.r , that &apos;s the polymerase-kettenreaktion , complicated word .
so it &apos;s about to copy genes , to replicate , d.n.a , fragmente , to replicate , so you can make them visible .
so , if i do this now , the most profiler thing , you get the profiler , then there &apos;s any haarproben , and then they &apos;ll go this way , and then you can say that , and then you can say , o.k , this hair is to this man .
and the machines that do something that are pretty expensive so much expensive to buy , the cheapest will go to viertausend euros .
and that &apos;s not in the hobbybereich , but it &apos;s really cool technology that can also be a lot of a lot .
so this is just a application of many , you can do with it .
and they have two of these two bastler and said , we have to do it easier and cheaper , and then we have to be hardware , and then they have a hardware system , and then they have a hardware , and now that they have to be able to have the marktreife and now the cheapest concepts of these devices .
i think , sort of , sort of a year ago or something like this .
but anyway , it &apos;s not cheap , but it &apos;s definitely in a framework where it gets to be very clear .
so , it &apos;s my opinion , after my opinion , a very gelungener .
one project i had started to build a gene-gun .
gene-gun is , yes , like a kind of luftdruckpistole , which is about two inches , two inches or something like that .
you &apos;re lädt d.n.a and goldpartikel in these luftdruckpistole , and then i &apos;ve got the then waiting for the first time and then the light system would have to go .
so the device you see there , that &apos;s not working .
but this is so my prototype , which was pretty disappointed to be on the kind of abgefahren , the thing in a branch , and pressure , and it was the pressure that was a high school thing to be able to break .
and then i took a sahnespender and it &apos;s going to be .
a sahnespender , if you take the full full power of water , the enough pressure , so i think , so that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing as 40 as a sechtzig bar .
and so you can get the particles , you can accelerate the particles , and then you go into the onion .
and the commercial device costs about fünfzehntausend euros , or something like this , so something that &apos;s how the damage .
so it didn &apos;t have the same efficiency , but it &apos;s essentially feasible .
so this is the kernanliegen that &apos;s the kernanliegen of the scene , that these availability of technology and also increase the information technology and the information and the verständlichkeit that you can engage .
because as the beginning , i said , it &apos;s an extremely important technology , and most people have fairly little hunch and also not a chance to form .
because if you just read about it , from sekundärliteratur , that &apos;s not the same thing that if you ever done it or seen it .
and i think technology is always becoming more important in our modern societies .
and if you can make a informierter citizen in society , and you want to make it a factor , you need to be able to understand the access and technology .
and you have to do it and understand it and understand it and understand .
and the firmiert is unter in the schlagworten open source and the citizen .
so you can see as citizens in the situation , you &apos;re going to be able to see with these scientific technologies .
and that &apos;s the kernanliegen of the biohackern .
these are the people who are officially at least in the website , d.i.y.bio-dot-org website .
this is a relatively remarkable number of people worldwide .
and interesting is also that they are also in southeast asia .
i think that &apos;s where there are fewer people in the way that actually exist .
so i know some of some of the ones that don &apos;t have been in .
and that &apos;s just the biohacker , the individual people .
partly , with these hackerspaces , so that sort of are in places where there are .
and that &apos;s what we &apos;re in the beginning .
and as i said , zweitausendacht has only started .
and hackerspaces , the computerhackerspaces , because the c-base in berlin was the first one , neunzehnhundertfünfundneunzig .
and this is a gigantic network of good , yes , infrastrukturzentren , infrastrukturzentren , the everywhere in the world .
and we hope that we &apos;re hoping we can also hold us , and then we &apos;re also good at that , and then they &apos;re also good for the way that you can be involved in more people .
and i would invite everybody to be in and even try to try and even try to explore .
it &apos;s not so simple , but it &apos;s not impossible if you &apos;ve got enough curiosity and enough energy , you get far .
thank you very much for listening .
that &apos;s it .
yeah , hi .
how do we work humans ?
this is a question that was very moved to me as a designer , but also in the field of usability , and all of things in the field of communicating .
and it &apos;s about how you can take people in interactive media so that they can use this interactive media and make it a way that they create a different experience .
i think that the interactive media in us is , cognitive models , cognitive models , cognitive modelle , which is really , in our biological memory , very long , very long , and that we &apos;ve been able to be able to make the eben of interactive media .
and this is really amazing because you think that these hochtechnologie that you &apos;re in the future , which is that you actually get a look at the future , but actually , the future is right at us , is to our archaischen roots .
what are the ones now , now , is actually archaische ?
i &apos;ve been going to talk four stichworte , and i want to talk to you like this .
and to archaischen models , and they are the models that we have in the pre-industrial times .
and to this archaischen models , we have a natural relationship to the virtuality .
this sounds like this .
i &apos;m going to get to see this right now , and you &apos;ll just give you a little bit of trying to try and have a natural relationship to the virtuality .
the second thing is that we &apos;ve been able to be able to talk about this archaischen models in which we are very , very bildlich , even though we &apos;re using a language language .
and the third area that explains itself to himself .
we all know that the interactive media is medien by definition , which is the ones that we &apos;re hoping and what we &apos;re told is that we &apos;re going to be the linearität of the world today .
fourth point is that the story is a place of the informationsweitergabe .
now , as this is the way that the virtuality is actually the most basic thing in the world .
i want to give you this to you .
how many türen did the house , where they live ?
we &apos;re going to answer them to me , but it &apos;s going to happen and it &apos;s going to happen in the moment .
they &apos;re going to go through the spirit of this house , in demn , and look at how many doors are there .
and that &apos;s exactly what they do .
they virtualisieren the reality , and it &apos;s really a computer .
fantastic , or ?
and there &apos;s a very mühe thing to be the virtual reality in our v.r.-labor , and we can actually do that for the whole time .
and this is the virtual vermögen to virtualisieren the reality that people have had to have bitter in the pre-industrial times , because they had nothing .
they had no books .
or they didn &apos;t have any fotolitografie .
they had no massenmedien .
the only thing that had had her head .
and in this mind , the memory is going to be .
in this head , knowledge and using these virtual pictures , the imagination , the imagination , was also passed to each other .
and so it &apos;s so much in us that we can do with the virtuality .
the interesting thing about that is when i &apos;m going to make a little trip .
yeah , that &apos;s going .
the interesting thing about this is that at that time , at this time , the human and medium was himself .
now , if you think about a little bit more .
what are media today ?
then you &apos;ll notice that there &apos;s been a transformation .
but i &apos;ll just talk to the same again .
and the most important tool of informationsvermittlung are known since stories .
schamanen , priests , so-called sogenannte , sogenannte , was that they were to preserve knowledge in stories .
and today we &apos;re still going to be very , very much about stories .
the author of the book , the storytelling animal , jonathan gottschall , we still verbingen , we still verbingen eintausendneunhundert eintausendneunhundert with the rezeption of stories .
this means for a kid that it takes to reach the most of the most of the time that most of his life has spent the most of his life .
now we think our love of stories , that we have to have a child on the lap of our parents .
no , no , no , far .
that &apos;s far more and more than the cultures of the pre-industrial times .
but for me , in the field of the interactive media , as a particularly impressive is that we have to design our biological memory to our biological memory , the ability to think .
i have one example of the nordamerikanischen tribe of the nootka-indianer tribe .
and the life lived in the küstenregion of british columbia .
and as you can see , this is a very inselreiches area , and you had to navigate there , from island to the island to become the island .
and they have done this with such as genannten .
you may even know if you &apos;re interested in that , and you know , a little bit of the australian .
they have similar principles .
they have no lead-landkarten , but they have the so-called gennanten songlines or traumpfade .
and what &apos;s interesting about that is that the navigation and the topography of uv areas could be used to be more .
and the language of the language was rang .
that means you &apos;re talking about sounds and talking about rhythm .
and these are these , and these rhythm , the topographie of a region , and that &apos;s also also allowed to be able to do this songs and so on the left , and then it &apos;s going to move back to the right , and then it was going to move back to the right .
why don &apos;t we sing , but we don &apos;t get to get from b from a b ?
no , no to navigate .
what &apos;s going on ?
so , this is what happens to be so gennante .
we &apos;ve moved us in the way that we &apos;re going to move in this way .
what happens is the ultimate thing and is going on the book and what &apos;s happened is that &apos;s the fotolitografie .
and that &apos;s what happens that we have the responsibility for our memories and the most important production of our individual memory have built on external media .
on the book and on the image .
so , unfortunately , we &apos;ve got a piece of god to virtualisieren .
and i &apos;ve been virtualität to be independent in the middle of us , and has to do with reality .
bruce brown , a well-known designforscher , the bekannter , is so far , and the image , he explores the book , and so on , so that &apos;s what we call the internet and so on , that these basic mass extinctions that these are massenmedien and our capacity to virtualisieren our capacity .
let &apos;s do a little zwischenbilanz .
from the vogt-zeitalter to the maschinenzeitalter .
what has a einflüsse on our thinking and our erinnerungsvermögen ?
then the most verblassenden einflüsse of the pre-industrial remains of the pre-industrial form .
and they are the way over the course of centuries , and more überschrieben , through the einflüsse of the maschinenzeitalters .
that means we &apos;re trying to remember , we have to have been standardized , and we have a huge amount of insight of memories that we can depend on our personal memories .
we &apos;re not producing more .
we have a abstract language .
we &apos;re asking the thing in images , not anymore in pictures , but we &apos;re kodifizieren them into our language .
we used to have used to be used to that things .
and we &apos;ve been akzeptiert as law and there &apos;s only one exceptions , like the non-linearität .
what &apos;s left is , is the storytelling .
still , we are the most storytelling as a informationsvermittlung , very strong .
the question is , what &apos;s going ?
we had the vogt -zeitalter , we had the maschinenzeitalter and we &apos;ve been able to do this as &quot; genannte .
this sounds very spacig and sounds very , very science-fiction , i know .
but this concepts of the cyber-zeitalters that bring us back to the ability to rediscover our skills .
there &apos;s a little bit more amazing , it &apos;s about non-linearität , it &apos;s about storytelling .
i want to explain a little bit about this .
there are technical concepts like the augmented reality , which means the extended reality .
so if you look at google glasses , then a concept that makes us combine the virtual world with the real world with the real world , which is called our affinität to the virtualisierung , the virtual normal , the virtual level of feeling , and becomes a little bit of natürliches , and then angesprochen .
another example is the virtual reality .
so , of course , this is how this is the context of my talk , because we don &apos;t move to existenten , virtual worlds , and the model of the model .
and other one another example are the ambienten , intelligent systems .
these are spaces that can respond to a human .
all this needs the ability to accept our basic capacity to accept the public domain as a real habitat .
i &apos;ve got in the middle , and i hope that &apos;s going to work , a very , very nice project , which is the bachelorarbeit of michael burk , ann-kathrin krenz , joris krenz , joris klause and jan-moritz müller .
and the two letzteren are today here today .
you might just get your short stand , so you can talk to the pause .
and this project i have as an example of how to be a wieder , cognitive models .
all of this is a game , i have to say to .
what the most of the storytelling of course , is extremely entgegenkommt and it &apos;s a computer .
and if i say computer , you &apos;ve got a probably very likely to see that any people are irgendwelchen people before people in front of people &apos;s konsolen or they &apos;re playing with the people in the hand .
anyway , in case they &apos;re doing it .
this is a game for outside .
and that &apos;s what i think is that i &apos;m going to try and see the outside world , so i can again again .
and this game is the virtual world , the data the datenraum , the data that we produce , we produce , with the real world .
i apologize i need to be so powerful to be so powerful .
you can then explain the same way that much better , there &apos;s more more behind .
and it &apos;s about that i &apos;m going to study a city by which i &apos;m positive or negative getwittert .
and so i get a whole different lens , one completely different impression , which i see negative and a positive set of city and a whole bunch of a city and a whole different way of doing this kind of a very different place of a very real city .
and we can now look at this now .
ah , what you can see here , sorry , is another one of what you &apos;re going to see .
of course , this virtual world in the walls of our cities , is clear .
and with a kind of a flashlight we can make these virtual worlds .
so , i like to read this , i &apos;m going to read this , and in the sense that the properties and the skills that we have acquired out of the vogt and the skills that we have to be activated and so that we &apos;re going to be able to be activated and that we &apos;re not going to be able to be able to be able to
thank you .
yeah , i &apos;m very excited to be with you .
i &apos;ve been asked to be asked if this is a sprechender sack , and my next is to speak .
it &apos;s not going to do it .
i &apos;m also going to try and get a little bit of what &apos;s inside of it .
but i &apos;m not going to go on the same thing .
yeah , children are inherently curious or should be curious , designers , designers .
i &apos;m a lot of home , so i &apos;m also involved with the subject of curiosity and how much the curiosity would also change our thinking , and why would we also lose curiosity and have to go back and forth again .
this is a whole bunch of things that you &apos;re going to be next to the actual dasein of the actual dasein .
if professors are curious , you &apos;re often going to be a n forschungssemester .
and that &apos;s what i had been last year in the last year .
a forschungssemester for happiness is a subject of design .
now , you &apos;re going to wonder , why all of the whole gestalter are going to be so natural , archaischen urformen of communication , interaction and so on .
and i just think of one of these little devices , because the things are always intuitive , and the things always should be more intuitive , and there &apos;s always a natural time , and there &apos;s a way to look at what &apos;s actually , of course , what is benutzungsfreundlich or intuitive .
and before the background , i &apos;ve been looking at the area of the hintergrund design , so the next generation in the position of the human brain in the relationship with the relationship with the human brain , how our tools to be involved in the beziehung of the computer , or how to change the computer in the digital world .
so i &apos;ve been busy with this , when of course , or intuitiv .
maybe you have to see a look .
why does this happen ?
so if we look at the evolution of our society , there &apos;s just shown here , and then we &apos;re moving from the third gesellschaftsgeneration in the fourth direction of the fourth river .
so , from modern modern into the computergesellschaft .
each society is shaped by a primärmedium .
the beginning of the stammesgesellschaft through language .
that means you &apos;ve been found that you &apos;ve talked to a common language , you could talk to each other , you could have a very similar cave , in other areas , cities , educated , or a half , and has a dörfer .
the primärmedium was , but the language , something very natural , something very much .
you had to learn to learn , so no toddler can be a toddler can talk about nature , but we &apos;re learning to use it and natural .
and then , they became a true society in the ancient society and the first form of abstraction .
this was a riesen-aufschrei , because of course , of course , the language of language began to manifestieren manifestieren in the form of writing , which is what is fluid and alive and meißele , i &apos;m going to go and put it into stone and so on it .
the way i meißel and when i meißel , it &apos;s a completely different tv than if it &apos;s a alive of mine .
but then , sukzessive , then , was the script as a primärmedium , was going to be done .
then the next generation we live in today &apos;s life today .
that &apos;s the only way through pressure and print geprägte with gutenberg and others .
then , in the case , it was a affront , where did , klerus and others said , you &apos;re actually really insanely , if the people starts to read , then the afterwards is still going to be fatal .
and now we &apos;re going to go into the next generation and the exciting thing is , a generationswechsel is just all of the few hundred years , and we &apos;re really in this phänomenalen phase , that we &apos;re going to be involved .
and this is the field of course , because we &apos;re seeing this one side of the new media , social media , facebook and so on .
with the total transparency , what &apos;s the new thinking is , what &apos;s happening on the old thinking , don &apos;t say that in the lasagne pferdefleisch and no beef is more or other phenomena , i want to just vertuschen this thing .
and these two worlds are just taking together a different way of thinking about it .
the exciting thing about this is , if you look at this , this new society , these computergesellschaft , entlehnt , sehr , prinzipien , prinzipien and archaischer and archaischer from the stammesgesellschaft .
now , not more on the local level , but on global level .
we understood that the weather is global .
that the theme of ecology is a global .
if i think about locally in the local ecological network , and the neighbor is less likely to get less ecologically , then it doesn &apos;t work .
this means , from local village , a global village has become a global village , of course , for the same principles , of course , for , but the total transparency , but also the total transparency .
so as you knew in the village , who had the village , who has to whom , and when that &apos;s what happens when this expansion of our own self is going through this mobile place .
it &apos;s been that we know global and getting faster and getting better .
so as earlier it was happening to the village .
so , i &apos;ve been looking at the background , which means what &apos;s actually , what is , what is it , what is , what we might also have is , what we might also have is , what is also instinctively , what makes the difference ?
because often , people are coming , you can &apos;t make it benutzungsfreundlich , so that everybody can deal with that .
so you have to have to engage with that , because that &apos;s what that means , and not just change it , it &apos;s actually better .
and when of course , of course , of course , and as a result of , as a result , i can take a lot of the impact , and they &apos;re just trying to make things that a benutzungsfreundlich , so they &apos;re going to be intuitiv , and they &apos;re just doing it .
you then think , as well as the studiums , with the subject and the wahrnehmungspsychologie .
and this is also what you &apos;re doing , and you &apos;re going to start and look and say , okay , now i &apos;m going to look at the inside .
and how does it look like this ?
so how do we work , if we were there ?
and what does it mean , of course , intuitively and how we work our channels of perception and how does the cognitive affect change ?
because steve jobs has said , &quot; you know , you &apos;re going to to you deeper deeper .
so you really have to be in detail , if i &apos;m going to benutzungsfreundlich something or intuitiv , what does that mean in the core .
and there you see that you have a couple of sense of our seven senses , most of you , we &apos;ve only got five , and it &apos;s probably seven times , because in the near future , the next is , as an extension of the self , and as an extension of its own .
and to see how process we process information , how do we use information ?
alone , what is information ?
information is every difference that &apos;s a difference .
many use , the word , but not what it means to do .
but i have to understand the core , in the essence , when it &apos;s understanding , when information is information , when information comes from information , and from information , i know how i can make some things , or of course , can make some intuitive things , or of course , can make it possible for me .
and of course , as is , how does design influence the perception .
we see this , if i &apos;m making things , i can design them as well as you can do it on the right , where i don &apos;t know what is salt and pepper , or i can make it intuitive , by making things .
so much of natural , in a brain , but i see it directly straight , where salt and pepper in the water .
and if i say somebody , give me salt , or pepper , then he &apos;ll be thinking about what &apos;s going on .
and the left just plain and hopefully hopefully that i hope that no sugar is in the salt , which is to give them accordingly .
but also our perception of how many of you are doing it .
for example , this notion of perception in the context .
the right circle looks bigger than the little circle , although that &apos;s not the case , but they &apos;re just a big , but still our perception , depending on what &apos;s going on in the context of the context of the context of things .
anyone know what that is ?
come on .
pattern recognition should work .
there &apos;s been more likely to be in my glasses .
so it &apos;s the same .
a second circle begins to be talking to a certain similarity or to talk .
and then , if i &apos;m going to go through a halboval , we don &apos;t see a einheit , and we see a unity , and we see a unity , we see a unity , we don &apos;t see three parts , a circle , a very circle .
it &apos;s called gestaltgesetz or eben , which affects us in the perception .
the most important thing that they &apos;ve done most of the most of the first semester that &apos;s the great semester .
gestaltgesetz , the gestaltgesetz of the continuity and so on .
so often , in the third one , you &apos;ve got to forget .
but this is a essential important , if you want to make things really intuitive to make things .
the next phenomenon , which is also very interesting to the heart attack .
sounds very well , but it &apos;s about a little bit of exciting to engage with it .
so we have the front and now think we &apos;re going to think about the beginning .
that &apos;s wrong .
you see , you see , from back to the front .
and they &apos;re projiezieren a presumption that you see something you see , what they &apos;re seeing , beispielweise circle .
that means we see our vision before before we see it , and then we see it back into our seheapparat , to say , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay
i got this very cognitive way , you &apos;ve got what &apos;s going on what you want to see .
and then there &apos;s this thing back then again .
then it goes back , because the back of the front , and says , well , the back of the front and says , well , don &apos;t really cool , and you can make sure what you see , what you want to see .
and then it goes back and then it &apos;s actually seen it .
so , a whole , very spannender process , like certain things , and what kind of things that happen is happening .
i don &apos;t know who &apos;s going to know this picture .
there &apos;s exactly the same thing i described .
now everybody tries to recognize this pattern .
i don &apos;t know who recognizes what .
does somebody see something that &apos;s going to happen ?
a dalmatiner , right .
once i &apos;ve seen that that &apos;s a dalmatiner in the top , you know that .
you &apos;ll never forget about it , because i &apos;m showing you where the dalmatiner is .
now you see the dalmatiner .
and on , look at it .
that means that i actually actually see it actually shows you that she doesn &apos;t recognize patterns , but i &apos;ve got it konditioniert within a little while , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again
and this is this projection of heart attack , rückkopplung .
now i know this and now i &apos;m going to go forward , i &apos;m going to see the dalmatiner .
i see the dalmatiner .
so , quite exciting , exciting processes that then in this , yes , it &apos;s not really , but here &apos;s just a little bit of quantity .
anyone know what three seconds ?
long , yeah . yeah .
that &apos;s our present .
so , it &apos;s always interesting to know than designer .
if i know something else takes three seconds , i can sort of go out of the present in the present , i can also take very well in the vergangenheitsschleife , which i &apos;m going to do with him , i &apos;m going to have someone else &apos;s going to be with three seconds .
it has to be only a day as a present .
and then it &apos;s in the past and so , i can really elegant very elegant , for instance , in the computer , if i know this phenomena .
what does the hell do they do ?
yeah , milliseconds .
and also a very interesting phenomenon .
this is the time that you love in love with love .
that means , if you know , you know , look at this now , you know , look at how long , because i don &apos;t have any gewähr , which is what can happen to happen .
and sechzehn milliseconds , also a very interesting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the time of most of the most powerful that we have .
this means that this first impression is happening in a curved fast , how we perceive things .
and as we see things , on what we &apos;re looking at and how we kind of sozusagen against our environment , so we can solve this accordingly .
of course , the other thing is not only about the subject of the subject , and neuronale verarbeitungen , but of course , with the subject of the mensch-objekt-beziehung .
so , how is a human being on certain things .
there &apos;s even the practical functions , so that &apos;s how much more specific or formalästhetische .
there &apos;s anzeichen-funktionen where i know exactly where i have to reach .
but there &apos;s also a symbolic functions , why is somebody for such a little täschchen , where anyway , anyway , horrende , so horrende sums of money , even though it &apos;s not so virtually so virtually that it &apos;s not as good ?
there &apos;s been on the symbolischen , on the bedeutungsebene , which we &apos;re also about as a creator of course .
and back to my actual topic , and the subject of interface and the topic , which is also dahinterliegt , is usability .
and usability is always always means how can i get a very quick goal or how can a users in a particular nutzungskontext , efficient and zufriedenstellend .
so that &apos;s what the norm is .
how can i make something like a little bit more benutzungsfreundlich ?
i can direct directly in the direct , or i need to do it , i need to be a entsprechende , i need to be able to do this .
and fewer usable or benutzungsfreundlich is it .
that i just do it differently and beautiful , doesn &apos;t mean that it &apos;s better handhabbar .
it &apos;s also to understand .
and then , if you have to have the software that we &apos;ve seen , it &apos;s also , you know , and then you see , you know , and then you see why neunundneunzig percent of our current is not allowed to be a little bit of the software , or not auf , in many areas , although it &apos;s really far more intuitive , even though
and yet , the intuitive benutzbarkeit is not just a elementarer wirtschaftsfaktor , nen elementarer , wenn , if i want to be doing technologische devices .
why ?
because in the case , we &apos;ve been through this new kind of nutzbarkeit , so the natural barrier , for example , 10 times faster than our goal .
you need to imagine that if you do something that you do something that &apos;s something that &apos;s going to do something that takes five hours and with this new kind of natural software that &apos;s another hour .
that doesn &apos;t mean that you probably go to four hours of home , but you can then pay your employers or you &apos;re going to get them to do with the four hours .
but i want to say that it &apos;s a corresponding leistungssteigerung , and also , to do things .
if we then then get into the area of the software , this is the first command line interfaces that were very abstract , where you have months to deal with these systems .
then the next thing that happens to the next thing that has been doing with it is , or mental model , or rather , or mental model , you have a idea of something that is metaphor to make the metaphor of a desktop to make the computer .
so , no more republican and the ones or kryptische codes , but a metaphor .
this has been doing all the whole thing that i &apos;ve done , but it &apos;s also much better .
the next generation of graphischen benutzungsoberflächen is really much more with behaviors .
so , i think , as a result , as a result , much more often than that .
this is also a paradigm paradigm .
i believe that this is always going to be the aussehen for success , just a heart attack .
and then , if i got a step into this simple user , where i was doing , in the process , where i was doing , my voice , my voice , via geste , and not more than the things that has to steer , and then i &apos;m still more and more like that , i &apos;m still going to go back and even more .
but that leads me to the point where the point is when they &apos;re going to be done in the things ?
if you &apos;re going to be more intuitive , and then i have to come back to my little friend here and see what &apos;s going on , what does this mean , what is that really , right ?
and that &apos;s always a little bit more intuitive , if i &apos;ve got to think about a little bit about it .
so he didn &apos;t want to think he &apos;d like to think , it &apos;s just making it available .
the less i think about this , the more time , the same time .
and what does that mean for designers ?
that means that if we look at the existing handlungsmodelle of one another to something else , for example , the metaphor , i can do that as a result .
that means i can just have a kind of a physical , human handlungsmodell , and make the software to make the software .
and of course , the question is , what is actually the most intuitivste handlungsschema of us humans and now i have .
this is called the called osit-modell .
this is the reason that we use each of us and osit is an acronym and to be , selektieren , informieren , informieren , informieren .
so , the power of you all the time , but he &apos;s doing it , and yes , it &apos;s kind of intuitive , or partly instinctively .
the model is already going to be ausprägt in the womb and it &apos;s interkulturell , so it &apos;s been used in the world and old , and it &apos;s going to be used by us , and it &apos;s going to be used by the whole time , without knowing that this model is present .
osit osit is about 50 to the fünfzig of us ever to aktivität , so in the sleeping , you &apos;ve found that it &apos;s less likely to be less likely to be a day .
i can now have this mental handlungsmodell , selektieren , selektieren , informing , informieren , transagieren transfer on a interaktionssystem .
and by this kind of transmission , similar to the metaphor of the desktops , now , now , is a metaphor of a physical object , but a metaphor of a handlungsmusters , a metaphor of a handlungsmusters .
and this is on a higher grail of the benutzungsfreundlichkeit than the transmission of a classical metaphor , which is the desktops .
and when i &apos;m going to go into this , for example , in the case of the jetzt , in the case of a choice , and i &apos;m going to be able to look at the detail , and i can say , &quot; transagieren , i can also send it to send it or send or send someone else or send or send or send or send
then i can transmit this .
i try to take this time in a beispiels .
just has a cake .
and i think now , i &apos;m going to take the lessons to the object , can be rauszoomen again , reinzoomen .
i &apos;ll get the entire thing , and can say , &quot; i &apos;m going to say , &quot; show me all of the things that i &apos;m going to do with chocolate .
and i &apos;ve got a interface that &apos;s what &apos;s going to be more intuitive and very much natural .
because i can make things like the little bit , can make a touchen , and they come to me , is far more natural than if you can use hierarchisch organisierte or to think about hierarchisch , or other mechanisms , to make some of these things .
imagination is more important than , and with this sentence , i want to give you a little bit of a laugh , and then you want to give you some of the clue to get some other way to get to new solutions and in this sense , thank you for your attention and please .
i want to show you a very specific aspect of curiosity .
the first thing when you &apos;re faced when you &apos;re big when you &apos;re going to be a baby , when you have to get yourself to be , you know , what they have you have to do is , and depending on , or you have to be able to play more or less , and the more , that &apos;s going to be , of course ,
and the curiosity don &apos;t learn .
that &apos;s all of the ones that are here and curious , and they &apos;re really people who have a property that you can &apos;t learn .
i &apos;m about this all about this whole umweltdiskussion , weltuntergang , vierzig years of umzusetzen , in quality of life .
and there &apos;s a central point .
and the depends on phosphorus .
give pee , a chance .
every day you give them a größenordnung , you &apos;re going to add two grams of phosphorus , and they have to take two gram of water .
otherwise they can &apos;t have teeth .
you can &apos;t store energy .
you can &apos;t have bones .
we could only do it as a amorphe mollusken through the weltmeere .
if we don &apos;t take a phosphorus and then .
amazingly , it &apos;s so much that we &apos;re looking at something that &apos;s actually selbstverständlichkeit , but not that &apos;s not as it .
because all of us talk about energy , but no one talks about the phosphor-problem .
the key ingredient is much critical .
we depend on two countries .
we &apos;ve only been able to do for two years and already , in the world &apos;s gdp , more uranium in the world , in the environment , as in all the atomanlagen .
in the last 20 years , are fünfzehntausend tons of uranium in our fields in germany .
and we take it all .
it &apos;s beginning to be leukemia in children .
and we think we would protect the environment if we &apos;re a little less harmful .
so , for example , schütz the environment , fewer car .
schütz schütz , the environment , fewer trash .
schütz schütz , the environment , less energy .
but that &apos;s not protection .
this is how if i say , &quot; if i say , schütz your kid , it &apos;s just three times five times .
that &apos;s just a little bit less destruction .
if we think from the wiege to the bahre , then our entire world will be used to our entire earth or later .
that &apos;s how to think about the wiege to the wiege .
and the most important thing is to look at the ground as the allererstes .
in the ground , over five percent of the kohlenstoffs .
so we &apos;re going to build corn and losing between 11 and 30 times tons of rock per hectare per hectare , or on the square of the ocean , or on the ocean .
that means we &apos;re losing the ground in the ground , more than a new educated .
we can see that we can see the müllproblem .
and everything is packaging or content .
in offenbach , for instance , are the most hausmüll percent of the inzwischen of the müllmenge .
and because we &apos;re getting older , that &apos;s the diapers of that .
so , this is all of them all in the vorwindelphase .
yeah ?
a baby needs a baby windeln .
we could reduce the 10 percent , but what does that do ?
this is going to be in china in a second .
that &apos;s completely trivial .
so the question is , how do we deal with these diapers ?
so here &apos;s one of the evidence that men don &apos;t have pigs .
let me tell you .
because the phosphorus is going to be the schweinen of pigs .
people in the people .
yeah . yeah .
so , for so much , can &apos;t be pigs for the men .
because that &apos;s actually a factor , right ?
traditionally we think we &apos;re thinking in the umweltdiskussion , we &apos;re too many of the world .
and if you get people when you get people to exist if you say that , you don &apos;t get there , you &apos;re going to go and go and raise .
and so somebody like al gore , one of our big heroes , there &apos;s nothing more wichtigeres than the human population .
in israel , if you &apos;re a menschenleben , you &apos;re rettest the earth .
here &apos;s the more you umbringst , the more you &apos;re better .
yeah . yeah .
the first question is , we really are too many ?
if you look at the ants , the weight of the ants on earth , then the ants are about more than we .
i could also be loving my ability , but in the united states nobody , no , in the far , even though they &apos;re vegetarian .
that means that ants weigh more than we .
and because they physically work much harder than we and because they only live three to six months , they &apos;re going to be in your weight , in energy , something about 30 billion people .
that means we &apos;re not too many , we &apos;re stupid , yes ?
and where you see how far we are really going to do , and how sad we are , and how sad we are at the earth , you can see that , for example , that &apos;s what a program has a program to be vierzig , to be here , you want to be here , you want to be here ?
you can only be klimaneutral if you don &apos;t exist ?
the only opportunity .
have you ever seen a tandem tree ?
yeah ?
one of the one ?
that means our intelligence means that we want to be dumber as trees , yes ?
yeah ?
no tree is kohlenstoffneutral .
not happiness , yeah ?
there &apos;s no überbevölkerungsproblem of trees .
there &apos;s only just the only largest trees in the amazonasgebiet trees in the amazonasgebiet trees .
have you ever heard anything from trees from trees ?
that means all our intelligence means that we want to be the consume as trees .
and where you see , even in something like demeter , the strikteste bio- , erlaubt agriculture , doesn &apos;t allow our own stoffwechselprodukte .
every year , we lose three million tons of phosphorus , which really needs to be in that direction .
and we are too many .
just about it .
this is what we feel about this is so guilty on earth we say , there &apos;s no bio-landbau , no bioland , no nature-et-progrès , no nature-et-progrès , and as you all the hot , that allow our own exkremente .
isn &apos;t that sad ?
so we &apos;re too many .
it &apos;s safe to be more powerful , less harmful , which is angeht .
but where are we useful ?
we &apos;re trying to minimize our ecological footprint , but it &apos;s about having a big footprint that is useful .
we want to be good for society , we want to be good for the economy , but when it comes to the environment , it &apos;s not being there , right ?
nullemissionen , yeah ?
you can only have nullemissionen if you &apos;re not there .
even if you shoot now , they would have emissions .
so , you can &apos;t solve that .
we can do it differently .
we can get our nutrients .
we do in brazil in brazil in brazil in the world where we get the nutrients .
so , right , we can see that in this way , and in a way that we &apos;re in charge of agriculture in agriculture .
we do this in china for instance , where we &apos;re going to take the sample from it .
in china , a nachttopf nachttopf is still a nachttopf , and so , yes , yes ?
and in our western world , we were always too stupid , our nutrients .
that means that all the western territorial zivilisationsgeschichte , that the city has only only has only been , but the farmers never has a sudden .
and so they had to grow the cities more , because the farmers went into the cities and the cities had to go away and further away their nutrients .
so all of the western empires are always , until they don &apos;t get the infrastructure and then they &apos;re implodiert .
yeah ?
in china , it was different .
you &apos;ve been done over the bruchlos civilization over five years because you always have the nutrients that the nutrients .
even even if you &apos;re invited to dinner , you &apos;re expected to eat , you &apos;re going to stay long until they &apos;re going to make the toilet .
because it &apos;s the unfreundlich , and the nutrients .
you have them to go back to the dinner , not for the nährstoffdiebstahl .
that means you can see the internet , as you can get the nutrients .
so , this is actually a nice thing , so , if you do this , so agriculture is , in a hectare , in a hectare , in a hectare , with a bauer , and the anlage can be waiting for a bauer dollar and the facility that are waiting for the chickens and enten and gemüse and fische .
and the great thing about this is that the verbrechensrate in the favelas is about a hundred percent .
so we don &apos;t need to control people to be slightly bad .
we can support them to be good .
this is natürlich , but the facilities are carrying themselves .
the byproduct is clean water .
and they &apos;re so designed to be designed by the design that you can just do it just .
that means that the verbrechensraten go back to the verbrechensraten .
and none of these facilities , we &apos;ve been built over hundertfünzig in the last twenty years , no one of these facilities ever been sabotiert .
you could easily just get a liter of altöl reinwerfen , and then the plant would be ruined over over years .
isn &apos;t going to happen .
that means we don &apos;t need to control people to be slightly bad .
we can support them to be good .
that means we need to be phosphorus .
and by the way , if you want to do what &apos;s going to do , you know , in germany , in germany , the best way of all the kläranlagen in the besten is the in .
unfortunately , not in offenbach , but maybe you can help the frankfurtern , you can help a little bit more .
because the frankfurter could get the best one of the phosphorus .
and the needs to return .
we see that is that phosphorus is really critical .
and we see that it &apos;s really possible .
we &apos;ve been used to be used over three years .
the dutch government has explained , they &apos;ll be the first country worldwide , which is phosphorus .
but we need that .
understand , there are two countries that control almost siebzig percent of the world &apos;s worldwide .
there &apos;s a bunch of haufen .
these are sechsundzwanzig countries , the 40 percent of the ölvorräte control .
and the oil is we can replace through other people .
but the phosphorus will not replace replace .
that &apos;s not about making existing existing things a little bad , but it &apos;s about making something right .
and especially to wonder , what &apos;s the right thing .
that means it &apos;s about efficiency , not efficiency .
in holland , you understand that , of course , because in holland is the country built on flowers .
yeah ?
imagine if your wife is sad when you &apos;ve been a sad , if you have them , and they come with big rosen .
completely inefficient .
but it &apos;s all effective , yes ?
or take a lippenstift .
a woman in germany , about six , three kilogramm during their lives .
and it &apos;s about .
this is not a scientifically right , because we don &apos;t know how much of it is going to do .
but a lippenstift , even in this lighting , i can tell you , is completely inefficient , but it &apos;s all effective , yes , yes ?
all of what &apos;s beautiful , isn &apos;t efficient .
it &apos;s not very serious , but efficiency .
and to ask , what is the right ?
not to burn the klärschlamm , and you &apos;re going to go through a little bit better and to get it into the verbrennungsanlage and in the entire materials for cycles , but first time to ask , how do you solve ?
imagine mozart &apos;s efficient .
yeah ?
if i go to dinner , and say , there &apos;s a pill with offenbach-geschmack and a glass of water .
wonderful , that &apos;s what ?
that &apos;s efficient .
all of what &apos;s in life is not efficient .
if you fall in love with somebody , is efficient ?
yeah ?
that means everything in life is not to save the lives , to avoid it .
the whole umweltdiskussion .
we say the people , yeah , you don &apos;t have a green in the south .
no , that &apos;s right right ?
every place where you go , you know , you &apos;re going to go back again .
but the wrong things .
if you give the wrong stuff , you have a müllproblem .
in how we think of the north .
there &apos;s every unit of footprint .
if you walk , yeah , every footprint , every brain .
because the ground is going to die the mosses , and the wind and the water is driving the bottom away .
if you &apos;re in italy , everybody means that the water is going to stand in the meadow .
so , it &apos;s about to create a great footprint that is a feuchtgebiet .
not schuldmanagement .
we say in germany .
yeah ?
but if i ask you , how do you get to your wife ?
what do you say ?
sustainable .
then i say , herzliches beileid , yeah ?
that &apos;s just the minimum .
so not save , the world , avoid .
each waste is nährstoff .
and it &apos;s a lust , if you see in italy , like the people in the high bow , that &apos;s what you call the car to the car .
because you know , this is a lustvoller process .
it &apos;s the ne of revierverhalten , right ?
you can show , i was there .
but with the right design , please .
we have a eiscremeverpackung developed , which is a eiscremeverpackung , which is at room at the time .
you can do it where they go and stand .
in two hours , they spread all over the time .
and it &apos;s also used seeds of rare plants , so they are using the way that they &apos;re going to launch .
that means we are useful , not less harmful .
so it &apos;s two cycles .
not all of it should be kompostierbar .
a tv or a washing machine , they &apos;re just trying to use it .
just the things that verschleißen the verschleißen , like schuhsolen , like bremsbeläge , like autoreifen , who have to be so that they &apos;re going to go into biological systems .
the things that are just used to be used to be in technical systems .
but today we &apos;re talking about the biological systems .
yeah ?
for example , the sneaker , yes ?
and the direct ads , and not for the company , for the company , for the company , but for that they &apos;re going to help this company to make these products .
because we don &apos;t do things that are more free .
yeah ?
so , if i take them out to eat , and say , this is free of hähnchen , then you &apos;re not going to do that .
no , we &apos;re stuck with what &apos;s inside .
positive .
so not like detox .
not toxic in this .
it &apos;s all of what &apos;s inside , is useful .
these are the first shoes that you can use the kavalierstart to the fußgängerampel and the rubber in biological loops , yes ?
all of it is kompostierbar .
and if it &apos;s going to be , we &apos;re going to get us , of course , for adidas , for nike , for hennes and mauritz and all the textile industry .
and that &apos;s half of all the abwasserprobleme globally that causes the textile industry .
so , it &apos;s about that , you know , ask yourself in the people .
hey , puma , you &apos;re really going to really serious ?
because they &apos;ve already been twice the vorstandsvorsitzenden .
and i &apos;m not sure that they really dabeibleiben .
so , you help me a little bit about it .
but it &apos;s going .
yeah . yeah .
that &apos;s what &apos;s been in the right .
that &apos;s going .
we can do the things that they &apos;re doing when they &apos;re verschleißen , if you &apos;re kaputtgehen , you can have biological .
technical is also the same .
there &apos;s a direct rücknamesystem .
this is the first ökologische rucksack , actually that &apos;s made for the circulation .
so , that &apos;s too , in any store , you can do things .
if you get to the get , yeah ?
remember the way that we even remember ?
when it &apos;s the waste .
everywhere are all over this case , almost like this .
in the countries where people get to money .
there &apos;s been on the deponien , but also in the landscape , yes ?
if we change the plastics , so that it can go into biological systems , so if we can change the wasserspeicher , if we can go back to the zellulosebasis , you can put them on a baby in israel or in tunisia , bäume trees .
yeah ?
if you take these these cell , they zerkleinern , sterilized and the powder to do the trees to plant trees .
so that &apos;s the baby kohlenstoffpositiv for life , and it &apos;s already done by the beginning .
so , we don &apos;t need to be klimaneutral , we can be klimapositiv .
it &apos;s sort of sozusagen to a beneficial poop .
yeah , so .
yeah ?
we can do that .
we can even invent all .
i &apos;ve got a institute .
meanwhile , there &apos;s a lot of people with people and they can all engage .
there &apos;s a club that &apos;s a club , cradle-to-cradle-verein , where everybody can participate .
so no longer save , new , avoid , reduce , no schuldmanagement , but intelligent waste .
do you make this curious ?
thank you .
the work of the interpreten .
music is as language .
in the description of my talk , i wrote that i was as a interpretin , so as a übersetzerin , so in english , and so in english , you know .
interpreten are the translator of the written notes in klingende music .
you don &apos;t just think about the word for the word in a different language , but also to understand the deeper point of words and wortzusammenhang , so that it makes a very good translation , to know that it &apos;s a reasonable translation , who &apos;s got to do with fremdsprachen .
already from the english department into english , you can &apos;t know more , it &apos;s going to be , if you &apos;re going to go to solve or poetry , or even to go on .
it &apos;s been very much , but for the laien , what we do with our musiksprache .
as a interpretin , i just had a first noten of the world &apos;s the world .
you think that the composer in the notes is exactly what he has to be there .
in fact , the notes are very vague and ungenau .
these notes are about equivalently or ungenau , like a verbal , if you have to genaue a very seemingly penibelst , description of a landscape .
because in this verbalen , the smell of flowers don &apos;t smell the level of the grüns , the level of the grüns only is to hear the säuseln of the fittest not to feel .
this means , the most prolific one has to be the ungenauen of the notensprache , which is , in a different , concrete , nonverbale .
today , i want to show you what i was going to be able to translate -- so , again , a language of language .
so basically , a translation of translation .
so i &apos;m going to talk to you all of the whole rather days , because if i had to translate it into english , it would be the kind of thing that i would be interested in for the translation of translation .
so , the music works for me as much as the spoken language .
the notierten notes have the function of the letters of a script .
so it &apos;s not to learn to learn just the notes , and they tend to put on the piano on the piano or the right place on a violinsaite .
this is just the letters that you learned to paint .
the point of the letters you can only see if you can make the language .
so , you need to be musiksprache for the learning for the music for the music , as for the spoken language .
there &apos;s also a abstufungen , whether you learn it for the hausgebrauch , just passive understands or you can also talk to the musical way .
the work of the interpreten is kind of like a theaterregisseurs .
after you first have to play a piece of cortisol , because you &apos;re excited about it , you &apos;re going to be erstmal , and you &apos;re going to end up to the origin of the composition .
you get information about the piece of the play .
you read in the letters , tagebüchern , notes , or whether it &apos;s words , thoughts of composers .
you studied the works that he previously before and after it .
you &apos;re interested in .
the beweggründe , it &apos;s too writing .
how did he affect it ?
how were his latest society , like the society and politics ?
all of this stuff was interested .
you &apos;re thinking about this time , by opening up for example , or for instance , contemporary images or literature .
but the time you have a lot of interpret to know about the composers that you &apos;re playing , and it always always always a lighter to be easier to feel oneself in him and feel .
the composer will always end up getting more and more to the friend that you live together .
his urging , the piece of writing , is increasingly becoming more and more to my personal cause .
now , the notes of all the things that the anliegens record of the &quot; the tallest of the composers , but just a scaffolding , i &apos;m going to show you that framework to make it happen .
i &apos;ll say , with my own words , what was written in this framework .
i play games , what these sound could have .
now for me and for the composers , and what you might mean for him today .
each note , every one is , every one , i &apos;m going to get a sense , because i &apos;m supposed to be , because it &apos;s about my now personal gelebten .
it has to be in this room for me and now , otherwise , i can &apos;t persuade my audience that i &apos;m going to convince my mind .
it &apos;s always a very happy concert , if i can have the experience , that i &apos;ve been doing that , and i &apos;ve been doing this as long as we were doing .
how you &apos;ve been going to have a happy new day , although always , with the same kind of rituals in life , stand up , and then , in the work , to work , so i &apos;ll keep the same time with the same time .
i &apos;ve been going to have a day , the seasons , the seasons , my pulse is about slow down to the morning , in a konzertsaal , in a konzertsaal , it takes longer to be a longer that the sound of the sound would grow back to home .
i suppose that breathing of the audience , or unconsciously , or unconsciously .
all of this affects me and all that my self is affecting my experience with the composition .
it &apos;s quite amazing , if i &apos;m standing with a duo-partner on the stage , and we have the same wavelength .
and then the same thing happening in a good , angeregten conversation .
you get a new idea , and it &apos;s going to be a response to a response .
it &apos;s exciting , because then things that we don &apos;t have so much , and what you can &apos;t do so much .
it makes great fun , in this sense , and they have to have the audience as the audience , as the music is alive .
so every concert is a different concert .
i &apos;ll never play more like this .
i can &apos;t play as much as in africa .
and i &apos;m going to have more lebenserfahrung than today , and i &apos;m going to talk to my palette of the musikklänge , and so far more more more farbnuancen , emotions and emotion .
sure , i &apos;m going to have some farbtöpfe , but it &apos;s not a few farbtöpfe .
i have a nice example of this .
it was on a klavierkursus for musikstudenten at my beloved old teachers , professor jürgen , a bekannter jürgen , a well-known beethoven-spezialist , konzertpianist and langjähriger professor in stuttgart .
unfortunately , i was even too young at too young , so he was emeritiert when i started studying .
but i had the great fortune , very early , with a long time , and i was going to be on my own kursen .
i was 17 , when i was sitting on one of his courses again , and she played the last four of the chopin of chopin , a spätwerk .
he asked me what the preamble of this ballade was .
this is such a getragenes part .
and in my jugendlichkeit , i said , expectation .
and then schmunzelte and he said , so ?
it must be the altersunterschied .
because for me , it means memory .
he was already about sechzig .
well , with a 17 , you have a few dreams , but no significant memories .
i &apos;m going to play the piece of all over the time , and it &apos;s always been interested in me , although no one has changed .
every time it &apos;s exciting , because i &apos;m going to read something new .
one example of a completely different region . you have gemalt the seerosen x-mal .
it &apos;s always the same garden , but to different tageszeit , at verschiedenem light .
he &apos;s translated into the seerosen verschiedentlich , as he saw her as she saw him at this moment .
his personal impressionen of the seerosen .
the most common interpretation of a piece of a piece of a piece of a piece of mine is this
meanwhile , i &apos;ve been also older as a chopin of time , when he wrote the piece .
he &apos;s been living in a neununddreißig years .
and it &apos;s important to me again , again , again , even if i mean , you can do it .
to keep zwiesprache , right with the composers .
because the notes are the only connection to him .
especially , if he died .
now , how do you start to talk about the language of music ?
i said , &quot; well , you need to take care of the spoken word .
often , the musikunterricht is that you have to learn the notes .
you learn to learn how to read the reading before you just talk a word .
you learn to find the notes to find the notes on the instrument .
if all of the fingers around and right , as it &apos;s right , as it &apos;s moving in the notes , then you get notes that are so sound like music .
if that &apos;s going to happen , the students get the students to go on .
and over interpretation is barely talking about the anfängerunterricht .
well , there &apos;s a front of the front , which is a very small piece .
lento , slowly .
loud and leisezeichen , f and b , etc .
that &apos;s what most of you here .
but even if you get these things , it still has something to be a little bit .
and it &apos;s always not interpretation .
i wonder .
i wonder that you often have something quite a very elementares .
namely , that , to make music on the instrument that has to do with their own , and feel there .
and that &apos;s the singing .
a kid that don &apos;t learned because it doesn &apos;t have the parents that they don &apos;t have to do it .
this is like the sprechenlernen .
it &apos;s necessary to have its own experiences and idea of music to make it happen , so it &apos;s about a tool , to make a instrument that &apos;s sound .
people who never have been going back , have never ever been able to do with your own body , as it is to form a note .
one thing to design with his own breath .
the idea is the extension of our body .
our vocal chords to sing , our hands and feet like to dance .
so the hammerköpfe are the hammerköpfe in the piano the fortsetzung of my fingers .
the tune is coming from the gesungenen and the rhythm from the dance .
the most dauernde berieselung nowadays , with music , there &apos;s not förderlich .
you don &apos;t need to make music even music if it gets bored .
no longer required to whistle a liedchen or to sing .
each music will become more likely to plattgemacht if you &apos;re constantly touching the outside outside of the outside .
there &apos;s some among you , there &apos;s some among you , yes , but what do you do if i don &apos;t sing ?
i &apos;m asking you , you can &apos;t sing , you know , because they believe they can &apos;t sing ?
or b , because they don &apos;t have to be singing ?
and so , in both two , it &apos;s not too late to start to figure out whether they can &apos;t , or learn how to use these little muscles that put the vocal chords , right .
that &apos;s what you can train .
or c , because you have them to give them a bescheinigt , they &apos;re untauglich .
i ask , how fachlich kompetent was that a sanitary pad ?
have you ever been a zweit- or a drittmeinung , how do you say it beautiful ?
or d , you may not have music and therefore want to do a good job .
but what i &apos;d regret is that i &apos;d regret because music is a nice , kommunikative thing .
but maybe you can also have them even more umstimmen .
well , you see , you have to be seen , all of the cases has to be a aussichtsloser candidate .
but they don &apos;t say , &quot; i don &apos;t understand anything about classical music .
i can &apos;t say whether it &apos;s good or bad .
and i &apos;m going to say , but certainly you can say , whether it or not .
because i don &apos;t think it says , &quot; somebody , i don &apos;t know if i was not cook , because i can &apos;t cook .
so , they don &apos;t get the point , except because they can &apos;t cook .
so they don &apos;t have to be auf on classical music , because they don &apos;t play a instrument .
listen to them , and they say whether it tastes or not .
whether the music of them is to gepfeffert or sweet .
say , what they &apos;re feeling .
and the time you get too much more and more gewürze , and they want to be more likely to be a little bit more gewürze or taste .
why do i urge you to see my audience that it &apos;s also actively listening ?
because the music is a language , and a language is to communicate .
a piece that you never really look at , has no force .
the food that &apos;s food , which was designed to a chef or a chef &apos;s office , has to be eaten and not just looked at or rezepte .
so please , please , if a music is played .
it &apos;s not just a nice geräuschtapete .
if you &apos;re in a environment where the adult active music is to hear music or at least a child , it &apos;s easy to ask a child , to ask , what color is your flower ?
can you play me now in blue ?
and the kid plays after a gedenkpause , rather than a red flower .
and this is really different than before .
and this was the first beginning of a different musical world .
so the first step to a interpretation .
and what happens if you play a piece of play , which originally ursprünglich a hundred or a hundred years ago ?
meanwhile , the instruments have been fortentwickelt .
there were all about the time of the time , and there was no piano .
it wasn &apos;t yet invented .
i think the bach was excited , if he had had the klanglichen capacity of modern klaviere .
i can now have the klangvorstellungen that has had the stream , on the modern wing , to sound what a barockes cannot be able to do .
and also , you know , you know , you know , that he was hearing more than he had been hearing .
today , a modern orchestra is able to play anything that &apos;s a orchestra of the orchestra of the time that &apos;s been rejected as a unspielbar .
so , the composers are dependent on us , which is the stücke that we &apos;re reinventing .
so they &apos;re being hörbar , what they &apos;re just in the spirit of france .
and also , what you think about today in the spirit today .
or what i &apos;m going to do today because what they thought you might have thought .
thank you .
you know what &apos;s going on ?
were you ever been doing ?
and how did that feel ?
suck . suck .
i have a friend who drives a passerati .
and then i come to the little bits of w piesel and me , that &apos;s what &apos;s going on .
and i &apos;m going to go through a little bit .
i say , ulf , what do you need to do this ?
this is actually the first year in the first year .
and at all , you do much less than me .
why is i need to do this guy , right ?
and then i immediately got to tell me , that &apos;s unfair .
it &apos;s against justice .
and how i say the word &quot; justice , this is a uncomfortable emotion .
our organism has invented a great method to make these kinds of feelings of how to get your disappear .
you can also try and try and ähnlichem with worten or ähnlichem .
i want to tell you with this mechanism today , or something that tells you what you &apos;re likely to be familiar with .
the mechanism from the lie from the lie .
but think of it , don &apos;t think about the lie , as you may have heard , if people say , no one has a wall to build a wall .
and then rocks auftürmt , so he &apos;ll give you the point of view .
one of the things that you see is that the liars itself doesn &apos;t believe what he says .
it turns out to be easily slightly , that he &apos;s got to be very different in mind .
he &apos;s just täuscht , and not himself .
no , the lie i &apos;m talking about , which has to talk to do that they &apos;re bouncing themselves .
they need this lie to be a lebenslüge , to maintain a sanitary pad .
you can get less easily , yes , nachprüfen or the model .
you need time .
from this time , a anecdote that you may know .
spanish painter was pablo , a woman &apos;s frau .
this woman was going to see it , the portrait of her wouldn &apos;t be similar to her .
picasso says , &quot; you &apos;re just waiting .
it &apos;s always getting more similar .
at this point , and when you laugh , you realize how important this lie is and how much time you need to learn to experience something that is really good at all .
because artist has a gestörtes ratio to lie .
artist teilt shares something with you , and particularly on this lady , what you don &apos;t see if you &apos;re just looking at the mirror .
artist teilt shares one of the artists in a portrait something that you &apos;re going to be familiar with , if you &apos;re going to look at this piece again .
then this unangenehme feeling , you can &apos;t see them , and it will always be more similar .
here you have this mechanism that we can use to the lie as a great invention of our lebensverhältnisse .
and not only in art , also in the volksmärchen , in the mythology , in stories , again , again .
you may know this idea of dame , the queen that looked in the mirror and asked him , who &apos;s the most beautiful thing in the country ?
one day , this mirror , yes , there &apos;s a schönere .
behind the seven mountains and so on .
and you also know how much hostility of this true is auskunft , including the mirror can &apos;t lie , from that true .
but we should just be familiar with us that you can &apos;t say that there &apos;s a woman &apos;s going to be a schönere somewhere anywhere .
here &apos;s what it is necessary to understand what we understand underwater correctness , and over again .
we need to go on this place that these lie that tells us the deception without us not even to do that .
we don &apos;t just have the art in art , in the volksmärchendichtung , but in science , in science .
and there &apos;s this story of the wife of the woman &apos;s wife .
they heard from this book from charles darwin , the origin of the species and the abstammung of human .
that the human being should be abstammen and , yes , it &apos;s a common ancestor between humans and apes .
and then they ran them to her husband and said , &quot; i don &apos;t really believe that charles .
the man should be the monkey abstammen or a common ancestor .
no , no , no .
and if it &apos;s true , we have to stop that people were going to have it .
why we need to prevent that people have been going to gain something if it &apos;s true ?
because we cannot live without these lebenslüge .
because we have this self-deception , this sense , this sense , this sense , great , great , great , abstammung , from a kind of naturebene , not from a organism that exists , and what kind of things that is a rock and otherwise what things that is for us .
so , we can &apos;t even get these things .
we have to prevent that people were kenntnis of things , especially if you &apos;re true .
so you see how slowly this mechanism is looking at this and like the traces he &apos;s leaving the traces , which is going to be something that &apos;s going on to something else as a great picture of ourselves , i want to give you another story .
a particularly nice story , how i mean .
my wife told me .
she came from one day , she &apos;s a teacher , and she told them from a student .
a autistischer student .
they like it particularly , because he has a propensity to sincerity .
and they asked him what &apos;s your hobbies ?
and he says , well , i &apos;m at the firemen .
and because i &apos;m at the firemen , i &apos;m interested in for pyrotechnische things .
yeah , you feel it , if you &apos;re heiter , and it &apos;s not something that &apos;s wrong .
i said , my wife , whenever a human being in a moral car , that &apos;s because we should try to replace it through the wörtchen even though .
and then you do that , and then you have the sentence .
although i &apos;m at the firemen , i &apos;m interested in for pyrotechnische things .
you feel that , that &apos;s the actual truth behind the broccoli .
so a little bub , who cares not to be feuerlöschen .
the interest is interested in feuermachen .
but there &apos;s no evidence we can look at how to learn how to do fire .
there &apos;s only the second thing , the fire .
there &apos;s a conversation called himself .
and überdies , you also tells your teacher doesn &apos;t say that you &apos;d like to pick up fire and moves , if the fire was nachher .
no , it looks much better if we show that we are being used to eliminating the dangers , the others , if they &apos;re going to be fire .
here you have this little mechanism .
these verweis that i knew that in the innersten of the bub , that he actually has to be with fire , but that he doesn &apos;t say that he can &apos;t say that .
here you have this zensor between the unbewussten and the conscious , the sofort , which is going to be able to do something about something , and the things that you know they &apos;re very different to do is that they can make a better better way for them and others .
so , this is how these words that we &apos;re going to do is that we also use in the language of political korrekten and use it again .
we actually know that something else is .
but we know , if we &apos;re the aussprechen , the social force is very delicate .
we can &apos;t just do that .
it &apos;s impossible to do things like a society that should work .
i want to show you what we found in my institute .
after logic , this graph , this self-deception , the quest , the willingness to learn , another reality of the way that we know in the grasp that she &apos;s actually gültig to spread out .
so i want to show you two , maybe three examples .
the first example of what many of you know and some of you are valuing some of you , some of you , not need any of all .
i mean the soul .
what &apos;s the soul ?
the soul is so geistiges , says about a leibniz .
it &apos;s something that doesn &apos;t mean by stop stopp , nature is inherently .
and if you have people who are struggling to have the confidence that they have to be able to have a soul , or you can say that the soul is to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be a very specific framework , and it &apos;s just a
and by this soul , you think that you somehow somehow have in this wolkigen nature , in this luftigen nature , anima , it &apos;s called in latin , the lufthauch , your mind .
and if this lufthauch came to the people , then he &apos;s filled with dignity , with a spirit , with the mind , that only only life , right , with the soul .
and then he can just davonlaufen .
this is the idea of how the soul is .
so she &apos;s supposed to go from the outside .
so we should perceive them as something that is necessarily going to be for our lives .
and if you have these manifestations of eyes , they understand the logic , we can experience this lucky to make a very good way of a human world .
because now you can use a dreisatz anwenden .
dreisatz , she &apos;s still out of school .
this is a dreisatz that &apos;s a logic .
this is actually the hardest part of my talk .
here &apos;s what they need to do something logic , but also the willingness to lie .
so , because , in the case , they can &apos;t be able to use this logic .
in this dreisatz , three sentences come .
the first sentence is , klaus , there &apos;s no soul .
so the second sentence is , if klaus right , he doesn &apos;t have a soul .
now there &apos;s a third sentence .
i &apos;ve got him in love with it .
a third sentence , which immediately did the immediately , in people who have a strong sense of a soul .
the say , who don &apos;t have soul , it &apos;s dead and can &apos;t be anything .
and here &apos;s it .
this logic comes in this , yes , in this täuschenden talk .
you see it immediately .
the first two sentences , they are logical correct .
i can say anything .
the logic doesn &apos;t have a direct story about reality .
i can say , the kanzlerin is a man .
and if i &apos;m right , then the kanzlerin is a man .
if i don &apos;t right , then the kanzlerin is not a man .
the logic doesn &apos;t make sense about what &apos;s going on .
i can claim all .
but critically , if i &apos;m right , it &apos;s just right .
so if klaus says , there &apos;s no soul .
secondly , if it has right , he doesn &apos;t have a soul .
these things are logical accurate .
and now our most basic consciousness is going to immediately immediately immediately , you can do something .
it &apos;s just a third sentence , which is not to do with the first two sentences and the way that the opposite of the first sentence has proven and vorausgesetzt .
because we have to prove whether it &apos;s the soul or not .
but with this logic that just use it to be just correctly , and a third dazuhängt that looks like this , as he would have to do something with so that we can save our lebenslüge .
so , we pretend to do it , it &apos;s actually impossible without a soul .
and we &apos;re very happy about it .
we can make these things at different examples .
in the present , we have a very modern example , which is going to be filling the tageszeitungen again .
so , you need to have another philosophisches topic , a dauerbrenner from philosophy , present .
it has to do that we go back into the vierzehnte century .
there was a scholars who was called johannes buridanus and after that &apos;s the most buridansche esel named esel .
the most buridansche esel is a esel that is made of raw nature .
didn &apos;t have this soul .
this is such a naturding .
and if you put the exact exactly in the middle between two gleichgroßen , then he &apos;ll verhungert .
because he doesn &apos;t know what he did first .
so he &apos;s right in the middle .
so the naturdinge are introduced .
gleichgroße forces with gegensätzlichem vorzeigenzeichen .
there &apos;s nothing at all .
just if you get another example , so if you do immediately make a haystack and he doesn &apos;t have any reason and nothing else .
automatically automatically is going to be right now .
so if you have this idea of being driven in nature , you know , in nature , von , the bigger crowd that you have to attract , you also have a sense that they have to be a sense of a free will .
and if we &apos;re in frankfurt here at frankfurt , i remember the max-planck-institut for brain .
there &apos;s a scholars that &apos;s called wolf singer , and by him , you sometimes say , wolf singer , there &apos;s no willensfreiheit .
now we can form the second sentence and can say , if wolf singer has right , it &apos;s not a willensfreiheit .
these sentences are absolutely logical and correct .
and what we &apos;re now able to do is actually read almost every day in the daily daily , find that in this third sentence .
it looks like this looks like this , who has no willensfreiheit , can &apos;t be able to get their actions and to behauptungen for the responsibility to the responsibility and it &apos;s so unzurechnungsfähig .
again , you &apos;ve got it again .
actually , you have to think , you know , if you have something like that .
but the logic of deception allows us to do so much as the first sentence of the french , when you have to do the opposite without evidence .
and now you can just do anything , if you want to do anything , if you want to test anything , and especially if you want to make people happy , that courage to lie to lie .
practice , for example , if you &apos;re going to encounter a people , you can say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
and please don &apos;t use the german word for vorhersager , which is called the prophet .
they don &apos;t call them , that would be a little bit of political inkorrekt .
say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
immediately , you will immediately get one of those of you who have come of those , you know , you can &apos;t prove it .
and you have a problem .
because while they &apos;re busy with it , they &apos;re hoping they cannot prove that there &apos;s no vorhersager , the man is very happy .
he &apos;s quite happy about it because he has to be fooled .
because he has led them to a fährte , which he doesn &apos;t even want to be embarrassed .
because actually , this person is not interested in a debate .
it &apos;s just about himself to be interested in itself , to prove to be a prove that there &apos;s been vorhersager .
so , in the way the shift of the verschiebung experience is the brilliance of the lie .
and once you have a way to feel this way to feel this way in other people , they do it , because they &apos;re going to be happy if they don &apos;t remember this way .
thank you for your attention .
yeah , good afternoon .
i &apos;ve got to have asked me whether i &apos;m going to mention them .
it &apos;s one of the most veranstalterinnen of this great event , and i asked me whether i &apos;m going to keep a talk on and my idea .
i have to say , you know , you &apos;ve got mitgekriegt , it was very hard to talk about my idea .
and i may think maybe my favorite thing i &apos;m going to try to do with you .
but it &apos;s natural , the sum of the whole , quite many ideas .
i &apos;m sure , you know , the two nice girl still has to be , i &apos;m sure , i &apos;m sure , in the generation that i &apos;ve got to be a schlechte image , because i &apos;ve got maschinenbau maschinenbau in karlsruhe , engineering , i think , i think , i think , is .
and i got the first time in berlin , berlin , because i wanted to make renewables , and that &apos;s not the erneuerbare .
there was the kernforschungsanlage leopoldshafen .
the occasion of all the kfa , the jülich was called kfa .
the hot today .
because a good engineer has either paid to be amazing cars or atomkraftanlagen .
but this is what we like doofes n , from kind of a hundred watts of the square watt , which was a toy .
and in berlin , there was a crazy ingenieurkollektiv .
i &apos;m thankful to the premium-kola-mensch grateful that he &apos;s got the word again , because after the mauerfall , you couldn &apos;t use the word anymore , because all of the left was bad .
however , it was not like that in the achtiziger years .
there was that there was selbstverwaltete alternativbetriebe and one of them sitting in kreuzberg in kreuzberg in the mehringhof , where you were evil .
so , in the place , but this was called wuseltronik and has taken wind and sonnenenergie and i started to get the center of the celebration .
and yeah , a lot of what i was saying today , because many , many , many , many , many , many beautiful expressions that i &apos;ve also got to be on .
i worked 11 years in the american working , which was basisdemokratisch .
we were 20 people .
if a no said , the vetoprinzip , which has been a completely zermürbt , i &apos;ve been doing hard to do this very much , and i &apos;ve been doing it hard to me , i &apos;ve always been able to have my father &apos;s father &apos;s always zugeredet , because you &apos;ve always got the money to the window at your kid .
it &apos;s busy with schwachsinn .
and this was really , very bitter , and you get into the phase , and you get into the phase of the mind , and you get into the phase of the mind , where i asked the image of a few years , a thousand years ago , the only thing that i was still in , in the very small , einheitslohn , of course , that
and i got up to the sechsundneunzig , and then we &apos;ve got with friends with friends , i &apos;ve become mitbegründer with friends , which then subsequently became the most common q-cells of the largest zellenhersteller of the world .
a riesenerfolgsgeschichte , but we &apos;ve got the problem of a growing company , and we &apos;ve got a little group of unternehmens and our minds , and we &apos;ve been going to go back and ask us to the next issue of the future , and the next issue of the future , and the next issue of the future , and the next issue of the future ,
and i have a project that i want to introduce you to imagine .
and the title of the talk was , as you get to a hundred percent renewable .
and we just have to have a relatively einfach-verrückten story to questions , where you could have a memory of a memory .
on this island , that &apos;s the island graciosa on the azoren .
yeah , that &apos;s the data .
there &apos;s a thousand people &apos;s lives .
we have a renewables rate of 15 percent .
and the question is , why don &apos;t they do it ?
that &apos;s just not technological .
if you get more windkraft , the system begins to fail .
i &apos;m always telling the politicians , if you &apos;re in berlin-adlershof unsere .
the say , why ? why ?
we &apos;ve already been 20 percent in germany .
but no problem can be .
but it &apos;s not true , we &apos;ve got seven percent and our network is seen the european .
if we had gotten in europe in europe , we &apos;ve already had the same problems that people have on this island .
the question was , it was a zweitausend2006 , the first time , the first phase of the island started to start with the island , but just a time .
how big it was like to be a battery , so that you have a battery to 20 , 30 , 40 , 50 , 50 percent , maybe even the big percent renewable .
and yeah , i &apos;ll go again .
the conventional system is seeing all over the world .
by the way , a hundred thousand gigawatt elektrische on dieselbasis zugebaut on the world .
this is the way of the brain , because that &apos;s really quickly everywhere .
the energiehunger of the world , the way , is going to be a diesel , because you don &apos;t have permission .
this is going fast .
you &apos;re going to be a box .
and then it looks like this .
and in the course of the course , you always have three of the dieseln , two , and that &apos;s always going to be .
yeah , this is what &apos;s going on the load .
we also have got very detailed data .
and the windkraftanlage or the solaranlage or whatever it is , is that it &apos;s a back-up system , which is a system that &apos;s actually a system which is just in small amounts of here .
our goal was to say it was to say , okay , okay , okay .
the diesel is going to back-up and the wind , the sun is the burden that they can put the bigger of the bigger .
and if you get over 20 percent renewable energy consumption , so energy per year , not the performance , you have to be the diesel off the diesel .
that means that the moment you have to worry about that the renewables is going to take the whole thing .
and you can only do , of course , if you &apos;re going to be in any way .
that &apos;s what no one has done on the world .
there &apos;s the little style , so you can also use your rasierer in your car .
people always ask me what was the forscht of what was going on in adlershof ?
that &apos;s already .
if you want to have several of these wechselrichtern zusammenschalten , and they should build a network , then it becomes very complicated .
and our goal was , we wanted to get to the siebzig to three and a half percent renewable , and then there &apos;s this rest of the last 10 , twenty percent , and that &apos;s not going to be very , very expensive and that &apos;s not going to work that you &apos;re doing that .
this will be a energieträger , the hydrogen , hydrogen , hydrogen , methane , power , power , you know , power , or the sch , that will be it .
you have to go on a saisonalspeicher , and they &apos;re not just tag-nacht .
we just wanted to know what &apos;s going on with a regular , stinknormalen battery battery battery .
how far is you get there ?
and then they have a whole bunch of simulation .
and the sun and the sun and the load of the sun and came to the conclusion , a whole thing of interesting outcome that you have to do a middle-aged strompreis of about 50 cents a cent , about 50 cents a cent , about vierundvierzig cents .
this was the first year of six years ago .
and then we said , okay , okay , okay .
well , yeah , we have a business model .
we are cheaper , cheaper , when the dieselpreis five percent goes a year .
and then we started to negotiate with the insulanern .
what would you have to do anything ?
and investors have been touched with investors , i &apos;ve got new gesellschafter .
we were just five people to rebuild a society .
and here &apos;s the representation .
the brown is sort of the conventional system that &apos;s our system .
that our system also has a preisanstieg , because we &apos;re still going to do twenty percent of you and also a preissteigerung on the other things .
and the power-utility that the elektrizitätsversorgungsunternehmen on the island , has actually been rejected , we find that .
we also want to support , but we don &apos;t believe you can solve the technical problem .
and so we decided to build a hall in berlin to build a hall where we &apos;ve sort of the electric power of the island in the scale of the scale of the island .
that means we have to find a way to find the largest battery of the world .
here &apos;s it .
it comes from asia , in the case of japan .
and witzigerweise is in the early &apos; 70s in the &apos; 70s , today , abb , and then auslizensiert auslizensiert .
you see , it &apos;s a very , very big battery .
she has a megawatt performance and can bring six hours to bring these performance and that &apos;s the battery that we have sozusagen .
and then they set .
we also have one of these diesel-aggregate in the same size , as he said there , in fact , in the hall , in fact , in the hall , there &apos;s so much , because the diesel is the diesel , here &apos;s the big batterie , which we &apos;re doing the net .
over here , we &apos;re going to have the whole übertragungsleitungsystem , the kilometer-physik of the cable , to the schwingungsverhalten , to the schwingungsverhalten .
and here you can see that all the whole thing .
we can also photovoltaik zweihundert kilowatt on the web .
here &apos;s the again here again , we see this again here , we see the diesel here , again , again , the whole aggregate .
and what we did was , since the hall , the hall was finished , and now , the halle , all of the things that there is to develop the individual system in software , and we &apos;ve done software to software .
so we are not batteriehersteller , but we define ourselves as a company that &apos;s only between the subject and the topic and all the time .
you have to communicate to battery , you have to communicate with the battery , you have to communicate in the grid , and that &apos;s very complicated .
the nice thing is that you &apos;re basically on this island in this island , today , this is what &apos;s going on in the field of problems that we get when we &apos;re going to raise our hearts of renewables .
so this whole discussion , how are you going to be right now and herbewegt , energiewende , how to do that , we have to be beispiel for fünfundzwanzig to 30 percent exzessenergie , so we müdsen the wind and the sun .
natürlicht bietet , then smart-grid .
so smart-grid , a riesenthema everywhere .
we can start to start to integrating elektromobilität , elektromobilität , rumzufragen , you can manage the load .
that means if you get the siebzig percent , then you will not make it without memory .
you can smart-grid through &apos; n , you can do by ignorance , yeah , you should do whatever you do , but you never have to be completely completely completely completely completely completely completely completely completely .
and that &apos;s the message that &apos;s the message .
so many people come too many people , and look at this , because you can see what you &apos;re going to do .
if we turn the diesel off , you don &apos;t have to be able to get this spinning mass of the network .
and our europäisches verbundnetz is basically just out of all the rotierenden of great kraftwerken , where the wave are all about europe around the world .
we look at this network , the numbers , the distance , and when it comes out of the neunundvierzig , it &apos;s going to be neun , and then we &apos;re going to be paar a few ventilchen , then a little more merh dampf , then we &apos;ll go back to again .
that &apos;s the system .
and of course , this is an accident .
if you put this somewhere , you &apos;re going to be a little bit .
the spinning state has at least 10 seconds to keep the net .
and in time , they can respond to another .
if you don &apos;t have that , this spinning mass , you have to replace that with leistungselektronik and elektrochemie .
and we can have this big battery , two milliseconds , two milliseconds .
there you see , what &apos;s going on , what enormous geschwindigkeitsmöglichkeiten there .
and the message is , we need to be able to get a lot of rotierenden , if we have to choose our goals , when we &apos;re going to reach our goals , twenty percent , 30 percent , 30 percent , and so on , if we want to achieve the at all the time .
then we have to break our capacity down on the grid .
must-run is just simply that the power plant to keep the frequency .
yeah , it &apos;s a riesendebatte at the moment , zubau from the kohlekraftwerken , because we don &apos;t know , or gasturbinen , because it &apos;s not going to go .
and we just simply just simply just to predict that you &apos;re going to use the capacity , the must-run capacity , which is to be able to use elektrochemische memory into the web .
and then there &apos;s been a whole bunch of studies .
and this purpose , people are always getting up and look at our versuchsstand on the der , basically our inselteststand .
and yes , the debate is always about the question , how far can you get a piece of a big future .
and many discussions that i had in the last six years was similar to the debate that i had in the last 30 years was to photovoltaik .
isn &apos;t , &quot; schwachsinn , kinderspielkram , we &apos;ve never got anything , we never have .
we have dreißig gigawatt gigawatt in germany .
this is vorbildlich .
and i just go out of that , we &apos;re going to be the same capacity in the next 30 years , the same capacity to be seen in the world .
just easy , it will come .
there &apos;s going to be a whole bunch of widerständen and streitereien .
the beauty is that i &apos;ve been talking about the last two years that the scientists are going to be asking .
we &apos;ve got to get tens of millions of millions of förderprojekte , and now , in the course of the ne , jetzt jetzt .
that &apos;s going to be in the next april .
so , you know , you know , so you also notice that there &apos;s a change in there and only one of these abwehrhaltung , to the idea , to the idea , 100 percent is right .
and if you get a hundred percent renewable , then that &apos;s like a autarkes system .
so far , in discussions , in discussions , they &apos;re trying to be trying to do this , which is doing a real little network , which has nothing to do with our verbund .
the question is , if you &apos;re totally independent , if you &apos;re totally independent , or uranen energierträgern , who will be rausgebohrt on the world , and they become hingebracht , they &apos;re a island .
then they use it , what &apos;s on the sun and wind there , where they live .
and this is so much of our vision of a vernüftigen social , and i &apos;m also thankful to be grateful that they said , they have said , solar power .
and that &apos;s what we do , and they &apos;re all coming , and also the talk of premium kola , that you can use a very big and sonnenenergie , here &apos;s a little bit .
and yeah , i just want to encourage you to encourage you to encourage you , in the sense that you can be a little bit crazy and also have a vision .
and you really have to be really quite zäh , but i think that it &apos;s going to be .
thank you .
as steve lopez , the los angeles times , one day , one day , one day , one day , walking through the streets of los angeles , he heard a wonderful music .
she came from a man , a african-american , sympathisch , rau , who was on a violin , which had only two strings .
many of you will know the story , because of the steves articles , was a book that was verfilmt , and jamie downey , who was verfilmt junior , and jamie foxx , who studied anthony ayers , the kontrabassisten , the kontrabassisten of the juilliard-konservatorium , and the dessen of the tragischerweise of his paranoide was finished .
nathaniel verließ verließ , who was a nervenzusammenbruch and 30 years later , he was living as a homeless row in the center of los angeles .
i &apos;m going to tell you all of you , reading the movie , or you know , the movie is to look at the movie , which is not just the wonderful thing that we &apos;ve been hearing , but also how the music was making this connection , and how they were allowed to make this instrument when that &apos;s erlaubt , the mithalf , is nathaniel from
i met mr ayers in 2008 , two years ago , in the walt disney disney hall .
he just had a demo of beethoven , and fourth symphony and came out of the stage to imagine .
he spoke in a very heiteren and geselligen note about yo-yo yo-yo and hillary , and the dodgers , the dodgers would never be able to create the largest world &apos;s largest passage of the first few of the first time in the last sentence of beethoven .
we came to talk about music , and a few days later i got a email in which i was in a stand , that &apos;s actually been interested in me .
i have to say that nathaniel has a medical treatment , because he was already with elektroschocks and handschellen , a trauma that has his whole life .
so , as a result , he &apos;s especially anfällig for these schizophrenic stages , and they &apos;re sometimes bad , and he would pay for the streets of skid row , and that &apos;s the horror and the folterqualen of his own mind .
and in fact , in a reizstadium , it was nathaniel , when we started with our first national disney hall in the walt disney hall , and he had lost this irre flackern in his eyes and was completely lost .
he talked about invisible and smoke and about how someone wanted to poison him .
i was scared , not meinetwegen , but i was afraid that he could lose him in his states and that i could destroy his relationship to the violin , if i started talking about the violin , and i &apos;ve got to talk about andere and other exciting forms of the didaktischen geigenpädagogik .
so i just started playing .
i played the first sentence of beethoven .
and while i was playing , i was hoping to find that in nathaniels , a kind of a financial change in front of .
it was like he was under the impact of a unsichtbaren arznei , a chemical reaction to the point of my game .
nathaniels manischer zorn zorn , in understanding , curiosity and anmut .
and as a miracle he took his violin and started playing some of the snippets of violinkonzerten and asked me to play them , mendelssohn , tschaikowski , sibelius .
we then started talking about music , and i started talking about bach , brahms , bruckner and all the other bs , from bartók to esa-pekka bis .
and i realized that he wasn &apos;t just a enzyklopädisches know about music , but it also had a strong personal relationship with her .
he talked about a passion and a understanding that i just know about my colleagues in the philharmonie of los angeles .
by playing music and talking about this paranoiden , the verwirrten man who was still going through the streets of los angeles , a liebenswerter , ausgezeichneter , ausgezeichneter , musiker .
music is medicine . music changes us .
for nathaniel means music health health care
because the music allows it to him , his thoughts and delusions with help and creativity in a little bit of a matter .
and so he entflieht his quälenden .
i understood that this is the nature of art .
this is why we &apos;re making music : so we do something that in all of us in the inner , our emotions , our feelings , through our own lens , through our creativity , through our creativity .
and the reality is that we &apos;ve reached all of us , and we &apos;re moving forward and moved to us .
what nathaniel does , so it made him back into a community of friends .
the erlösende force of music brought him back into a family of musicians who understood him who was his talent and ihn him .
and i &apos;m going to talk to over nathaniel music , whether or not in the walt disney hall hall or in skid row , because he reminds me why i &apos;ve become a musician .
thank you .
bruno giussani : thank you very much . thank you .
robert gupta . robert gupta .
robert gupta : i want to play something i &apos;ve got stolen .
i hope you &apos;re forgive me .
so i &apos;ve got a lot of fish in my life .
i just loved two loved .
this first one was more like a passionate affair .
it was a beautiful fish , wohlschmeckend , good konsistenz , gehaltvoll , gehaltvoll , a gentleman on the menu .
what a fish .
even better , it became the longest highest seas of sustainability .
so you could feel comfortable with it .
i had a relationship with this beauty over time .
one day , the head of the company , and asked , i asked if i could talk about a tedtalk of the sustainability of the farm .
&quot; of course , &quot; i said .
this was a company that was trying to solve what this is going to be the unimaginable problem for our chefs , how do we keep fish on our speisekarten ?
in the last 50 years we &apos;ve got the ocean gefischt , how we &apos;ve got the forests .
it &apos;s hard to überbewerten the destruction .
90 percent of the great fish that we love , the tuna , the heilbutte , the lachse , they &apos;re collapsed .
it &apos;s almost anything left .
so , i guess or übel übel , fischanbau , a part of our future .
many arguments . fischzuchtanlagen are the environment , most of them , and they are inefficient , we take tuna . a big disadvantage .
he has a futterverwertung of 15 to one .
that means that 15 pounds are required to get a pound pfund .
not very sustainable .
it &apos;s not very good .
so here &apos;s a company that was trying to do it right .
i wanted to put them up .
the day before the event , i called the head of the öffentlichkeitsarbeit for the company .
let &apos;s call him .
&quot; don &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; and i said , &quot; just to have the facts , you have to be able to grow up in the ocean , that you don &apos;t have the environment . &quot;
&quot; that &apos;s true , &quot; he said , &quot; we &apos;re so far outside that the waste of our fish will not be concentrated . &quot;
and then he added it , &quot; we &apos;re basically a very world .
this futterverwertung of 2.5 , &quot; he said .
&quot; the best in the industry . &quot;
2.5 , great , great .
&quot; 2.5 to one what ? what ?
&quot; sustainable proteins , &quot; he said .
&quot; great , i said . put it on .
and this evening , i was in bed , and thought , what is the hell of hell is a profound protein ?
so i called the next day , a second day , in the event , don .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t , &quot; do what are sustainable proteins ? &quot;
he said , he didn &apos;t know . he &apos;ll end up .
well , i &apos;m going to talk to a few people in the company . no one could give me an amazing answer , and i finally finally got to the leitenden biologen .
let &apos;s call it don .
&quot; don &quot; &quot; &quot; i said , &quot; what are sustainable proteins ? &quot;
well , he mentioned some algae and some fischmehle , and then he said , &quot; hühnchen-pellets .
i said , &quot; hühnchen-pellets ? &quot;
he said , &quot; yeah , feathers , skin , knochenmehl , reste , reste , getrocknet and food . &quot;
i said , &quot; how much percent of the futters is chicken ? &quot;
maybe two percent of the perhaps most likely .
&quot; well , that &apos;s about 30 percent , &quot; he said .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t think what &apos;s sustainable about being a fische ? &quot;
there was a long pause in the line , and he said , &quot; there &apos;s just too much chicken on the world . &quot;
i &apos;m going to come from this fish .
no , not because i &apos;m a selbstgerechter genießer and gutmensch .
i &apos;m even .
no , i actually learned this fish , because i swear to god , the fish of that conversation , after that conversation has been to be in the fisch of the conversation .
this second fish , that &apos;s another kind of play .
it &apos;s the romantic way , the way you think you know your fish is to learn the fish .
i was eating him in a restaurant in a restaurant .
a befreundete journalist had been speaking for a long time .
she &apos;s got us in a sense .
he came on the table with a bright , almost white white color .
the chef had a ihn .
hold twice .
astonishingly , he was still delicious .
who can make a fish so tasty , after he was verkocht ?
i can &apos;t , but this guy can be .
let &apos;s call him miguel . actually he called miguel .
no , he didn &apos;t get the fish , and it &apos;s not a chef . at least , the way that you and i understand .
he &apos;s a biologist in veta la palma .
this is a fischaufzucht in the südwestlichen corner .
it &apos;s near the mouth of the river .
and until the 1980s was the farm in the hands of argentiniern .
they &apos;re züchteten fleischrinder on what was essentially feuchtgebiete .
they did this by making the country .
they built these complicated episode of kanälen , and they made the water from the country and turning out into the river .
well , they couldn &apos;t make it work , not profitable .
and the ecologically was a catastrophe .
it took about 90 percent of the birds around the birds , what are many birds .
and so , 1982 , a spanish company was bought with the country .
what did you do ?
they have the flow of water .
they literally have the lever .
instead of water , they used the water to use the channels to restore the water again .
they fluteten the channels .
they created a 11.000 acres of fischaufzucht -- barsch , meeräsche , shrimp , shrimp -- and that &apos;s what the ecological destruction is completely .
the farm is incredible .
i mean , you &apos;ve never seen anything .
it turns out to the horizon , which is a million miles away , and all you see are geflutete channels and those density , lush üppige .
i wasn &apos;t a long time ago .
he &apos;s a very incredible guy , three parts charles darwin and a part of a krokodil to the kiss . &quot;
okay ? there were us and we were kämpften and kämpften and schwitze and schwitze , and schwitze , habe , and schwitze bis , and miguel is going to be a biologievorlesung .
so here &apos;s a rare hebt , and he &apos;s got a rare gleitaar .
now he mentioned the mineralbedürfnisse of phytoplankton .
and here , here , he sees a pattern of illegal , which reminds him on the tansanische .
it turns out that the most largest of his career in the mikumi national park in africa has spent in africa .
i asked him how to become such a fisch-experten .
he said , &quot; fish ? i don &apos;t know anything about fish .
i &apos;m an expert for relationships . &quot;
and then he goes and stürzt in more gerede birds and algae and odd .
and don &apos;t get me wrong , that was really fascinating , you know , the biotische community , so in the way that kind of the kind of way that we were in .
it &apos;s great , but i was in love .
and my head was weak about this verkochte piece of köstlichen , which i had on the vorabend .
so i got it . i said , &quot; miguel , how does it come to your fish ? &quot;
he showed on the algae .
&quot; i know , boy , the algae , the phytoplankton , the relationships , that &apos;s incredible .
but what do you eat your fish ?
how is the futterverwertung ? &quot;
well , he goes to tell me that it &apos;s such a big system that the fish will eat the wild .
the pflanzliche biomass , the phytoplankton , the zoo , that &apos;s what the fish feeds .
the system is so healthy , it &apos;s completely selbsterneuernd .
there &apos;s no food .
the one of a farm that doesn &apos;t have to tell their animals ?
i went on this grundstück , and i asked him , &quot; for a place that &apos;s like , &quot; for a place that seems to be so much as any farm , &quot; how do you ever have success ? &quot;
in the moment , it was like a filmregisseur verlangt .
and we &apos;re flying around the corner and we offered the most incredible , thousands and thousands of pumps , a literally pinker pinker pinker that &apos;s going to be able to cut the eye .
&quot; that &apos;s success , &quot; he said .
&quot; look : &quot; look your bäuche .
she &apos;s schlemmen . &quot;
schlemmen ? i was completely confused .
i said , &quot; miguel , don &apos;t you schlemmen your fish ? &quot;
&quot; yes , &quot; he said .
&quot; we lose 20 percent of our fish and fischeiern to the birds .
now , last year , on this site of 600,000 birds , more than 250,000 different ways .
it &apos;s the largest and one of the most important of the most important of the most important health care system in europe .
i said , &quot; miguel , is a good gedeihender vogelbestand vogelbestand , not the last thing you want to have on a fischaufzucht ? &quot;
he &apos;s got his head , no .
he said , &quot; we build extensiv , not intense .
this is a ökologisches network .
the flamingos eat .
the shrimp eat the phytoplankton .
so the pinker that the gut is the better the system . &quot;
okay , let &apos;s take the rethink . a farm that has not been smuggled and farm a farm that measures their success on their own .
a fischaufzucht , but also a vogelreservat .
oh , and by the way , i should not even have this flamingos of the video .
they breed in a city in a town , where the bodenbeschaffenheit is better for the nestbau .
every morning they fly 240 miles a mile .
and every night they fly 240 miles back .
they do that because they can follow the gestrichelten white line .
seriously . seriously .
i had introduced a kind of journey of penguins , so i looked at miguel .
i said , &quot; miguel , flies them down the farm and then fliegen them down to 240 miles back to the night ?
do they do this for the kids ? &quot;
he looked at me as i was going to be a song from whitney &apos;s time .
he said , &quot; no . they do that because the food is better . &quot;
i didn &apos;t see the skin of my beloved beloved beloved , the delicious was the delicious , and i don &apos;t like fischhaut . i don &apos;t like them . i don &apos;t like them .
it &apos;s this beißende , verkohlte flavor .
i never almost ever do it .
and yet , when i was in this restaurant in this restaurant , i don &apos;t have anything to fischhaut at all .
they were sweet and in it , as if you would take a bites of the ocean .
i mentioned that to the miguel and he nickte .
he said , &quot; the skin seems like a sponge .
she &apos;s the last thing before something in your body .
it &apos;s developed throughout evolution in evolution to unreinheiten unreinheiten . &quot;
and then he added it , &quot; but our water has no unreinheiten . &quot;
okay . a farm that don &apos;t have to meditate their fish . a farm that your success measures its success .
and then i realized , if he says , a farm , a farm that has no unreinheiten , because the water that comes through these farm , from the river , which is coming from the river .
it &apos;s a river that has all the things that are conducive to you , they tend to lead to lead , chemical pollutants , abfluss of schädlingsbekämpfungsmitteln .
and if it &apos;s got through the system , and this leaves is the water cleaner cleaner than it is hereingekommen .
the system is so healthy , it cleans water .
so not only a farm that doesn &apos;t speak to their animals not choice , not only a farm that measures its success of their ability to measuring their own health , which is literally a wasser-aufbereitungsanlage , and not just for you , but for you and for me .
because if the water goes , it &apos;s in the atlantic ocean .
a drop in the ocean , i know , but i take it , and that &apos;s what you should do , because this thing that always tells us , as romantic , is also going to be a great deal .
you could say that you &apos;re a recipe for the future of the future , whether we &apos;re talking about barsch or fleischrindern .
what we need now is a radical new concept of agriculture , from one of the food in which food is actually good .
but for many people , it &apos;s a little bit too to do .
we are not realisten , we &apos;re genießer . we &apos;re lover .
we love wochenmärkte . we love little familienbetriebe . we &apos;re talking about regional food . we eat .
and if you argue that the things that are the future of bad food is someone else somewhere somewhere on and says , &quot; hey , i love pinke flamingos , but how are they going to feed the world ?
how are you going to feed the world ? &quot;
may be honest ?
i don &apos;t like this question .
no , not because we &apos;ve producing enough calories to feed the world more than just .
a billion people are being starving today .
one billion -- this is more than ever before -- because of the krasser inequalities in the distribution , not the gesamtproduktion .
well , i don &apos;t like this question , because they have the logic of our nahrungssystems for the last 50 years .
füttere getreide , schädlingsbekämpfungsmittel on the earth , the chemicals on earth , the chemicals in the earth , and all of the time , they asked , &quot; if we were more people , and then we have more people to grow more people , how might it be that much ? &quot;
this was the cause . it was the guy . it was the most of american agriculture .
we should call them what she is , a built-in array of abwicklung , a craft , the quickly , quickly , which is exactly the same kind of production .
this is not a craft , and it &apos;s not agriculture .
our kornkammer is now threatened , not because of abnehmender zufuhr , but because of the abnehmender resources , it &apos;s because of the abnehmender resources , it &apos;s because of the most dangerous resources , it &apos;s because of the abnehmender resources , it &apos;s because of the most dangerous resources , it &apos;s because of the abnehmender resources , it &apos;s because of the most dangerous resources ,
not by the latest mähdrescher- , and traktor-erfindungen , not by the pumps , not by pumps , not by pumps , but through the frisches , not by kettensägen , not by fischerboote and nets , but through fish in the ocean .
she &apos;s going to feed the world ?
let &apos;s start with the question : how are we going to feed ourselves ?
or better , how can we create conditions that are going to be able to feed each other , to feed themselves ?
to do that , don &apos;t look at the agrarindustrie-modell for the future .
it &apos;s really old , and it &apos;s done .
capital , chemistry and machines are obenan and it never made a really good for food .
let &apos;s look at the ecological model .
this is what &apos;s going on for two billion years .
look at miguel , farmers like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel
now , the time they &apos;re not worlds for themselves , and they &apos;re not betriebe , and they &apos;re not just anbauen , but the extensiv , just like , just farmers , not only only only only only only only just being just , but experts for relationships , but experts for relationships .
because they are the ones that are experts for flavor .
and if i really honest , you know , a better chef than i ever be .
you know , this is quite right , because when that &apos;s the future of food , it will be delicious .
thank you .
if i want you to tell you today , this is a thing that we &apos;re going to do is that the data of the data that we consume , and instead of thinking about the sum of your parts , and instead of thinking about how we can use information to be able to use that , and we &apos;re so trends that they would not be visible to
so , what we see here is a typical sterbediagramm of age .
the program that i use here is a little experiment .
it &apos;s called pivot , and what i can do with pivot is that i can filter a particular cause , we &apos;re going to say accidents .
and immediately i see a different pattern that makes it .
and it &apos;s because in the mittelbereich here , people are the ones in the most people , and they &apos;re over here .
we can take a step further and then neu the data and see that kreislauferkrankungen and cancer are the usual suspects , but not for everybody .
now if we go back and go to age , we say 40 years or younger , we see that accidents is even the hauptursache of the speech is to make people care about the people .
and who sees it , that &apos;s especially in men .
so you realize that the look at information and data in this way , is really what &apos;s erinnert in a lebendigen informationsgrafik .
and if we can do this for raw for the raw , why not for content ?
what we &apos;re here is the titelbilder jeder , &quot; sports illustrated &quot; that ever had ever printed .
it &apos;s all here . it &apos;s all online .
you can do it for my talk in their lives .
with pivot , you can dive into a decade .
you can dive into a specific year .
you can go directly to a specific copy .
now , if i look at this , i see the athletes that appear in this copy and the sportarten .
i &apos;m a lance armstrong fan , so i decided to put all of my living in which one of my ausgaben is going to be in the middle of that traffic .
now , if i just want to get a trip to a gröberen , i could think , &quot; ok , what if i &apos;m going to do anything with the subject ? &quot;
so i go back and forth back and forth .
now i see greg lemond .
and so you get a idea that if you &apos;re looking at this kind of information , breiter , thoughts , reinzoomen , rauszoomen , rauszoomen , you don &apos;t just want to do or not just do not just do it .
you do something that &apos;s actually a little different .
it &apos;s a little between , and we think it changes the way information can be used .
i want to let this idea of a little bit of a little bit of a bit about what a little bit is crazy .
what we &apos;ve done here is , we &apos;ve taken each individual wikipediaseite and make them available .
the summary contains a short of a short and a symbol of the field of that .
i &apos;ll just show the top 500 500 of the populärsten wikipediaseiten .
but even in this class , we can do a lot of things .
immediately we get a glimpse of the issues that are on wikipedia .
i &apos;m going to choose the subject .
now , after i &apos;ve chosen &apos; government &apos; elected &apos; elected , i know that the wikipediakategorien that most of the time i &apos;m going to have to go to the most exciting magazines people .
this is really important , because this is a realization that &apos;s not in a single wikipediaseite .
this is just too far when you look at a step and look at all .
and then , in a certain of these summaries , i can then go into the subject of time magazine , &quot; people &apos;s &quot; people &quot; and all right .
now , if i look at all of these people , i think that the majority of these are regierungsbeamte , some of these are coming from science . some of the people are coming from science , and some of the economy , here &apos;s my boss . and a comes from the musikbereich .
and interestingly , bono is also a ted prize .
so we can now look at all the time and see a look at all the ted prize winner .
you see , we surfing the network , we &apos;re the first time that it &apos;s really a network , not just by side , but much more abstract .
and so i want to show you what a little bit of a little surprise .
i &apos;m just showing you just the new york times .
pivot , this application -- i don &apos;t want to call it a browser ; it &apos;s really not a browser , but you can see websites that we can look at this zoom-technologie , and we bring this zoom-technologie to each individual website like this .
so i can go back to a step back , and it &apos;s bouncing to a specific sektion jump .
so this is important because you just have the look at the same time in this kind of way that all the internet-verlauf in the same way .
so i can put in my process in my process .
this is the state of the demonstration that i was going to be told .
and i can sort of anything that i &apos;ve seen today , again , again .
and if i take a step back and look at everything , i can see my serious neu , perhaps , i think , i think , after my such-vergangenheit , i &apos;ve got to go to &apos; nepotistisch , or for a live labs .
and from here i can go back to the site and they go back .
it &apos;s a metaphor that &apos;s always used again , and every time it makes it greater than the sum of the world &apos;s sum .
in the moment , in this world , we think that data is a curse .
we talk about the curse of the informationsüberflusses .
we &apos;re talking about &quot; the drowning . &quot;
what if we could turn this situation , and the internet on the head , so that we &apos;re always going to go from one to another , and so you can see many things that are going to be able to do in many things , and what they would be able to do ?
if we can do this , then these are bisherige , maybe a new source of information .
and instead of moving into information , we can get to get this .
and if we know , we can actually know , maybe even beyond the weisheiten .
so i hear , thank you .
i grew up with a gehörigen portion of science fiction .
in my bedroom , i went to school , and i was going to school , every day , a day .
and my nose was always in a book , a science-fiction-buch , which is my thoughts in other worlds and auf my deep in me , unersättliche unersättliche .
this curiosity also showed that i was in school , if i was not in school , and i was going to be in the school , and &quot; proben , and käfer and teichwasser and teichwasser , and teichwasser and looked at the microscope .
i was totally wissenschaftsbegeistert , you know .
it was always about trying to understand the world and the limitations of the possible .
and my love of science fiction appeared in my environment , because then , in the late &apos; 60s , we flew the moon and the deep sea .
jacques cousteau , in our living room , with his favorite shows that animals and places and a world had a world of miracles that we could never have to be able to imagine .
and that &apos;s really good at the very good thing to be jener .
and i was an artist .
i could draw . i could paint .
and there &apos;s not videospiele video games nor computergenerierten videospiele , and i had to create all the whole thing in the media landscape , i had to create the pictures in my head .
we had to all the time , and when we read a book as a book , we took the description of the autors and projected them on the screen in our heads .
my response was drawing and painting of extraterrestrial worlds , außerirdischen worlds , robots , raumschiffen , raumschiffen and all of all that .
in the matheunterricht , i was constantly constantly excited about the teacher , like i , hinterm , herummalte .
creativity had to be sort of out .
and something interesting happened . what excites me about jacques cousteau shows was the thought of a unknown world here on earth .
i would certainly never have a außerirdische world with a spaceship . that seemed quite unlikely .
but here &apos;s a world that i actually could actually enter in the earth , and she was also very intriguing and exotisch , and as all that i &apos;ve always imagined , when i was going to read this books .
so i decided to be 15 , to become divers .
the only problem was that i lived in a small village in canada , 1,000 kilometers away from the next ocean .
i didn &apos;t get me to the point .
i nervte my dad , until he finally finally finally got a tauchschule in buffalo , new york , new york , had done exactly the other side of the border where we lived .
i graduated from the pool in a pool of ymca in the winter in buffalo , new york .
but the ocean , but one real ocean , i got two years later , when we moved to california .
since then , in 40 years , who are now verstrichen , i spent about three hours of water , 500 hours of it .
and i learned that the world of deep , even in the flacheren oceans , so rich as faszinierendem is the realm of life , how we really can &apos;t really imagine it .
nature knows no limits , completely unlike our own , kläglichen human imagination .
to the today , i &apos;m going to get a tiefste awe for what i consider my dives .
and my love to the ocean is to think of the same intensity as it did .
when i was a erwachsener aussuchte , it was the filmmaking .
this seemed to be the best way of thinking , my inner urge , stories , to be able to unite pictures .
as a kid , i drew the constantly and so on .
so , the films of the path , images and stories . it was together .
of course , the stories that i was aussuchte , from the science-fiction-bereich , &quot; terminator , &quot; &quot; aliens &quot; and &quot; &quot; aliens . &quot;
&quot; abyss &quot; i could mean my vorliebe for the unterwasserwelt and the diving with the filmmaking .
so , it &apos;s sort of verflochten my two passions .
something interesting happened to be abyss : to solve a erzählerisches problem in this movie -- and we had to create a kind of liquid diagnostic system , we &apos;re going to be griffen on computergenerierte animation , cg , cg .
and what came along with this was the first computergenerierte soft-surface-figur that ever had to see in a movie .
the film was a cash , it &apos;s not a cash , i just played a produktionskosten , but i realized the audience was something that was like the audience in the world , like the magic of the magic .
the arthur clarke is the law that &apos;s called bekanntlich technology and magic and not to distinguish apart .
so she saw something quite magical .
and i found this .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s got to be really necessarily in the filmkunst . &quot;
so we went into &quot; terminator 2 , &quot; my next film , even much more .
together with ilm , we created the guy from liquid metal . the success is the success of that effect .
and it worked . we had done something quite magical , and the effect in the audience was the same , but we &apos;ve got a little bit more money .
from these two experiences , a whole new world , a new world of creativity is the creativity of creativity .
so i started a company with my good friend , winston , winston , who was the best make-up- and creature-designer was called &quot; digital domain . &quot;
the basic idea was that the stage of the phase is the stage of the world &apos;s greatest processes with visual printers and the same time with digital produktionen .
we then did that , and we also have a competitive and a half of us .
but the mid-1990s of the 1990s , we realized that we were in the creature- and character-design -- which we &apos;ve actually founded the company -- to langsam .
i had this piece of &quot; avatar &quot; to written the bar in the sun in the whole new heights of new heights , and computergenerierter effects in a whole new way , with a very human characters , which were made by cg , and the hauptfiguren should be alle , and the world should be cg .
but the guy was very nice to go back and forth , and the people in my company told me that we don &apos;t have to be able to do that , that &apos;s not the able to do that .
so i was just like this , and i made this other film about the big ship , which is going to be .
and the filmstudio i have this as &quot; romeo and julia , &quot; sell on a ship , &quot; it was a liebesfilm epischen , a spiritual film .
but the chinese decided , i was really trying to be a real wrack .
i &apos;ve done the movie .
this is the truth . the studio didn &apos;t know that .
i &apos;ve convinced them , by watching , &quot; we &apos;re going to go to the rock . we &apos;re going to go .
we &apos;re going to show it in the eröffnungssequenz of the movie .
this is tremendously important . it &apos;s a good aufhänger for marketing . &quot;
and i persuaded them to finance a expedition .
sounds crazy . but this is going back to back to back to that , that your own imagination can make a reality .
then we created six months later , which i was in a russian tauchboot wiederfand , four miles under the surface of the north of the north , and i was a real titanic of the nordatlantik .
this was not a movie , no hd , that was really real .
so , that really really gave me really loved .
and the built was enormous . we had to build cameras and health and all sorts of things .
and i remembered how much that tiefseetauchgänge , a weltraummission .
well , they were also hochtechnisch and bedurften umfangreicher .
you &apos;re going to be in this capsule , you &apos;re in this dark , and you &apos;re in this dark , feindselige environment , where no hope is going to be like , if you don &apos;t get back to it .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s as much as i was in a science-fiction-film .
that &apos;s really cool . &quot;
i was obsessed with the study of the deep sea .
anyway , from the part that has to do with curiosity and science . it was all . it was adventure , it was curiosity . it was real .
and it was a experience that i couldn &apos;t give you .
because , you know , i could imagine a creature that we could design for a visual effect , but i couldn &apos;t imagine what i would see outside of the fensters .
in some of the following , i &apos;ve seen some of the things that i &apos;ve seen in thermalquellen , and sometimes things i &apos;ve never seen before , and for the science , i had seen the science before , when we saw them , even no words .
so this has really been really richtig , and i wanted to do more .
and so i got a little bit more unusual .
after the success of the titanic , i said , &quot; okay , i want to be meinen my hauptberuf as a filmmaker in hollywood in hollywood , and i &apos;ll be a little for a while . &quot;
and then we started to &quot; bismarck , &quot; and they &apos;re terrified with roboterfahrzeugen .
we went back to the wrack of the titanic .
we took little robots that we built , which is a fiberglaskabel abwickelten .
our intention was , hineinzutauchen and the inside of the ship , which was never done before .
no one had ever done the insides of the wracks , and you &apos;ve got no means for that . so we evolved the power technology .
well , i &apos;m sitting now , on the deck of titanic , in a tauchboot , and see , planken , that &apos;s kind of like this brettern , and i know that once you know that the tape has played there .
and i &apos;m flying with a little tour of the gänge of the brain .
i just bediene it , but my consciousness is within the vehicle .
it felt like i was physically physically in the schiffswracks of the titanic .
this was the surrealste form of a déjà-vu , which i ever had to ever say , because before i was going to be a corner , i &apos;ve always had to know what &apos;s going on in the lichtkegel of the heart , since i was going to be übers with filmset .
the set was a very accurate copy of the beginning of the united states .
so this was a highly strange experience .
she made me aware that this telepräsenz-erlebnis , that you use such roboterhafte avatare , and so that &apos;s your consciousness in the vehicle , in these different forms of existence .
it was really profound very complicated .
and maybe a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of the things that might happen in some decades , if you have to do something , or to do something , in all kinds of post-humanen , which i can imagine .
so , what we did was , what we &apos;ve seen down on this , what we &apos;ve seen down on , really appreciate this tiefseequellen , for example , this incredibly mysterious , and that &apos;s actually a extraterrestrial , but here &apos;s the erden .
they live with help .
they don &apos;t exist in a sunlight on sunlight , how we do that .
and so you see the animals that right next to a 500 degrees c is they can survive there .
at the same time i was also interested in the same time , and i was also interested in weltraumwissenschaft , which was again from my childhood .
and so i ended up with the people who are interested in space and the nasa plan and richtige and richtige weltraummissionen , and they &apos;re going to be fahren , and they &apos;re going to be fahren , and it &apos;s going to be able to use the internationalen protocol of the international weltraumstation and then use our 3d-kamerasysteme .
this was fascinating .
but the end of it was that i took it to us with us in the deep sea .
i took them with the world and verschaftte them to the world : astrobiologen , planetenwissenschaftler , people who are interested in these extreme situations , and i took them to the sources of making them , and they were able to test and test instruments and so on .
we were talking about arguments , but actually , science , more specifically , genauer .
so the circle of my existence as a science-fiction-fan , at the time , and the implementation in the reality .
and over the course of this restaurant , i learned a lot .
i learned a lot about science . but i think you &apos;re certainly sure , a director has to lead to a leader , a leader like a schiffskapitän or something like a schiffskapitän .
i don &apos;t mind much of leadership before i antrat these expeditions .
because at a certain point , i had to say , &quot; what do i do here ?
why do i do that ? what &apos;s going on ? &quot;
these blöden films don &apos;t bring us money .
we &apos;re going to play a moment . it &apos;s not a trail .
all of you think i &apos;m between &quot; titanic &quot; and &quot; avatar &quot; and &quot; avatar &quot; davongelaufen and would have to me a point on a towel at a towel .
i &apos;ve all got these films , this dokumentarfilme , for a very small audience .
no fame , no honor , no money . what do you do ?
you &apos;re doing it to be the task of the challenge , the ocean is the herausforderndste environment that there are , and because of the weird connection , it &apos;s because of the weird connection that comes to a little group of people who are a team .
because we &apos;ve done all of this with only 10 to 12 people , the years of the years , we were zusammengearbeitet for two to three to three .
and in this community , you realize that the most important thing is the most important thing that you have front of them is because you have a job of a job , you can &apos;t explain any other time .
if you get to land , and you say , &quot; we had to do it , the fiberglas , the whole thing , and the difficulty that you &apos;re doing , the whole thing , and the difficulties that are just going to work on sea , and that &apos;s how you can &apos;t explain the other thing , and they can have a soldaten or the ones that
there &apos;s a link , a gegenseitiger respect .
so when i got to turn into my zurückkam to turn my next film &quot; avatar , i tried to use the same radiation to be able to put his team and to be in the education of the respect .
and this is really changed the dynamic .
so i was standing with a little team on the unbekanntem terrain , and we were called &quot; avatar &quot; with a new technology that was not yet before .
incredibly exciting .
a tremendous challenge .
and we were given for a year of a time of a time of a time .
so , it changed my way my way to do films .
there were people who were told , we would have really good at the time , and on the planet .
it was more to me , to do a more inclusive way of doing my job , the actual process of being changed in the outcome .
so what can we conclude from all of that ?
what lessons we learned ?
i think , first is the curiosity .
it &apos;s the most powerful human feature .
our imagination is a force that can actually create a reality .
and the fourth teams is more than all the world &apos;s most lorbeer .
and to me , i &apos;m going to come to come to come to get young , saying , &quot; give me a advice , as i can do . &quot;
and i say , &quot; don &apos;t you do yourself .
that &apos;s a few , you know , you have others for you . don &apos;t you see yourself , you can &apos;t get to yourself .
nasa has such a lieblingssatz : &quot; failure is not an alternative . &quot;
but in art and the process has to be a alternative , because there &apos;s a vertrauensvorschuss .
no important thing , the innovation , the innovation , ever attempted .
you have to be willing to take risks .
this is the idea that i &apos;d like to give you to the way , and we &apos;re not a alternative , fear , but it &apos;s not a alternative . thank you .
today i &apos;m talking about to you about energy and climate .
and this may be something that &apos;s because my vollzeitbeschäftigung in the foundation mainly mainly mainly are mainly in the foundation of vaccines and seed , to invent the things that we &apos;re going to invent and to deliver the poorest to a better life .
but energy and climate are extremely important for these people , exactly what &apos;s even more important than any other person on the planet .
and klimaverschlechterung means that their saaten are not growing over many years , and we &apos;re too much more or less , and things are going to change as much as their fragile weapons can &apos;t be able to withstand their own personal system .
this leads to hungersterben . it leads to uncertainty . it leads to riots .
so , one is a climate for them .
also , the energiepreis is very important for them .
the fact is that if you could only reduce one thing about one thing , the price would be energy to the most effective .
now , the energiepreis is about time .
in fact , the fortschrittsgesellschaft is basiert .
the kohlerevolution trieb the industrial revolution and even in the 20th century there was a rapid rate in the elektrizitätspreis and so we &apos;ve got refrigerators , we can make modern materials and do so many things .
so we &apos;re in a wonderful situation with electricity in the rich world .
but if we cut the prize -- let &apos;s take the prize to the prize -- we put a new barrier and this barrier is with co2 .
co2 , co2 , the planet and the equation for co2 is quite clear .
they summieren the ausgestoßene co2 , which leads to a very negative consequences of the temperaturerhöhung , and perhaps worse , and worse , the indirekte , the indirekte , that the natural ecosystems is that the natural ecosystems can &apos;t adjust such a rapid of change and so on .
now , the exact exact relationship between a co2-anstieg and the dadurch resultierende temperaturveränderung and where their other consequences are , there &apos;s some kind of thing , but not very much .
and there are certain of the things about how bad this will be , but they &apos;re going to be extremely bad !
i asked the top-wissenschaftler several times : &quot; we really need to get down close to close ?
isn &apos;t it &apos;s not half half or a quarter ? &quot;
the answer is : until we get close to zero , the temperature will continue to increase .
so it &apos;s a big challenge .
it &apos;s very different than we say , we have a rich meter of truck that &apos;s going to bridge underneath a three feet , and then you can put it up underneath underneath .
this is to go down to zero , on zero .
well , we &apos;re going to go through a lot of kohlenstoffdioxid , over 26 billion tons .
each americans about 20 tons . people from poor countries , less than one .
in average , it &apos;s about five tons of every time for everybody on the planet .
and somehow we have to make changes that is lower to zero .
it &apos;s far as constant .
only different economic changes are impacting it and we need to go from rapidem increase in reducing the increase and a reducing to zero .
this equation has four new factors . they have this thing -- co2 -- that &apos;s what they &apos;re going to do to do , and that &apos;s going to be the number of people who are taking human energy , the average person in the average , and the co2 that &apos;s going to be a energieeinheit energieeinheit .
so let &apos;s take care of each other and try and think about how we get this to zero .
probably one of these numbers have to come close to zero .
now this is algebra , but let &apos;s go through it .
first we have the population .
today are today billion people today , people , people , people , people , people , people , people , people , people , people , people , people , people , people are living .
and it was schreitet billion billion savings spreading to 9 billion .
if we &apos;re very successfully with new vaccines , the gesundheitsvorsorgung and reproduktionsmedizin , we could be cut down to 10 percent to 15 percent , but we &apos;re going to see a slope around the time .
the second factor is the services we &apos;re using .
it includes everything that we eat , clothing , clothing , television , heat .
these are very good things , and armutsverringerung , that these services are almost available to any of the planet .
it &apos;s great that this number is going .
in the rich world , in the upper billion , we might be able to make abstriche and less use , but it &apos;s going to increase this number of every year , and so on average , that &apos;s the number of services that are going to be in the number of services .
here &apos;s a very basic service . there &apos;s home light to the home so you can read the homework ?
and these students don &apos;t have it , so they go out and read their schulaufgaben under the straßenlicht .
now , efficiency , efficiency , the e , the energy , the energy , there &apos;s been good news .
we have something that doesn &apos;t work , that &apos;s not going to be a thing .
because of different successes in the lichtsektor , through other autotypen , through new methods in the jungle , there are lots of services , and they &apos;re taking some of the individual services to cut up 90 percent .
in other words , the manufacturing of düngemitteln , 105 , 105 : 56,000 : 56,000 : &amp; -- &amp; : 05 : 05 : 05 : 05 : 58,000 : 58,000 or luftverkehr , is a very much smaller .
if we &apos;re optimistic , we may get a reduction to a factor of three or maybe a factor to be a factor of sixth .
but in the first three factors , we &apos;re now from 26 billion of 26 billion tons of tons of tons , and that &apos;s just simply not enough .
so let &apos;s see the fourth factor of -- and this is going to be a model -- this is the amount of co2 that &apos;s going to be a energieeinheit energieeinheit .
it turns out that you can get that on zero .
if you burn coal : no .
if you burn natural gas : no .
almost every herstellungsmethode for electricity today , except renewables and nuklearenergie .
so what we need to do on a global level is to create a new system .
we need energiewunder .
now , if i use the term &quot; miracle &quot; i don &apos;t mean the impossible .
the microprocessor is a miracle . the computer is a miracle .
the internet and whose services is a miracle .
the people here have contributed to the evolution of this miracle .
usually there &apos;s no one that you have a miracle to take a miracle to a certain date .
usually you &apos;re just standing just and some people are , others don &apos;t .
in this case , we need to give it vollgas and a miracle in very short time .
well , i wondered how can i really feel that ?
is there a natural illustration , a demonstration that &apos;s going to be here ?
i remembered my last year when i was born , and sort of liked the people that .
the idea was really true for them , you know that there are people who live with mosquito .
for energy , i remembered this .
i decided that was the freilassen of fireflies to be the environment here .
so here &apos;s some natural fireflies .
you &apos;ve got to me that they don &apos;t bite . actually , you won &apos;t get the glass .
now , there &apos;s all kinds of spielereilösungen like this , but they don &apos;t get much .
we need solutions , either or any of them have a unimaginable scaling and unimaginable community , and although there are many ways that people are searching for , i really can really see five of these big demands .
i have a fire , geothermal , fusion and biokraftstoffe .
and if you &apos;re going to do a moderaten , and if you &apos;re going to do better than i expect , but my favorite thing is that we have to work on all of them , and we can &apos;t give them up , because they &apos;re going to give us , because they &apos;re going to be a einschüchtern .
let &apos;s first look at burning fossil fuels , burning burning from either either coal or natural gas .
what you have to do there , maybe it &apos;s just simple , but that &apos;s not , but it &apos;s not the co2 , which is coming from the schornstein , and then you have to pick up pressure and hoping that there &apos;s there .
there are some pilotprojekte that &apos;s going to be a 60 percent more than 60 percent , but it &apos;s very hard to get a very difficult problem to get the lagerung of co2 , is a big challenge , but the biggest problem here is the lagerzeitfrage .
who will make it make ?
who can guarantee something that literally many billion times larger than any kind of junk that you can imagine ?
this is a lot of volume .
so this is a tough nut .
next year : nuklearenergie .
the fact has three big problems , especially in hochregulierten countries , especially in hochregulierten countries , and the question is that you &apos;re really hoping that nothing can go wrong , despite the human spirit , that the power of the power is not using the power for guns .
and what do you do with the waste ?
because even though it &apos;s not very big , there &apos;s a lot of concerns .
so three very difficult problems that may be solvable , and you should work on that .
the last three of five &apos;s five have .
it &apos;s the renewables that they &apos;re often called often .
and also , the ones they have -- although it &apos;s great that they don &apos;t need fuel -- they have some drawbacks .
one is the power that produce these technologies are dramatically dramatically improving than the von .
these are energiefarmen , you &apos;re talking about many quadratkilometern , 1,000 more than a normal power plant .
and also the new sources of this sources :
the sun doesn &apos;t seem to the day , it doesn &apos;t seem to be a day , and it &apos;s not the wind not constantly .
so you have to depend on these sources , a way that you have to have the energy , the energy , even if you don &apos;t get available .
so there &apos;s great preisherausforderungen . there are challenges in the transmission , and when we say , &quot; the power of the country is outside the country , it &apos;s not just the technology , they need to be able to do with the risk of where the energy from different from wherever it comes from .
and there &apos;s the lagerungsproblem .
and to show the dimension , i &apos;ve been looking at all of the batteries , the way that they &apos;re going to be , and i found that in the amount of electronic energy , and i found that all the batteries that we &apos;re going to produce now , less than 10 minutes of the gesamtenergie .
so we need a big breakthrough , something that is going to be a factor to be 100 better than the time of time .
this isn &apos;t impossible , but it &apos;s not that easy .
that &apos;s what happens when you try to get these unterbrochenen sources about over 20 percent -- 30 percent of the present .
if you want to be able to support 100 percent of it , they need an incredible wunderbatterie .
now , where should we go , what is the right approach ?
&quot; manhattan project &quot; ? how do we get to target ?
what we need are many companies that work on it . hundreds .
in each of these five areas we need at least 100 people .
so many of you will say , they &apos;re crazy ! that &apos;s good .
i think there &apos;s a lot of the group that are already done there .
bill gross has several companies , including a namens , a called esolar .
vinod khosla invested in dozens of companies , and have interesting choices and i try to support that .
nathan myhrvold and i finance a company that was , maybe surprisingly , the revenue of the nuclear approach .
there are some innovation in the nuklearbereich ; modular , liquid .
the evolution has stopped in this industry in this industry , so it &apos;s not a big surprise that some of the good concepts .
the terrapower-konzept means that instead of a part of the urans , the one percent , the one percent , the u235 , we decided to burning the 99 percent , the 99 percent of the u238 .
this is a pretty crazy idea .
but in fact , you &apos;ve been thinking about this , but you could never use a little bit of time , but you could never get a vernünftig , but you know , there &apos;s a modern supercomputer , and you can see that , you know , it &apos;s like the right materialienherangehensweise , it looks like that it &apos;s a toilet .
and because you burn this 99 percent , it &apos;s much better .
in fact , you get the waste , and you can even use the waste of today &apos;s waste as a antriebsstoff .
instead of going to break down the head , they just burn it . a great thing .
it &apos;s uranium , it &apos;s going to be serious , a little bit like a candle .
you see that it &apos;s a kind of column , often than &quot; a &quot; wandernde reactor &quot;
that &apos;s really the treibstoffproblem .
here &apos;s a picture of a place in kentucky .
this is the waste , the 99 percent . you have the part that &apos;s burned today , so it &apos;s called aufgebrauchtes uranium .
the triebe triebe the u.s. economy for hundreds of years .
and if you &apos;re ozeanwasser ozeanwasser and just filtriert , you get enough fuel for the rest of the planet .
you know , there &apos;s many challenges , but it &apos;s an example of many hundreds of concepts that we need to get forward .
let &apos;s think about how we should measure our success .
how should our testimony ?
well , we &apos;re going to go to goal we have to do , and then we talk about the zwischenschritt .
many of a 80 percent of a 80 percent reduction to 2050 .
it &apos;s really important that we get there .
the rest of 20 percent are synthesized in poor countries , and still a little farming , hopefully will be waldrohdung and cement to be clean .
so , to get these 80 percent , the most industrialized , including countries like china , their elektrizitätsgeneration completely .
the other grade says , whether we use the null-emissionen technology , whether they &apos;re used in all developed countries , and we &apos;re on the way to get the rest of the way .
this is great important .
this is going to be a key part of this .
if we go back to where there should be the end of the 2020 ?
it should be again again the two elements .
we should use the effektivitätsmaßnahmen to use the effektivitätsmaßnahmen to bring reducing reducing , the less we emittieren , the lower will be the co2-summe and the temperature .
but actually , this is the things that we do is not to have businesses that don &apos;t completely completely to the big reduktionen , just as a less important thing that the other thing that is the speed of innovation .
this is , this is what we need to do with vollgas and we can measure : in firmenzahlen , pilotprojekten and regulierungsänderungen .
there &apos;s lots of great books to this subject .
the al gore book &quot; we have the choice , &quot; and david mckays mckays , &quot; sustainable energy energy the . &quot;
they &apos;re really going through and create a framework that can be discussed in the feet , because we need to take any of all of all the sides .
there &apos;s some kind of thing that needs to work together .
this is a wish .
a very clever wish that we invent this technology .
if you &apos;re a wish for the next 50 years , i could choose the president , a vaccine , and i love this wish , or i could choose this wish , the halbierter energiepreis , the halbierter energiepreis , the wunsch of carbon will take this wish .
this has the largest effect .
if we get this wish , the tunnel between long-term and human minds are being used between the u.s. and china , between the u.s. and china , and almost all of these two billion will be very much worse .
so what do we need to do ?
for what are i going to do ?
we need to use it for more of the world .
if countries in places like koppenhagen , they should not just talk about carbon footprint .
they should discuss these innovationsstrategie , and they would be shocked by the lächerlich of the geringen of geringen that are being spent for these innovative .
we need marktanreize , co2 , co2 , cap , cap &amp; amp ; independent is something that a preissignal creates .
we have to spread the message .
we need to have dialogue and sustain and also the things that are made by the government .
it &apos;s a more wish , but i think we can fulfill it .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you . thank you .
thank you very much . just to understand something better -- to do something better than you can give us an idea of the scale of the scale of that investment ?
bill gates : to get the simulation of a supercomputer , all of the great scientists , we have to have some 10 scientists , which we have just to have some 10 million , and even if we have our materials in a russian reactor that it works is to make sure that it &apos;s going to be comfortable , you &apos;re just going to be on the 100en
the hard step is the building of the first reaktors , another billion , to find the regularien and the place that &apos;s going to build the first of it .
once the first thing is done , if it &apos;s going to be like , it &apos;s all clear , because the mass , the power is so different than we know it .
to understand the right : that means deep in the ground , almost like a vertical , a little bit of a nuclear arsenal , that verbrauchten , and then it starts to go up and go on top of the top and then go on to go down .
bg : right . now , you have to retool the reactor , and many people are always new , and many people , and many of the controls , and many of them , and that thing where you get it to you , and it &apos;s a ding , and that &apos;s not good !
but if you have very cheap fuel , you can befüllen it for 60 years -- think of a column -- they &apos;re buried , without the whole komplexitäten .
and it &apos;s sitting there and 60 60 years , and then it &apos;s done .
a nuklearreaktor , the self for the trash .
bg : yeah . now , what happens with the waste : you can let it sit on this method -- there &apos;s a lot of waste with this method -- then they take it into the next reactor and burning it on the next reactor and burning it .
and we start by using the waste , which already exists out of the waste , which is already exists in these kühlbecken or trockenbehältern , and that &apos;s our startbrennstoff .
so what that came to this particular occasion is , what we have is a problem that we &apos;re doing in our own and so that it &apos;s going to dramatically reduce the müllvolumen dramatic .
but while they &apos;ve been talking about these possibilities , they &apos;ve talked about these ways to talk about this possibility .
where &apos;s the largest interest , so what really is really ?
bg : now we have a lot of interesting research , and there &apos;s a lot of interesting things that are in the name , and there &apos;s a lot of interest in russia , india , china , china -- i &apos;ve met the energieminister and talked about the energieminister and talked about how this fits to the energieagenda .
i &apos;m optimistic . you know , the french and japanese have something in the direction .
this is a version of a thing that was done .
this is a more important step forward , but it &apos;s like a faster reactor and some countries have built this , so anybody who has a fast reactor , a kandidatat reactor for our first .
in your mind : so , in the same way , and chance really do something really in a life ?
bg : now we need one of these skalierbaren things that are very cheap , we have 20 years to invent and then end 20 years .
this is basically the deadline that we have to have the most potent thing that we have to do .
and you know , terrapower , if everything is good , and that &apos;s a big wish , could easily hold it .
and fortunately , there are dozens of companies today , and we need hundreds of hundreds , the same , as if their approaches work , the same thing that works for their pilots , for the same time .
and it would be best if it &apos;s a little bit , because you could use a mixture of a mixture .
so , anyway , we need a solution .
one of the great possible breakthroughs , is that the greatest thing you know ?
bg : a energiedurchbruch is the most important thing .
it would be without the umweltherausforderung , but it makes it more important .
in the nuclear sector , there are other innovative companies .
you know , we don &apos;t know their work as well as these , but there &apos;s the only way that we have a different approach .
there &apos;s a flüssigen reaktortyp which seems to be difficult to do , but maybe they say that over us .
and so , there &apos;s different , but the beauty of that is a million energy like a , and so they &apos;re the most beautiful thing that we can do with the issues and the cost of the kosten , the potential , the potential , the potential , the potential , the impact on the country and other things , almost in a very own cultural .
if that &apos;s not done what ?
let &apos;s have to be notfallmaßnahmen to try to try to keep the erdtemperatur stable ?
bg : if you come into this situation , it &apos;s as if you ate too much , and you &apos;re just going to be a heart attack , and what do you do ? you might need a herzoperation or something like that .
there &apos;s a forschungsrichtung called geoengineering , which is befasst with various techniques to be the warming , so that we &apos;re going to be 20 or 30 years longer to be zusammenzuraufen .
this is just a versicherungsmethode .
you hope that we don &apos;t need that .
some people say , you don &apos;t even work at the insurance work because one of the things that might be doing , you know , because you &apos;re going to eat that one is going to save the herzoperation .
i don &apos;t know whether the collective of this problem is , but there &apos;s a discourse in geoengineering , but there &apos;s a discourse in geoengineering about whether you should have available to the available if you have to get faster , or that innovation takes us to expect .
klimaskeptiker : have two sentences for the ones to convince you to persuade them ?
bg : well , unfortunately , the skeptics is in very different camps .
those of those who make scientific arguments are very little .
say that there are negative effects that have to do with the clouds that are going to have ?
there are very , very few things that they can say , from whom there &apos;s a chance in a million .
the hauptproblem is like this as a similar thing .
you make the mistake now , and you pay for it much later .
and so the idea is , if you have all kinds of problems that you have to invest in something that &apos;s not about what the investment is , and it &apos;s actually not that the investment in the world &apos;s the most important thing , and there &apos;s the fact that the ipcc is not necessarily the worst scenario , and there &apos;s a lot of people who look
the fact is that these uncertainty should worry about .
but my dream here is that if you can do it , and the co2 , and the skeptiker , the co2 , and the skeptiker , say , &quot; okay , i &apos;m not interested in that it &apos;s not a carbon emittiert , but i &apos;ll think it &apos;s probably not to accept that , because it &apos;s cheaper than the previous method . &quot;
and this would be the answer to the björn lomborg , that if you use all of these time and energy to solve the co2 , all the other goals , all the other goals , the bekämpfung of malaria , and so on , it &apos;s a dumb waste of resources , and so that it &apos;s better things that we can do .
bg : well , the actual spending for the research -- let &apos;s say the u.s. dollars should spend 10 billion dollars more than they &apos;re doing today -- that &apos;s not dramatic .
and the other thing is not suffer unnecessary .
you get to great geldsummen , and you can disagree with reasonable people , if you have something that &apos;s not unique , and trying to finance that .
it &apos;s because you &apos;re very short about a kostendurchbruch and funded the lernkurve , and i think we should try to do more things that have the potential to be a lot more cheaper .
if the abstrich , you get , you get a very high energiepreis , you can only keep the rich .
i mean , each of us could spend five times for our energy without our power .
for the lower two billion , but it &apos;s a disaster .
and even more lomborg think about .
his new masche is now : &quot; why is the research going to be more ? &quot;
he still gets to be a few of his former stories , with the skeptiker-camp , but he understood that this is a very lonely group and therefore he &apos;s now going to be the forschungsargument .
and that &apos;s a kind of a kind of thing that i think for appropriate .
research , it &apos;s just crazy , how little the supports .
bill , i think i &apos;m going to talk about almost all of people here , if i say , i hope to be true , thank you very much . thank you .
bg : thank you .
several years ago , here at ted , peter peter skillman called a design-wettbewerb called &quot; the marshmallow-herausforderung . &quot;
the idea is quite simple , vierer-teams , the most powerful freistehende structure of structure with 20 , about 1m klebeband , about 1m klebeband and a marshmallow .
the marshmallow has to be top top .
and , although it really seems really easy , it &apos;s really hard to do because it &apos;s really very quickly to work very quickly .
and so i thought that this is a interesting idea , and i &apos;ve turned it into a design-workshop .
it was a huge success .
since then , i &apos;ve been doing about 70 about the world , and the architects , and architects , even with ctos of the fortune-50-unternehmen and there &apos;s something about this particular problem , which is deep to work in nature of collaboration and i want to share some of them with you .
usually most people are able to orient themselves .
you talk about how it looks like it will look like it &apos;s going to be rangeln to power , and it &apos;s going to be rangeln to power , it &apos;s going to be rangeln to power , it &apos;s going to be doing power .
then you invest a little bit of time in planning and organization . they &apos;re acting and put together .
they invest in the most zusammenbau time in the zusammenbau ständig , they &apos;re constantly wachsender structures in the zusammenbau ständig .
and finally , before they don &apos;t have time , you get a time , someone takes the marshmallow and they sit down the summit , kick back and forth back and forth , &quot; ta-da !
but then , what happens is , almost always , the &quot; ta-da &quot; is &quot; uh-oh &quot; is &quot; the weight of the marshmallows that the whole thing is going to be and einstürzt .
there &apos;s a series of people who have much more , &quot; -momente &quot; and the other ones are fresh bwl-absolventen .
they lie , they cheat , they &apos;re confused and produce really dürftige .
and of course , there &apos;s a lot of times more &quot; , and underneath the best , the best absolventen absolventen is frische absolventen .
and that &apos;s pretty amazing .
and as peter , peter told us , they don &apos;t just produce the highest towers , but also the most interesting structures of all .
what you might ask is , how does that come ? why ? what is that ?
and peter tells him , &quot; neither of the children spend the time in the spaghetti of the spaghetti sauce . &quot;
they don &apos;t invest in machtkämpfe .
but there &apos;s another reason .
and that &apos;s that bwl-studenten was trained to find a right plan , ok !
and then it &apos;s going to realize it .
what happens when you put the marshmallow on the top , they don &apos;t have time and what happens ?
it &apos;s a crisis .
sounds familiar , what ?
what &apos;s happening is that they make it with the marshmallow and prototypes , erfolgreiche prototypes , successful prototypes , and they &apos;re always going to be the marshmallow of the summit , so they would have gotten the opportunity to fix prototypes .
konstrukteure erkennen recognize that kind of collaboration as a core of a nucleus .
and with each trial , the children get immediate feedback that works and what doesn &apos;t .
so the power of work , working with prototypes , far more -- but see , what is the most common teams .
the average for most of the most difficult , most of them , is about ca. , bwl-studenten , the half of them , lawyers , but not much , but much more , are much more than the adults .
who &apos;s on the most successful ?
architects and engineers , to happiness .
north america is the highest , what i saw .
and why ? because they are dreiecke and sich-selbst-verstärkende geometric patterns , the key to build a key structure to build structure .
ceos are a little bit of average , but here &apos;s what it is interesting .
you get a exekutive administrator on the team , they &apos;re going to better better .
it &apos;s incredible . you see , and see this team will win . &quot;
you can predict the predictions . why is that ?
because they have special attributes of the prozessbegleitung .
they conduct the process , they understand it .
and the team , the r and on the work is going to improve the performance of the team of teams .
and skill and prozessfähigkeiten and their combination lead to success .
if you have 10 teams , the typical of the pyramid , you get about six , the stable structures .
i tried to figure out something .
i thought we &apos;ll bring the pokereinsatz .
so i offered a $ $ prize for the winner to the winner .
what do you think with these design-studenten ?
what was the outcome ?
this is happened . not a team had a stable structure .
if you have a 2,5cm construction built , he would have worn the price of home .
so isn &apos;t what interesting is that high wetteinsätze have a strong effect ?
we call this exercise with the same students .
what do you think ?
now , now , you understood the benefit of the &quot; bottom . &quot;
so , this was from the same , bad team .
they produced the highest construction in the least .
there are so tief-greifende lessons for us , about nature and success .
you may ask questions , why would someone actually make a marshmallow-challenge ?
the reason is , i &apos;ll use digital tools and processes to help teams , cars , cars and visual effects .
and what the marshmallow-challenge is doing , she &apos;s helping them to identify the hidden assumptions .
because frankly , every project has his own marshmallow .
the challenge offers a shared experience , a common language , a common language , to build the right prototype .
and this is the value of this experience , this simple exercise .
and those of you who are interested in , can visit marshmallowchallenge.com .
it &apos;s a blog where you see how to build the marshmallows .
there &apos;s a schritt-für-schritt-anleitung there .
they find crazy examples of all the world , like people in the system and raffinieren .
there are also weltrekorde .
and the basale lesson , i think , is that the construction actually is a verbindender sports .
it requires that we all have our senses to drive our senses , and we &apos;re using our thinking of our feelings and our own , in the challenge that &apos;s going on .
and sometimes a little prototype of this experience is all of this experience , which is what it takes us to bring us from a &quot; uh-oh &quot; -- to a &quot; ta-da . &quot;
and that can make a big difference .
thank you .
so we have this as a machine , one machine .
a big machine , a cool , ted-artige machine , and that &apos;s a time .
and everybody in this room has to go .
and you can go into the past , you can go into the future ; they can &apos;t stay in here and stay now in the future .
and i wonder what they would choose because i &apos;ve been asking my friends in my friends , and they wanted to go into the past .
i don &apos;t know . they wanted to go back to the time before it gave cars or twitter or twitter or twitter .
i don &apos;t know .
i &apos;m convinced that you &apos;re sort of irgendwie to the nostalgie , to wunschdenken .
and that &apos;s what i understand .
i &apos;m not part of this group , i have to say .
i don &apos;t want to be in the past , and not because i &apos;m a big set of -- i &apos;m a big set .
it &apos;s because that means that they don &apos;t go back to this planet , they go forward .
so i want to go into this machine , and i want to go into the future .
this is the greatest time that the ever had ever been on this planet , which is what they do : health , wealth , wealth , gelegenheiten , declining .
there was never been a time before .
my ur-großeltern died all of them as they were 60 .
my grandparents would be used to the zahl that number on 70. 70. .
my parents are the 80 to the fersen .
so , there should be a nine at the beginning of my todeszahl .
but it &apos;s not time to think about people like us , because this is a bigger thing than that .
a kid that &apos;s going to be born today in the outside , as long as the richest man in the world was 100 years ago .
think about it . that &apos;s an incredible fact .
and why is that ?
smallpox . smallpox have billions of people on this planet .
they have the demographics of the earth in a way that doesn &apos;t have the war .
they &apos;re gone . they are gone .
we have bezwungen . they were .
in the rich world , there are diseases that millions of us have been threatened by a generation of a generation of bedroht .
diphterie , röteln , kinderlähmung ...
even anyone know what that is ?
vaccines , modern medicine , our ability to feed billions of people , that are successes of scientific method .
and from my view , the scientific method is , the scientific method , looking , look , if it doesn &apos;t matter , it &apos;s not the most human achievement of humanity .
so that &apos;s the good news .
unfortunately , this is all good news because there &apos;s a few other problems , and they were often mentioned , often , often , they were often mentioned .
and one of them is that despite all of our entire world , one billion people in this world go to bed every day .
this number is increasing , and it &apos;s very quickly , and that &apos;s embarrassing .
and not only that , we have our ability to use this world , to try to raise the world .
drinking water , urbares land , rainforests , oil , oil , gas , and if we &apos;re going to go from this chaos , we &apos;re going to go out and we &apos;re going to go out of this chaos .
so the question is : can we do this ? i think .
i think it &apos;s clear that we can produce food , the billions of people will feed the country , without the country , on the country , to rape .
i think we can use this world with energy that they don &apos;t even die .
i think that really , and no , that &apos;s not a wunschdenken .
but this is holding me at night -- one of the things that i &apos;m holding night at night -- we &apos;ve never ever been able to have ever been so miserable , never as now as now as now , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never
and we also never been able to be able to be able to be able to einzusetzten him , as we can today .
we are on the cusp , amazing events of many fields , and yet i really think we have to go back to the front of a time , and i think we have to find a time in the front of the time , where we have progress in these things that we have progress in these things , and more than that , more than now .
people are going to believe in their faith , and that &apos;s how it &apos;s so deeply that you can &apos;t break them .
not even the truth will free .
and listen , everybody has a right to be right in his opinion , even a right to his view , for progress , and it &apos;s a right to progress , to progress , for progress , to progress .
but you know what you &apos;re right ?
they don &apos;t have a right to your own facts . &apos; tschuldigung , don &apos;t have them .
and i &apos;ve got a while to find out .
about a decade ago , i wrote a paper about &quot; the new yorker &quot; written &quot; the new yorker &quot; and a small article .
and i was astonished to bumping resistance on the resistance , to the resistance , to the resistance , which is the most fundamental public health care in health care in human history .
i didn &apos;t know what i should do , so i just did what i always do , i was writing a paper and drove .
and soon i was writing a paper about cup of cultural art .
the same thing , only bigger .
people were playing crazy .
so i &apos;ve written this article about this , and i couldn &apos;t understand why people thought that would be the &quot; frankenfood &quot; that they thought that molecules is a random kind of herumzuschieben a übergriff übergriff on the field of nature .
but you know , i do what i do . i wrote the article , i made .
i mean , i &apos;m journalist , i &apos;m journalist , i &apos;m journalist .
we &apos;re typing , we &apos;re rich , we &apos;re going to eat , that &apos;s okay .
but these articles were worried about me , and i couldn &apos;t figure out why , and finally i found it .
and that &apos;s because these fanatics that made me not even stand at all .
these were umsichtige people , well-educated people , decent people .
they were just like the people in this room .
and that was so potent ...
but then i thought , you know what we &apos;re honest : we &apos;re honest .
we are at a point where we don &apos;t have the same ratio for progress , as we used to be in progress .
we &apos;re talking about zwiespältig .
we &apos;re talking about it , with small , little , progress , &quot; progress . &quot;
okay , so there &apos;s been reasons , and i think we know what are the reasons that are .
we have trust in institutions , in the institutions , and sometimes in science and there &apos;s no reason why that should not be so much .
you can just call a few names and the people will understand .
chernobyl chernobyl , bhopal , the challenger , vioxx , weapons , the us-präsidentschaftswahl 2000 .
i mean , you know , you can choose your own list .
there are questions and problems with the people that we thought they &apos;re always right . so they were skeptisch .
ask yourself , ask them , demand , demand .
don &apos;t take anything like this .
but now , if you get the evidence to get this evidence , and we &apos;re not good .
and i can tell that , that we &apos;re now in a epidemic of fear &apos;s lives , as i &apos;ve never seen them and never see again .
about 12 years ago , a story of a story , a horrible story that the autismus-epidemie mit , mumps and röteln vaccine .
very scary .
and so many studies , in the research , done , in order to see if that was true .
and the research studies , in the research , we should be done , and that &apos;s a serious matter .
the data came in .
the data came from the united states , from england , from sweden , from canada , and they were all the same , no correlation , no connection , no connection .
it doesn &apos;t matter . it doesn &apos;t matter , because we believe in anecdotes , we believe what we see what we &apos;re seeing is what causes us .
we don &apos;t believe in a bunch of a dokumente , a bündel , and i understand that , and i think that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing .
but you know what ?
the result was a serious about it , the result of the result .
because of this fact , the united states is one of the only countries in the world where the impfrate impfrate for the masern .
this is skandalös , and we should be ashamed .
it &apos;s awful .
what happens is that we could do this .
well , i understand that . i do .
because somebody has to work on ?
has a single one ever in the audience ever to see somebody ?
doesn &apos;t happen very often .
in this country at all , but in the last year , in the last year .
these are many deaths by measles , 20 per hour .
but because that &apos;s not what happened here , we can be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to walk and messages from fear
and that can make you because they &apos;re not connecting and korrelation .
they don &apos;t understand that these things seem to be the same , but almost never the same thing .
and that &apos;s something we need to learn , and it &apos;s very quickly .
this guy was a hero , jonas salk .
he &apos;s befreite us from one of the worst geißeln of humanity .
no fear , no qualen , kinderlähmung , verschwunden .
the guy in the middle isn &apos;t so much .
he &apos;s called paul offit .
he has just developed a few other people .
he can save the lives of 400- , 500,000 children per year in the developing world .
pretty good , isn &apos;t ?
well , this is good , except for the fact that paul talks and over vaccines , and says , how valuable are they , and that people simply want to stop .
and that &apos;s actually what he does .
so paul is a terrorist .
if paul talks in a public health , he can &apos;t be wächter without armed .
he gets to get calls to the home , because people like to tell him where your children are going to school .
and why ? because paul has made a vaccine .
i don &apos;t need that , but vaccines are essential .
take it out , the disease back , terrible disease , and that &apos;s what happens .
we &apos;ve now been talking in this country .
and that &apos;s going to be worse , and pretty soon , children will die again , because that &apos;s just a question of numbers .
and they &apos;re not just going to die of measles .
what about kinderlähmung ? take that . why not ?
a kommilitonin of mine wrote me a few weeks ago , and i would like to tell you a little bit .
nobody has ever said before .
she would not have a kid to vaccinate a fight against kinderlähmung .
fine .
why ? because we don &apos;t have any kinderlähmung , and you know what ?
we had no kinderlähmung in this country .
today , i don &apos;t know , maybe i &apos;m not going to go tomorrow , and i just ran into los angeles , and it &apos;s just right after los angeles , and he &apos;s talking about ohio .
and in a few hours , he goes , and he &apos;s got a car , and he comes from long beach , and he &apos;s going to visit one of these fantastichen ted-dinner tonight tonight .
and he doesn &apos;t know that he &apos;s infected with a lähmenden disease , and we don &apos;t know that , because the world is going to work .
that &apos;s the planet , which we live . don &apos;t do it as if it &apos;s not .
we love to do it in lies , we love this . we love that .
you &apos;ve got to all the morning ?
echinacea , a little antioxidantium that helps you help them .
i know that they did this because half the americans do it every day .
they take the stuff , and they take alternative cure , and it doesn &apos;t matter any difference , how often we find that they &apos;re useless .
the data is happening that .
they have to do your urine . more do they almost never do .
this is okay , they want to be a 28 billion dollars for dark numbers .
i agree with you .
dark urin . dark .
why do we do that ? why do we do that ?
well , i think i understand the world .
we hate a strong government . we don &apos;t trust trust .
and that &apos;s not what we should . our health care is .
it &apos;s cruel to millions of people .
it &apos;s perfectly amazing cold and seelentötend itself that can afford .
so we &apos;re running out and where we walk and go ?
we &apos;re running into the arms of the placebo-industrie .
this is great . i love the placebo-industrie .
but you know , this is really serious , because the stuff is crap , and we give billions dollars for it .
and i &apos;ve all got all kinds of little bits here .
none of it -- gingko , cheating , echinacea , betrug , acai , i don &apos;t even know what that is , but we &apos;re spending billions of dollars that &apos;s going to be .
and you know what ? if i say that , i say , &quot; what does it do you ? let &apos;s do what they want .
so they feel good . &quot;
and you know what ? they &apos;re wrong .
because it &apos;s because it &apos;s the gesundheitsminister , the gesundheitsminister , who says , &quot; hmm , i &apos;m going to plan the evidence of my experts , &quot; or any of the krebs-quacksalber that you want to treat his patients with kaffe-einläufen .
if you take on these path , where belief and magic and science replace science , they &apos;re going to be a place where they don &apos;t want to be .
they &apos;re going to thabo mbeki in south africa .
he brought 400,000 of his people around , because he insisted that red beete , knoblauch and zitronenöl , as a writer , viel , and zitronenöl , as a writer , which we know that they can use the process of aids .
hundreds of thousands of unnötiger deaths in a country that gets worse than any other of this disease .
don &apos;t tell me that these things don &apos;t have consequences .
they have them . they always have .
now , the most important epidemic we &apos;re right now is this battle battle between the befürwortern of the befürwortern foods and the bio-elite .
this is a idiotische debate . it &apos;s got to stop .
it &apos;s a debate about words , metaphor .
that &apos;s ideology , not science .
all we eat , every reiskorn , every branch , every branch , every rosenkohl , it was changed by people .
you know , there was no mandarinen in paradise .
there was no cantaloupe-melonen .
there was no weihnachtsbäume . we &apos;ve done this .
we &apos;ve done it in the last 11,000 years .
and some of them has worked and some kind of stuff .
we are losgeworden , which doesn &apos;t work .
now we can do it , and of course , it &apos;s risk . but we can do something like this , but we can do something like vitamin d , and the stuff can help millions of people , millions of people , and to mitigate their lives .
that &apos;s not what you want ?
i have to say , i don &apos;t understand .
we neglect the other thing .
why do we do that ?
now , what i &apos;m always hearing is : too many chemicals , pesticides , hormones , monokultur , monokultur , we don &apos;t want a huge amount of thing with a thing that is wrong .
we don &apos;t want firms life .
we don &apos;t want to have that companies have been seeds .
and you know what my answer is to all this ?
yeah , you &apos;re right . we &apos;re so on .
it &apos;s true , we have a huge nahrungsproblem , but that &apos;s not science .
that has nothing to do with science .
it &apos;s right , morality , patentkram .
you know that science is not a company .
she &apos;s no country .
it &apos;s not a idea ; it &apos;s a process .
it &apos;s a process , and sometimes it works and sometimes not , but the idea that we should not allow science to do their work because we &apos;re afraid , and they &apos;re going to be a real sackgasse , and they &apos;re going to be millions of people from the flourish .
you know , in the next 50 years , we have to grow 70 percent more food than the moment , 70 percent .
these investment in africa in africa in africa , in africa .
embarrassing . it &apos;s embarrassing .
they need that , and we don &apos;t give them .
and why ? aliens ?
we don &apos;t want people to encourage that verrottete stuff like that , like 28 .
so is something that &apos;s a half billion people eat .
it &apos;s about a kind of potato .
it &apos;s just a sack of calories . it &apos;s a bit .
it doesn &apos;t have nutrients , it doesn &apos;t have any protein , and scientists do that in this right .
and then the people would eat that and wouldn &apos;t get blind .
they wouldn &apos;t starve , and you know what ?
this would be beautiful . it wouldn &apos;t be foolish panisse , but it would be nice .
and all i can say is : why do we fight that ?
i mean , we ask ourselves , why do we fight that ?
because we don &apos;t want to have genes ?
it &apos;s not about genes , genes . it &apos;s not about chemicals .
it &apos;s not about our ridiculous passion for hormones , our employees to help food , better food , food food .
it &apos;s not about rice krispies , it &apos;s about getting people to get people alive , and it &apos;s going to be more time to understand what that means .
because you know what ?
if we don &apos;t do that , if we do so far as we do something about something we do , i think , i think , is not guilty of being high-tech .
there &apos;s no other description for what &apos;s happening here .
it &apos;s selfish , it &apos;s ugly , it &apos;s not worthy of our own , and we have to really stop that .
so after this incredibly funny conversation , you might want to say , &quot; you want to go into these ridiculous time and you go into the future ? &quot;
anyway , i want to fall on anyway .
in the moment , it &apos;s in the present , but we have an incredible opportunity .
we can put this time on everything that we want .
we can hinbewegen them , where we want to hinbewegen them , and we &apos;re going to move them where we want to go .
we need to lead this conversations , and we need to think , but if we go into the time and we &apos;ll be going to be relieved to be happy to have that .
i know that we can , and far as far as far as far as far as i &apos;m concerned , this is what the world needs now .
thank you .
thank you .
for some time , i &apos;m interested in the placebo-effekt , and it might seem strange to be a magician , because you look at it as a magician , as i think , as a delusion that &apos;s going to be as a delusion that &apos;s just going to be just as if somebody lies enough . &quot;
in other words , zuckerpillen have shown in some studies , which is just because the person who is doing , and it &apos;s just because the person who is doing , and it &apos;s just a kind of a kind of pharmazeutische or a kind of thing that &apos;s only in the patient &apos;s only place , a measurable effect in the body that you call the placebo-effekt .
a deception is becoming something that &apos;s really important because somebody that way .
so we also understand each other , i want to show you a basic , very simple thing .
and i &apos;m going to show you how it works , and this is a trick that at least at least at least for the 1950s in each other online .
i even myself have him from the cub magic magic in the 1970s .
i &apos;m going to try and explain it for you and then explain it .
and then i &apos;ll explain why i &apos;ll explain it .
so , you see what happens .
the knife that you can investigate , my hand , you can actually look at them .
i &apos;m going to keep the knife in my own .
i &apos;m going to go back to my sleeve .
and to make sure that nothing in my sleeve or from him , i &apos;ll just just put my wrist right here .
so , in this way , you can see that there &apos;s no time in anything , as i &apos;m here , can &apos;t go to my sleeve , or i can go to my sleeve .
and the goal is just simple .
i &apos;m going to open my hand , and hopefully , if everything goes well , the knife through my naked physical nerve .
it actually does quite a very nice place to be able to shake it , without having the knife .
nothing is about my sleeve or come , no trickserei , and you can study anything .
ta-da !
now , this is a trick that i often beibringe little kids , which are interested in complex , because you can learn a lot about deception if you &apos;re going to be more precise , even though it &apos;s a very simple trick .
probably , many of you here know , in the room , this trick .
he works like this : &quot;
i hold the knife in my hand .
i say that i &apos;m going to umschließe my wrist , to make sure that nothing in my sleeve or climb , and that &apos;s a lie .
the reason i &apos;m going to do my wrist is that it &apos;s the actual secret of the illusion .
in the moment , i &apos;m going to talk about my hand , so you see them from behind , and you see this fingers , and just from there , where he was in a position where he was so ausgestreckt .
great trick ?
there &apos;s a guy who had someone who had no childhood .
so , he &apos;s on here . right .
and if i umdrehe myself , the fingers will change your position .
and now you could talk about why this is a deception , why you &apos;re not sure that there are three fingers , because the minds of the mind is , and the way that it &apos;s the mind , they don &apos;t cheat , one , three , three , but they &apos;re seeing .
but it &apos;s not really , it &apos;s not , and then i open my hand .
of course , it &apos;s been available , but not through the magnetism of my body , but through a trick , by my zeigefinger , which is there .
and if i close my hand , the same thing i &apos;m going to do is , by looking at this motion , that the fingers is going to be zurückbewegt .
i take this hand away . and here &apos;s the knife .
this trick can be , and you can see your friends and neighbors . thank you .
now , what did that do with the placebo-effekt ?
one year ago or so , i read a study that really really has really really loved .
i &apos;m not a doctor or researchers , and so that was a amazing thing .
it turns out , &quot; if you put a placebo in the shape of a white pill , in the form of a aspirintablette , that &apos;s just a round , white pill that has a particular set of .
but if you &apos;re the shape that they &apos;re in the placebo , for example , in a smaller pill , and this blue is going to make it , and it &apos;s a letter on it , is actually measurably more effective .
and that &apos;s not any of them any of any of it , and it &apos;s just a zuckerpillen .
but a white pill is not as good as a blue pill .
what ? that really turned me .
it turns out that that &apos;s not all that .
if you take capsules , they &apos;re still effective as a visual form .
a colored capsule that &apos;s at a end of the end , and at the other red , is better than a white capsule .
the dosage is a role .
a pill twice a pill , not as good as three pills -- i &apos;m not going to remember the most exciting statistics . i &apos;m sorry .
the key thing is , but it &apos;s the key thing .
... that &apos;s also a role of the dosierungen .
and the shape is a role .
and if you want to have the ultimate placebo-effekt , you have to grab the needle .
right ? a syringe with a wirkungslosen -- a few milliliter substance , you get a patient &apos;s a patient .
this creates a very strong image in your head . that &apos;s much stronger than a white pill .
this chart is really -- i &apos;m going to show you another time , if we have a projektor .
so , the fact is that the white pill doesn &apos;t be as good as the blue pill , which doesn &apos;t seem as good as a capsule that doesn &apos;t seem as good as the needle .
and none of it has really pharmazeutische , and it &apos;s just our belief that we &apos;re going to get a stronger effect .
i wanted to know if i could use this idea for a magic .
i suppose something that &apos;s obviously a deception , and let &apos;s look really it .
we know , well , we know , well , we know , that you have to reach the needle if it &apos;s going to be .
this is a 18 cm lange , and it &apos;s very , very spitz , and i &apos;ll just put them a little bit of a little bit .
this is really my meat . it &apos;s not damians spezielles meat .
this is my skin . this is not a very special from hollywood .
i &apos;m going to take this needle in my skin and through them , and through them , until they go back to the other side .
if you get a little bit more , if you fall out of it , if you fall in ohnmacht -- i &apos;ve got a couple of friends in the south asian club , and some people i didn &apos;t know , and it &apos;s a woman &apos;s almost ohnmächtig .
so i propose to get quickly , if you get quickly , you look for the next 30 seconds , or you know , what i &apos;m going to do is going to be the first to be the first of the first time .
you can see it &apos;s right , but you can also get wegsehen , if you want .
so , it goes , right here , where my meat starts to be the bottom part of my arm , i &apos;ll just make a little more einstich .
i &apos;m really sorry . do it crazy ?
and now a little bit of my skin and on the other side of the other side is so again .
now we &apos;re actually in the same situation that we had in the messertrick .
about about something .
but now , you can &apos;t count my fingers , right ?
so i &apos;m going to show you you . this is one , two , three , four . five .
well , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah ,
i know what people think if you see that .
they say , &quot; okay , that &apos;s not so stupid and durchsticht itself , just to be a few minutes . &quot;
well , i &apos;ll show you .
how does this look like this ? pretty good .
yeah , i know .
and the people say , &quot; okay . i don &apos;t really see this right . &quot;
people are coming in the nebenräumen .
let me show you from the closeness .
this is really my skin . that &apos;s not a very special from hollywood .
this is my meat , and i can do that .
i &apos;m sorry . if you get evil , you &apos;re going to go away , look .
the people in the back , or the ones that later , at the time , you see , at the video , you see , you know , look at video , &quot; well , that &apos;s what it looks like , but if it would be , it &apos;s a hole and there , if it really is really a hole , and it would be really really
okay , let me just give you a little blood .
yeah , here &apos;s it .
i would say , now i would now be now now .
i would put my arm on my arm and show you that there &apos;s no wounds .
but i think in this framework and the intention is to make a deception for a deception , i &apos;m going to just leave the needle in there and go from the stage .
we &apos;re going to be going to see us in the next few days .
i hope you &apos;ve been excited to you . thank you .
everybody &apos;s talking about happiness .
i &apos;ve been letting some people in the number of books that were released with &quot; happiness &quot; in the last five years , and they gave them to about 40 , and there was much more .
there &apos;s a tremendous wave of the federal way of the universe .
there &apos;s lots of glücks-coaching .
everybody would like to make people happier .
but despite all of these tide , there &apos;s several cognitive cognitive , that it almost impossible to think about happiness .
and my talk today is mainly about this cognitive fallen .
this is true for the laien that are thinking about their own happiness , and it &apos;s true for scientists , who are thinking about happiness , because it &apos;s just that we &apos;re just like that same other .
the first of these guys are a widerstreben , complexity .
it turns out that the word is just a useful word of the word , because we &apos;re using it on many different things .
i think there &apos;s a certain meaning that we could do it , but in large , and all the whole thing we &apos;re going to do is to get to become a little bit , and we &apos;re going to have to embrace the complicated view , and we &apos;re going to have to have to take the complicated view , what &apos;s going on .
the second is a verwechslung of experience and memory , basically , they &apos;re between happy and happy to be happy about his life or happy .
and these are two very different concepts , and they are both zusammengeworfen in the idea of happiness .
and the third is the konzentrations-illusion , and that &apos;s the fact that we can &apos;t think about a fact that we can think of the well-being without teaching your meaning .
i mean , this is a real cognitive trap .
there &apos;s just no way to get it right .
now i would like to start with one example of someone who had a frage-und-antwort-sitzung , who had a frage-und-antwort-sitzung , who said , &quot; &#91; unclear &#93; , he said , he had heard a very sinfonie , and it was really a great music , and at the end of the recording was a fürchterliches sound .
and then he added , really quite emotionally , that has the whole experience .
but that didn &apos;t .
what it was also ruined was the memories of experience .
he had had the experience .
he had 20 minutes of music music .
they don &apos;t force because he was with a memory ; the memory was ruined , and the memory was all the way he had .
what &apos;s really tells us that we think about ourselves and over other people , in the sense of two types of self .
there &apos;s a erlebendes self that lives in the present and the present , is able to see the past , but basically the present has just been present .
it &apos;s the erlebende itself , which is the doctor &apos;s doctor -- you know , when the physician says , &quot; do it hurt if i &apos;m going to put them up here ? &quot;
and then there &apos;s a erinnerndes self , and the erinnernde self is that the mitzählt and the story of our lives , and it &apos;s like the story of our lives , and it &apos;s like the doctor &apos;s going to ask the question , &quot; how did you feel at all over time ? &quot;
or &quot; how did your journey to albania ? &quot; or something .
these are two very different units , the erlebende , and the erinnernde self , and the two and the two is part of the durcheinanders of happiness .
well , the erinnernde itself is a storyteller .
and this is really what &apos;s really a profound response to our memories -- it starts to happen .
we don &apos;t just tell stories if we &apos;re going to tell stories .
our memory tells us stories , which means what we &apos;re going to keep from our physical experiences is to be a story .
and let &apos;s start with a sample with a sample .
there &apos;s a old study .
these are actual patients that are going to be a painful procedure .
i &apos;m not going to go into the details . it &apos;s not painful , but she was painful , as those trial were done in the 1990s .
they were asked to report all of the 60 seconds about their pain .
and here are two patients . these are your record .
and they asked , &quot; who &apos;s got more likely to work ? &quot;
and that &apos;s a very simple question .
patient b has a lot of water , and his darmspiegelung was longer , and every minute of pain that had a patient b , and more .
but there &apos;s another question : &quot; how did these patients do they were ? &quot;
and here &apos;s a surprise : a surprise : a surprise : a surprise : a surprise : a surprise : a surprise .
and the surprise is that a lot of a much more subtle erinnrung in the darmspiegelung had a patient &apos;s disease .
the stories of the darmspiegelungen were different , and because a very important part of history is how they ends up -- as you end .
and none of these stories is very erbaulich or great -- but one of them is that this thing -- but one of them is that this thing ...
but one of them is worse worse than the other .
and the thing that the worse was , the way that pain is very , very much at the end of his peak . it &apos;s a bad history .
how do we know that ?
because we asked these guys , and also much later , &quot; how bad was the whole thing ? &quot;
and she was much worse for a than b in the erinnrung .
now , this is a direct conflict between the erlebenden itself and the erinnernden self .
from the point of view itself , b clearly had a worse time .
now , what you could do with patient , and we actually have done clinical experiments , and it &apos;s been made , and it &apos;s been done , you could actually put the darmspiegelung of the patient by the verlängern of a verlängern , you can just put the hose in it .
this is going to lead that the patient is suffering , but only less than before .
and if you take this for a few minutes , you &apos;ve got to make the erlebende itself of patient &apos;s bad , and you have to make that the erinnernde itself of a much better is better than you have a better story about his experience .
so , what &apos;s a story of a story ?
and that &apos;s true for stories that makes us feel and it applies for the stories that we invent .
now , this story is a story of auszeichnet , eminent and ends .
end is very , very important and in this case , the end result .
well , the erlebende itself lives in life .
it has augenblicke of the erlebens , one after the other .
and you ask questions , what happens with these moments ?
and the answer is really simple . they &apos;re always lost forever .
i mean most of our lives -- and i &apos;ve got this thing -- you know , the psychological present for about three seconds , and what means that it &apos;s about 600 million of them , and there &apos;s about 600 million of them . in a month , most of them don &apos;t live .
most of you will completely ignore completely completely by the erinnernden itself .
and yet , you get the impression that they should count that what &apos;s going on during this period of life .
it &apos;s the finite resource that we consume while we &apos;re in this world .
and how we would be very important to be important , but that &apos;s not the story that &apos;s going to be the most fundamental self for us .
so we have the erinnernde self and the erlebende itself , and they &apos;re really quite different .
the biggest difference between you is to be a deal with time .
from the point of view itself , if you have a vacation and the second week , as the first week is as well as the first thing is as well as the einwöchige vacation is as good as the einwöchige vacation .
so that &apos;s not how it doesn &apos;t work for the erinnernde .
for the erinnernde itself , even a zweiwöchiger vacation is hardly better than the einwöchige vacation because there &apos;s no new memories .
they didn &apos;t change the story .
and in this way , it &apos;s actually the critical variable that a erinnerndes self is different from a erlebenden itself , and it &apos;s very little influence on this story .
now , the erinnernde itself is more than to remember and tell stories .
it &apos;s actually that decisions , because if you have a patient who had two darmspiegelungen , we say two darmspiegelungen of two surgeons , and they decide to decide that , the one of the people who &apos;s got to choose the memory that &apos;s going to be a little bit , and that &apos;s the surgeon that &apos;s going to be selected .
the erlebende itself has no voice in this choice .
it &apos;s not enough to choose between the erlebnissen . we choose between experiences .
and even if we think about the future , we don &apos;t think about our future as an experiences .
we think about our future as a vorausgesehene memories .
and basically , you can see that , you know , as a tyranny of the erinnernden itself , and you can think of the erinnernde itself as one , which is kind of schleppt , which is the erlebende of experiences that doesn &apos;t need themselves .
i &apos;ve got the impression that if we &apos;re doing vacation vacation , that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing is , we &apos;re making things in the services of the erinnernden .
and that &apos;s a little hard to justify , i think .
i mean , how do we zehren from our memories ?
this is one of the explanations that &apos;s given for the dominance of the erinnernden itself .
and when i think about this , i think about a holiday that was done in antarctica , the obvious thing that i was ever had to ever had , and i think , is often that i think , and i think , is often that i think about the other things that i think about other forms of thinking .
and i probably have probably from my memories of this dreiwöchige journey , i would say about 25 minutes for about 25 years .
now , if i ever opened the folder , the 600 images i would have spent another hour .
well , these are three weeks , and that &apos;s just a half hours .
there &apos;s a bill to give .
now , i like a little extreme , you know , in the way i &apos;m going to do in the zehren appetite , but even if you do more of it , you have a real question , and why do we give you a lot of weight in the verlgeich of the weight that we &apos;re giving us to make ?
so i want you to think about a thought .
imagine your next vacation vacation , you know , at the end of the concert , all of the images are being wiped out and get a amnestisches drug , so they &apos;re not remember anything .
well , would you choose the same vacation ?
and if you pick another vacation , there &apos;s a conflict between their two species of self , and you have to think about this conflict , and they really don &apos;t really get any time to get in the sense of time , and if you think about a answer , and if you think about a answer , you could get a different answer .
why we pick the urlaube aussuchen that we &apos;re facing , is a problem that we care with a choice between the two species of self .
now , the two types of self , two terms of happiness .
there are actually two concepts of happiness that we can use , one per self .
so you can ask : how happy is the erlebende ?
and then they would ask you , how happy are the augenblicke in the lives of the erlebenden ?
and they &apos;re all -- fortunately for your car is a very complicated process .
what are the emotions that can be measured ?
and , by the way , we &apos;re now capable of getting a pretty good idea of happiness over time .
if you ask yourself to the happiness of the self , it &apos;s a completely different thing .
this is not what &apos;s going on , like happy person .
it &apos;s about how happy or delighted is the person when that person think about their lives .
very different notion .
everybody who &apos;s not going to screw this terms , and i &apos;m going to create a lot of researchers to a lot of researchers that are exploring the exploration of happiness , that would have this kind of thing that we &apos;ve been doing on exactly the way that we have in this kind of thing .
the distinction between happiness itself and happiness of the erinnernden itself is recognized in the last few years , and now you &apos;re going to use both of the two superpowers to measure .
the gallup organization has a global survey where more than half a million people have asked about what they think about their lives and over their experiences , and there was other efforts in the direction .
so in the last few years , we started learning about the two types of the self .
and the main lesson we have , i think , is that they &apos;re really different .
you can know how happy somebody is with his life , and that teaches you really much about how happy he lives his life and vice versa .
just to give you a sense of the correlation that &apos;s a correlation about .5 .
what that means is that if you meet somebody , and you would say , &quot; oh , his dad is a zwei-meter-mann , how much would you know about his greatness ?
well , you would know something about his size , but there &apos;s a lot of uncertainty .
they have so much uncertainty .
if i tell you that somebody &apos;s life as eight of 10 years , you have a lot of uncertainty about how happy he is with his erlebenden self .
so the correlation is small .
we know something about what the happiness is determines .
we know that money is very important , goals are very important .
we know that happiness is mostly , being a mostly , uncomfortable to people that we like , to spend time with people who we like .
there are other pleasure , but that &apos;s the dominant .
so if you &apos;re lucky enough of the two types of self , they &apos;re going to be able to do very different things .
the implication of what i said here is that we really don &apos;t really think of happiness than a substitute for well-being .
it &apos;s completely different .
well , just , a little bit of the other reason we can &apos;t think about happiness is that we don &apos;t think about the same things that we think about life and if we actually live life .
so if you ask the simple question , how happy people are going to be the correct answer .
if you ask these questions , you think that people have to be happier if you say , in ohio , in ohio .
and what happens is that if you think about life in california , think of the difference between california and other places , and that difference is , say , say , in climate .
well , it turns out , climate change is not very important for the erlebende itself , and it &apos;s not very important for the nachdenkliche itself , which is how happy people are .
now , because the nachdenkliche itself is responsible , you can end up at the end -- some people could pull the end of california .
and it &apos;s kind of interesting to pursue what happens to people who are going to be in california , happier .
now , your erlebendes self will not be happier .
we know that .
but one thing is going to happen . you &apos;ll think they &apos;re happier , because if you &apos;re going to be remembered , how do you remember this in ohio , and they &apos;re realizing that they have met the right decision .
it &apos;s very difficult to think about well-being , and i hope i have a glimpse of how difficult it is .
thank you .
thank you . i have a question .
thank you .
now , when we took a few weeks ago , i learned it to me that there was a pretty interesting outcome that came out of this gallup poll .
is that what you can do to do with us , because you &apos;ve got a few minutes ?
daniel libeskind : definitely .
i think the interesting thing that we found in the gallup poll is a number that we don &apos;t have to find .
we found that in the terms of happiness .
if we looked at the ocean , like emotions with income .
and it turns out that under a income of 60,000 dollars in the year , and that &apos;s a very big deal of americans , about 600,000 , but it &apos;s a big representative sample , under a income of 600,000 dollars in the year .
60,000 .
dk : 60,000 .
60,000 dollars in year are people who are unhappy , and they &apos;ll be increasingly pressure , the more they &apos;re going .
we get a perfectly flat line .
i mean , i &apos;ve seen the whole lines .
what happens is , obviously , money is not a erlebnis-glück , but that lack of money in a certainly patient is a surely , and we can measure this misery , very clearly .
in the spirit of the other self , the erinnernden self , they get another story .
the more money you are happy .
it &apos;s not for emotions .
but danny , in the entire american american , it &apos;s life , freedom , the pursuit of happiness .
if people would take this befund seriously , i mean , it seems to be able to ask everything on the head , all we think , for example , in terms of steuerpolitik and so on .
there &apos;s a chance that politicians , that the country generally generell a befund like the serious and how to make politics ?
dk : you know , i think there &apos;s anerkennung tickets for the role of the rolle of the politics .
the recognition will be slow in the united states , no question , but in the united kingdom , it &apos;s just happening right now .
people are saying , you know , they should think of happiness if you think about politics .
it &apos;s going to take a while , and people will discuss whether they want to explore whether they want to explore or whether they want to explore or whether they &apos;re going to be really going to have this discussion .
how you can detect happiness is very different , as you think and whether you think about the erinnernde itself , or whether you think the erlebende itself .
that &apos;s going to affect politics , i think , in the years .
in the united states , you start to measure the erlebnis-glück of the population .
that &apos;s going to think , i think , in the next one or two decades of the world &apos;s greatest statistics .
well , it seems to me , this subject , or should perhaps the most interesting political debate about the next few years .
thank you very much for the invention of the behavioral economics .
thank you , danny kahneman .
i &apos;m jane mcgonigal . i have to do video games .
i &apos;ve been trying to online-spiele for 10 years , and my goal for the next decade is to make it easy to save the world in reality , as they &apos;re saving in online-spielen .
i have a plan for this . i want to convince more people , including all of you , and more time with playing games and more games .
currently we spend three billion hours a week with online-spielen .
some of you might think , &quot; this is a whole lot of time for games . &quot;
maybe something too much time when you think about how many problems we have to solve the world .
but in fact , my research at the institute for the future , is exactly the opposite .
three billion hours a week , not nearly enough to solve the world of the world .
in fact , i &apos;m convinced that if we want to survive the next century on this planet , we need to increase this time .
i calculated that the needed is about 21 billion hours of a week .
this may seem like a little bit more reticent , so i &apos;m going to do it , so , if we can make problems like hunger , poverty , global conflict and obesity , we need to try and play games for at least 21 billion hours of the next week to the end of the next decade .
no , i mean it really seriously .
why ? this image is quite exactly what i think is that games are so essential for survival in the future .
this is a portrait of photographers phil toledano .
he wanted to capture the feelings . so he did a camera with the gamers .
this is one of the classic expressions of playing .
if you &apos;re not a player , you might have some of the nuances in this picture .
you probably see this sense of urgency , something fear , but also , &quot; well , can be very , very , very , very , very much , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really ,
if you play , you see some of the nuances here , which is after top of your eyes and mouth are a sign of optimism . the eyebrows show .
this is a player who &apos;s on the outskirts of a sogenannten sieges .
oh , you know , you know , ok . so , we &apos;ve got some players here .
a epischer victory is a result of a result that &apos;s so positive that they didn &apos;t know that it was possible .
it was almost beyond the imagination .
and if you get it , they &apos;re shocked that they &apos;re actually capable of doing something that &apos;s actually a little bit of a victory .
this player is just a very short victory before a epischen victory .
and this is what we have to see on millions of problemlösern in the world , if we take the barriers in the next century , and the face of the next century , the following of all the widrigkeiten of the widrigkeiten of the highway .
well , we see this face in real life , if we face hard to solve .
i call it as &quot; in life , i &apos;m bad &quot; in life , and it &apos;s actually my face , look ? yes ? ok ? ok ?
i &apos;m , i &apos;m like i &apos;m going to live in life , i &apos;m bad .
this is a graffiti in my former home in berkeley , california , where i was in my dissertation , why i &apos;m actually better than in the real life .
this is a problem that many players have .
we think we &apos;re not as good as well as in games .
and i don &apos;t mean less successfully , even though that &apos;s what it belongs to .
we &apos;re going to reach into spielwelten . i mean my good relationship with motivation , something to do something together , inspired to collaboration .
if we &apos;re in a spielwelt , i think many of us are able to turn into our best version of us , anytime , anytime , to solve the problem , so that &apos;s how long as necessary it can do .
and in reality , if we fail to our obstacles , we feel often ourselves .
we feel overwhelmed . we feel uncomfortable . we feel threatened , perhaps depressed , frustrated or zynisch .
and these feelings we &apos;ve never been playing , if we play games , they &apos;re not just going to play .
and that &apos;s what i really want to look like .
why is it possible to think , you know , you couldn &apos;t just get anything that you do ?
how can we put these emotion from the playing into the reality ?
so i looked like to play games like the world of warcraft , which is a ideale problemlösen .
and i &apos;ve been able to find some things that are going to be able to do that in online-welten , so possible .
so , first , if you &apos;re in one of these online-spiele , especially at the world &apos;s first of warcraft , there &apos;s a lot of different characters that are willing to give you a weltrettende mission , and it immediately immediately immediately .
but not only any mission , but a mission that will fit perfectly to your current level in the game , right ?
so they do this .
they never get a job that they can &apos;t solve .
but always on the edge of your ability , they have to be a hard time , but there &apos;s no unemployment in the world .
you don &apos;t sit around and dreht . there &apos;s always a very important thing to do .
and there are a lot of employees .
where they &apos;re going to go , hundreds of thousands of people who work with them to work with them .
we don &apos;t have the real life in the real life , that feeling that , in a sense that , is that a sense of a fingerschnipsen haufenweise are willing to be ready .
also , there &apos;s this epic story , this inspiring history , why we &apos;re there and what we &apos;re doing .
then we get this whole positive feedback .
they have determined by &quot; level of &quot; level &quot; and &quot; + a &quot; + &quot; or &quot; + intelligence . &quot;
this is not the way that we &apos;re not going to live in the real life .
if i leave this stage , i don &apos;t have to speak , + , and + 1 , to be a crazy idea , + .
i &apos;m not going to get in the true life of this feedback .
so the problem of the kooperations-online-welten of the world &apos;s world &apos;s world &apos;s world is that it &apos;s so gratifying , anytime we &apos;re going to be at the edge of a epischen sieges , that we &apos;re going to be spending our time in these spielwelten .
they &apos;re just better than the reality .
and all the world of the world &apos;s first of warcraft-spieler zusammen , spent 5,93 million years to solve virtual problems of azeroth .
this isn &apos;t necessarily bad .
it sounds like it .
but to see it in context : before millions of years ago , our first primatenvorfahren began to go to the first world .
so the first one is doing this .
ok , so if we talk about how much time we spend with play , it &apos;s only going to spend the sense of how you &apos;re going to be in the scale of human development , which is very common .
but also , it was appropriate . because it turns out that we &apos;re going to use this whole time playing games , actually , what we &apos;re doing as humans .
we develop ourselves , to be collaborative , and being in the beginning .
that &apos;s the truth . i believe .
look at this interesting statistics that recently published a researcher from a researcher mellon school , the average boy was going to be a land person in a country with strong spielkultur verbringt to the 21. to the 21st .
so 10,000 hours is a very interesting number , from two reasons , for two reasons .
first , for kids in the united states , 10.080 hours are gesamtzeit gesamtzeit , who spend the genaue gesamtzeit that they spend in school , from the 5. to the high school school , and if you never do anything .
so we have an entire parallelbildungsweg , on the young people , what it means to be as a good player to be a good player , how everything you learn in school .
and maybe some of you have some of you from the new book of malcolm gladwell , &quot; überflieger . &quot;
so she &apos;s familiar with his theory of success , the theory of the success of the success of the success .
it &apos;s based on the great research of the kognitivwissenschaft , that if we &apos;re going to study 10,000 hours with the mühsamen , one of the beliebigen of a matter of a matter of a beliebigen operation to the 21st century , we will become a master in the beginning .
we &apos;re going to do so good at whatever whatever you do , how the most momentous people in the world .
so what we have here is a complete generation of young people who are meister-spieler .
so the big question is , &quot; what are the right good news ? &quot;
because if we could find that , we would never have been able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be available in the gewesenes potential .
so many people we currently have in the world , at least one hour a day with online-spielen .
these are our meister-spieler . 500 million people that are really good at something .
and in the next decade , we have another billion players that are really good at whatever .
if you haven &apos;t heard it yet , you &apos;ve heard it yet .
the spieleindustrie developed konsolen , the energy and on mobilfunknetzen , rather than the breitband-internet , so that i have to have a players in the world , especially in india , china , brazil , brazil can play online .
you expect a quarter of a quarter of a quarter of a decade on the next decade .
so we have a 1.5 billion player .
so i started thinking about what it is , what makes us to make these games .
here &apos;s the four things that i found . first of all , dringlichkeits-optimismus .
ok , imagine how extreme selbstmotivierung selbstmotivierung .
dringlichkeits-optimismus is the desire to do something , to master a hurdle , together with the belief that we have a set of hope .
player always believe that a epischer victory is possible , and it &apos;s always worthwhile to try and do it .
players don &apos;t sit around .
players are masters in the spiders of social nets .
there &apos;s a lot of interesting profiling that we like to do more , after we have played more , even if they defeated us .
the reason for this is that there &apos;s a lot of trust to play with a game .
we trust that somebody who are going to spend that somebody else will spend the rules that we have the same goal and to stay on the spielende .
so , the zusammenspielen is the growing system growing growing by the creation , trust and interconnected .
as a result , we build a stronger social relationships .
glückselige productivity . fantastic !
you know , there &apos;s a reason why the durchschnitts-word of warcraft-spieler hours a week is playing a week , and as a teilzeitjob .
the reason is that if we play games , we &apos;re actually going to be really happy to work , when we &apos;re killing ourselves or nothing to do or nothing .
we know that we &apos;re going to be as human beings in the face of the human beings , if we do hard work , significant work .
and player are always ready to work hard , if you get the right task .
and finally , the good meaning .
players love it , part of awe missionen .
here &apos;s a hintergrundinformation to back the right light in the right , and you know , all wikipedia , the largest social world .
the second largest wiki of the world , with almost 80,000 einträgen is the world &apos;s world &apos;s world trade .
five million people use it every month .
they have more information about the world of warcraft in the internet as a different subject in each other &apos;s different economies .
they create a epic story .
they create a epic source of knowledge about the world .
okay , so these are four of the superpowers that lead to one outcome . players are super-mächtige , hopeful individuals .
it &apos;s people who believe that they can change the world .
and the only problem is that they believe they can change the virtual worlds , but not the real .
that &apos;s the problem i &apos;m trying to solve .
edward castronova is a volkswissenschaftler .
his work is awesome . he studied , why people spend so much time and money in online-welten .
and he says , &quot; we &apos;re not going to be seen less than a massenemigration in virtual worlds and online-spielumgebungen . &quot;
and that &apos;s from a economist . so he &apos;s logical .
and he says ...
not as i -- i &apos;m playing a little bit of games , i &apos;m a little bit .
so he says , that makes sense meaning , because player can achieve more than in the real life .
you can do more social progress than in real life , and they get more feedback and rewards in play than in real life .
so , he says , it &apos;s actually completely logical that players are more time in virtual world than in the real world .
i first thought , that &apos;s logical .
but it &apos;s definitely not a optimalsituation .
we need to start to turn the real world in a game .
my inspiration comes from a event that 2,500 years .
there are these ancient cube , from schafsknöcheln , and you know ?
and before this fantastic spielecontrollern , there were schafsknöchel .
and that was sort of the first of people .
and if you &apos;re familiar with the werken greek griechischen , you may know this story . the story about how to play and why .
according to be more games , more precise , more precise , in the kingdom , in a famine .
in fact , there was such a big famine that the king of lydien was going to a crazy idea .
people were sick . people are fought .
it was a extremes of situation . you needed a extremes .
so , they invented , loud , the würfelspiel and vereinbarten strategy , and it would be a national strategy , you would eat food . the next day you would play .
and they would be so much in the würfelspiel resolution , because games are so intriguing and with befriedigender , glückseliger productivity , that they would forget that there was nothing to eat .
and then the next day you would play . and the next day you would eat .
and according to herodotus , they would have been so put for 18 years , by eating a day and playing on the next day .
likewise , i think , is we &apos;re going to play games today .
we &apos;re going to make games to get the suffering of the physical world .
we &apos;re making games to get games to the most difficult world , that &apos;s not working in real world , especially that &apos;s not going to be the real life , and we &apos;ll get us what we need to do .
but that doesn &apos;t have to be the end .
that &apos;s exciting .
according to 18 years , the famine was not better than 18 years ago , so the king , a last würfelspiel anzusetzen .
they shared the kingdom in two .
they played a würfelspiel and the sieger , the sieger and the sieger was a epischen adventure .
they were going to lydien and went to the search for a new home , and they just had just been back so many people , and they were looking for the rest of a neighborhood where they were able to thrive .
this sounds crazy , right ?
but latest dna-beweise show that the etrusker , the etrusker , the roman realm , the same dna as the old lydier .
so scientists came to the notion that the herodotus is actually true .
and geologists found was a global abkühlung , which almost almost 20 years , which was going to explain to the famine .
so this crazy story could agree .
you may actually have to get your people in games by making 18 years in games and then they had this eingebung and so much about the other thing that they &apos;ve learned to have saved the entire civilization .
so we can also do that .
we &apos;ve been playing for 1994 .
this was the first strategiespiel in real time in real time , the world &apos;s world &apos;s world &apos;s world &apos;s world &apos;s world .
they played 18 years for 18 years , we &apos;ve been going to be warcraft for 16 years .
i &apos;m saying , we &apos;re ready for our own game game .
so , they sent half their civilization , looking for a new world , so i suppose i take my 21 billion spielstunden per week .
we should be übereinkommen that half of us had a hour of a day with playing a day with playing , until we have solved the world &apos;s problems .
i know you know , &quot; how do we ask , &quot; how do we solve the physical world in play ? &quot; and exactly what i &apos;m going to do is that i have to have my work in the last few years .
we have this banner in our office in our office in palo alto , it would be like the future .
we don &apos;t want to try to say the future .
what we want to do is to create the future .
we want to introduce the best outcome , and then people are allowed to make these things in reality .
we &apos;re going to ask ourselves to be able to be able to do that , and give people the opportunity to do it .
i &apos;ll just show you just a very short games i designed to try to try to make people siege in their own future .
this is &quot; world without oil . &quot;
the game is from 2007 .
it &apos;s a online-spiel that you have to overcome a ölknappheit .
the ölknappheit is invented , but we have enough online-inhalte , so they &apos;re going to be realistisch , and they &apos;re going to be nachrichten-filme , and they &apos;re going to be nachrichten-filme , and they &apos;re going to be nachrichten-filme , and they &apos;re going to be able to figure out where they &apos;re not in the game , and they &apos;re going to be able to figure
we &apos;ve tested this game with 1.700 spielern in 2007 , and we &apos;ve been losing them over the last three years .
and i can tell you , it was an amazing experience .
no one wants to change your life because it &apos;s good for the environment or because we should be it .
but if you &apos;re in a epischen adventure , and they said , &quot; we &apos;re going to go out of the oil . &quot;
this is a fascinating adventure that you &apos;re going on .
they find out how they were surviving , most of our players have been beibehalten in the game .
so we &apos;ve got to give us a bigger play game , a bigger goal , more powerful goal than just ölknappheit .
we have the game &quot; superstruct &quot; at the institute for the future .
and so , the calculation of a supercomputers is that the people are only going to 23 years on the planet .
this supercomputers is called &quot; global aussterbungs- . &quot;
the call to player , and we &apos;ve got to have a wie gestaltet .
you know jerry bruckheimer-filme , where it &apos;s called &quot; dream-team , &quot; you have the astronauts , the scientists , and only can save the world .
but in our game , instead of five people , we say , &quot; everybody is in the dream-team , and it &apos;s our job for energy , health , health , secure , secure and the future of social justice .
8,000 spieler played the game eight weeks .
they found 500 of these incredibly creative solutions that you can read when they &apos;re googlen .
and the last game we take on the third of march . it &apos;s a game in collaboration with the world bank .
if you finish the game , you get the world award award , &quot; social umgestalter , &quot; abschluss .
we work with universities in the whole sub-saharan sub-saharan africa and store them to learn social .
we have a comic book . we have &quot; level of verstehen , wissensvernetzung , sustainability , sustainability and ingenuity .
i want to invite you to share this game with young people , all over the world , especially in entwicklungsgebieten , who are going to be able to imagine their own social enterprises , to save the world .
i &apos;m going to finish up .
i want to ask you something .
what do you think next ?
we have all these fantastic players , we have games that show us what we can do , but we haven &apos;t saved the real world .
well , i hope you &apos;ll agree that they are the players that the players are human resources that we can use to work in real life , and that games are a big meaning for change .
we have these entire superpowers , glückselige productivity , the ability to educate the ability to become strong social webs , and longing for epischer meaning .
i really hope that we &apos;re going to play together together , we &apos;re going to play together big games to survive on this planet .
and i hope you &apos;ll play with me playing with me and play .
if i put into next decade , i &apos;m sure i &apos;m going to be in two things : that we can create any vorstellbare future , and that we can all play all kinds of games .
so i say , let &apos;s start the weltverändernden games !
thank you .
i would like to tell you something about what i was going to have a few months ago in front of a artikels of italian .
i &apos;ve been talking about my synonym-wörterbuch , but i was going to finish with the record of the text , and i noticed that i &apos;ve never had my life in my life , which means &quot; &quot; disabled &quot; . &quot;
i read you the post .
&quot; disabled , &quot; adjektiv : &quot; verkrüppelt , hilflos , zerstört , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , impotent , gelähmt , gelähmt , gelähmt , erledigt , kaputt , kaputt , kaputt , siehe , nutzlos , nutzlos and weak .
antonyme : healthy , strong , leistungsfähig . &quot;
i had this list of a friend of mine , and i had to laugh , i was just lächerlich , but i was just going to be weitersprechen , and i couldn &apos;t stop reading , and i had to raise and to read and see that überfallartigen and damit emotionalen .
of course , this was a ausgefranstes , old synonym-wörterbuch , and i just thought that the copy was pretty old .
but in fact , it was a copy on the early 1980s , when i started with the elementary school , and i started to create my school outside my family , and to shape , in terms of other children and the rest of the world around me .
and god was a synonym-wörterbuch , i was not used to use a synonym-wörterbuch .
i would take this post that i would like to be born in a world that someone like me to perceive , in a sense , which is a person in any way , but i &apos;m going to be able to have the opportunity and adventure that i &apos;ve been doing .
so i was going to tell you the online-ausgabe of 2009 , and i expected that i find a ansprechenderen contribution .
here &apos;s the aktualisierte version of this .
unfortunately , it &apos;s not much better .
especially in the last two words , i was going to be &quot; near antonyms &quot; and &quot; healthy . &quot;
but it &apos;s not just the words .
it &apos;s about what we think about people who describe it with these words .
it &apos;s about values that are put in these words , and how we build these values .
our language affects our minds and how we see the world and the people around us .
many of the most altertümliche societies , including the greek and the romans , the most important force has a big force , because what you &apos;re loud , which is to be manifestieren .
so , what do we want to do -- a disabled person or a healthy people ?
just to give a people as a kid , could possibly make it and you can have beliefs .
wouldn &apos;t it be nice to open them open ?
a man who opened for me to me was my pediatrician was a pediatrician at the most a.i. dupont institute in wilmington .
he called dr. pizzutillo , a italo-amerikaner whose name , as you can think , most americans couldn &apos;t get into the formula . so he always called dr. p. .
and then he always carried a very colorful flying and was just a very colorful flying work with kids .
i found the time i &apos;ve spent in this hospital just amazing -- to my physiotherapie .
i had to have a single übungen lot of the things that we have to do with these procedures , elastischen -- in different colors -- and i hated it to my bein-muskeln , and i hated it . i hated them . i hated them . i hated them . i hated it .
and imagine i &apos;ve been talking to a fünfjähriges kid with dr. p. , and so trying to stop those exercises , natürllich without success .
and one day he observed me at one of my studies -- these exercises were just ermüdend and gnadenlos -- and he said , &quot; wow , aimee , you &apos;re so much , sit and young girls , you &apos;re going to become one day of a bänder .
and if you make it , i &apos;ll give you a hundred dollars . &quot;
this was just a simple trick of dr. p. , so i decided to do the practice that i &apos;m not going to do with the ones that the message that shows five year-old girl in the second largest , but he actually got to see my daily übungs-horror with new übungs-horror , and it was a new and vielversprechendes experience .
and i &apos;m wondering how much of my vision of me as strong and a powerful young girl , and i could imagine my own home and i could imagine that as a symbol of a strong , cultural and atlethischen human .
this is just one example of many , like adults in machtpositionen , the imagination of a child .
but how the already zitierten of the synonym-wörterbüchern , we don &apos;t have to give us our language , we don &apos;t have to imagine something we &apos;d like to be to do to do , to be able to be able to be able to see ourselves as a powerful person .
our language has the social change that has been triggered in many ways .
of course , of course , of course , my legs can say that my legs , the laser-chirurgie for alternde , kniegelenke for the grenzen of titan , kniegelenke , who are going to use to use their ability to develop their own bodies , not to speak of social schicksal , not to speak of social networking , people who are going to be able to make a
so maybe this technological change is , because there &apos;s always another truth , which is that there &apos;s a different truth , which is that every man can be very besonderess and very powerful and that the human ability to adapt , our biggest plus .
the human ability to be able to adapt , because people are always asking me to tell you , and i &apos;m going to tell you something about how i was going to talk about , and i &apos;m going to have to be a very uncomfortable to me , and i always felt very uncomfortable to me , and i think , i understand why i understand why i
this sentence from the idea of the idea of the idea of the idea that success or luck , it &apos;s been a challenge to master , and how much my life would be so successful about , because i could get the kinds of life on a living with a prosthetic , or how much people i thought was going to me with my disability .
but the truth is that we change ourselves . of course we are homo , whether they &apos;re physically , whether they &apos;re physically , emotionally or even both the two .
and i argue that that &apos;s good .
widrigkeiten are no obstacle we need to be umkurven to get better with our lives .
widrigkeiten belong to our lives .
and i tend to see widrigkeiten than my shadow .
sometimes i &apos;m sometimes , he &apos;s very present , sometimes he &apos;s barely seeing , but he &apos;s always at me .
and i want to have to be able to do the effect of the impact of the kampfs of a human herabsetzen .
there are in life and challenges , and they are just the only real real and the challenges that we &apos;re doing is different , but the question is not , whether we &apos;re going to come with widrigkeiten or not , but how we manage to do it .
so we &apos;re not just responsible for that people who love to preserve the people we love to preserve the schicksalsschlägen , but they also make it to be with it to be good .
and we don &apos;t have our children , if we give them the feeling that they can &apos;t adapt .
you have to separate two things that we have to be a medical fact , and for the other social opinion , whether i &apos;m disabled or not .
and to be honest , the only thing that i was doing , the only thing that i was trying to be to be able to do to be happy to be used to describe the world , they could describe me with these definitions .
in our wish , people who are struggling to protect us , and you can tell the fact that the ability to do , and to ask the fact that the ability to ensure , in fact , a prediction of the quality of the quality of the quality of the quality of the quality of the quality of the quality of the quality of the quality of the quality
perhaps the most exciting concept that &apos;s just what it is in a broken sense , and how we fix it , for each greater disability than the pathology .
if we don &apos;t treat a people , and not all its forces and possibilities and also , we can create the natural struggle to the natural struggle that you have to lead another disease .
we degradieren a man who has a value for our society .
so we have to look at the patologie and focus on all the area of human possibilities .
the most important thing is that there &apos;s between the perception of our unzulänglichkeiten and our great erfindergeist , one relationship .
we should not be abwerten these herausfordernden times or we should not try to avoid them , we should go back to the carpet , but it &apos;s about to recognize the chancen opportunities .
and i think it &apos;s probably about what i think we don &apos;t necessarily have to be necessarily about widrigkeiten , but we &apos;re open to the embrace , they &apos;re going to be able to use them to use a kampf-ausdruck and even to dance .
and maybe we can do it as a natural thing , and useful and useful , and feel so much more as they are .
in this year , we celebrate the 200 . birthday from charles darwin and when he wrote about evolution , darwin , has darwin , in my eye , in my eye , very much indeed in human character .
i would like to survive , not the most basic of its kind of style , and also not the most fundamental thing that &apos;s going to be able to adapt to the best .
from conflicts to grow creativity .
not just from darwin work we know that the ability of human beings , to survive , and aufzublühen , from the battle of the human mind , is to turn through conflict .
so , again , change and adaptation are the grandest skills of human .
and we may know , from what wood we are , if we &apos;re really going to be true , if we &apos;re really going to be a trade-off .
possibly , this is exactly the sense of widrigkeiten , a sense of the ichs , a sense of our own power .
we can give us something that &apos;s going to happen .
we can give a new meaning that goes beyond severe times .
maybe we can see widrigkeiten as change .
widrigkeiten are stehen for a change we haven &apos;t yet adapted .
i think the biggest damage we have to have to be is to believe that we should be normal .
so , the normal thing is , is normal ?
there &apos;s no normal .
there are the usual . but not the normal . but they would not want to be the arms , and would you really learn to know if it really really would really be really ?
i think rather than .
it would be great if we could be a different of the ability to formulate the power or the starches , to be able to make a little bit dangerous , and we can actually release the forces of very many children , and they can invite their special and valuable skills in society .
and anthropolgen found that we &apos;ve always been talking about the members of our society : useful and a contribution to do .
there are evidence that the neanderthals with older people , and people with severe with severe with severe with severe injuries with severe injuries , and that may be because the lebenserfahrung of these people in the society was valuable , is to be valuable for society .
they don &apos;t have the people as broken and useless ; they were being treated as something special .
a few years ago i grew up in the city where i grew up in a lebensmittelmarkt in which i grew up in a lebensmittelmarkt zone in the middle of pennsylvania , and i was standing on a scheffel tomato .
it was summer , and i had shorts .
and i hear how a guy &apos;s behind me , &quot; well , if that &apos;s not a charity . &quot;
and i &apos;m looking at me and see this older man . i had no idea who he was .
and i said , &quot; sorry , sir , we know ? i can &apos;t remember them . &quot;
and he said , &quot; well , you remember , you know , remember .
so when i saw it first , i was taking her from her mom . &quot;
oh , so .
and of course , it &apos;s done , but then it &apos;s done .
this was dr. kean , a man that i just knew from my mother &apos;s stories about this day because i was , in fact , typical , my birthday to my birthday was a very typical weeks .
the doctor &apos;s doctor was for pränatale diagnostik in the vacation , and so my parents had the man who brought me to the world , not at all .
and because i was born without wadenbeine , and my feet after you , and i just had a few toes at this and a few toes on the other hand , he had the überbringer , that foreign foreign news had to be the bad news .
he said to me , &quot; i had to say you never run , and never as brilliant as other children , or you &apos;ve never got a independent life , and they just have a lie . &quot;
really , i was really excited , i was actually accumulated zeitungsausschnitte of my entire childhood school , i had been talking to the pfadfindern of the sportlichen klasse , and he used to errungen my husband &apos;s office , and he used to teach this collusion , to teach his students to teach his students , medizin-studenten from the hahnemann medical school and the hershey medical school .
and he called this part of his kurses , the x , the potential of human .
you can &apos;t just emphasize enough to make the quality of that life expectancy for quality of human life .
and then he told his kean , he said , &quot; i learned that kids , if you didn &apos;t have anything else , if you get a little bit of time , and if you get a little bit of time , then kids can get kids to do themselves , kids can do a lot of time . &quot;
you see , dr. kean has changed .
he understood that the medical diagnosis of diagnosis and how somebody is causing with it , two different things .
and i &apos;ve been studying my thinking in the course of time , when you asked me to have been asked my prothesen to my prothesen , and i had getauscht meine , i would have no sekunde .
i was going to be really normal .
if you ask me today , i &apos;m not so sure .
and that &apos;s what happens because i &apos;ve experienced something with my legs , and not yet that experiences .
and maybe this change could happen because i &apos;m so many people who have been lucky to be open to meet the doors , rather than having me to be ashamed or me to have a performance .
you see , it really needs a man who are watching them as they can manifestieren their powers , and they &apos;re through .
if you allow it to be able to get someone to activate your own forces , your own forces , the human mind is so empfangsbereit -- if you can do that , and for somebody else &apos;s going to open up a door , they &apos;re a very good teacher .
they bring them to open yourself .
the real meaning of the worts &quot; wurzelt &quot; in the word &quot; educe &quot; . &quot;
it means something that &apos;s in a sense , which is the potential .
again , which is the potential we want to be ?
in the 1960s , in britain &apos;s been done in britain , and then 800,000 were transformed into gesamtschulen .
they call this &quot; streaming trials &quot; in the united states , we call this as &quot; tracking . &quot;
students are going to be divided by notes .
and the students are going to get mündlich harder to climb up , getting better teachers and then get better teachers .
they then have a dreimonatigen zeitraum , which is a &quot; ausreichend &quot; and they were told , they were told that they were very clever , and after those three months , they really wrote it .
and of course , it &apos;s going to hear a heart to hear that the umgekehrt of the einser-schülern said , they &apos;re just just sufficient .
and then it was after the three months .
but only those who were still in school -- except by the students who had gone to school .
so , in this study , the teachers were not eingeweiht .
the teachers didn &apos;t know that something was changed .
they just said that the einser-schüler and that they are the students with the grade , and just as they have a little bit and they were treated .
the only real world is a gebrochener mind , a spirit of mind , the broken mind has been a mind , has no hope , it &apos;s not more schön. , it &apos;s not more schön. , and our innate capacity of the imagination .
but if we manage to support the human spirit of the human mind , to hope itself and other people are beautiful , and then we put our power into our powers .
if a mind has this mind , we can create a new reality and create new forms of life .
i want to end with a poem called the persischen poet , and the poem is to me , &quot; every child , god knows , not god &apos;s god , not god &apos;s god , not god &apos;s god , and the god , the god of the name , but the god who repeats four words and that constantly always said , &quot; come on , dance ,
come , dance with me . thank you .
how would you want to be better than you &apos;re right ?
suppose i said , by few changes of your genes , a better memory , a better memory -- meaning , more and faster .
or they want to be more fitter , stronger force .
would you want to be more attractive and selbstbewusster ?
how would it be longer to live in good health ?
or maybe you &apos;re a bit of those who are always more creativity .
which would you like to be in the most ?
which would you like to have to have to have , if you have one ?
creativity .
how many people would choose creativity ?
raise your hands . let me see .
some of them . probably , about a lot of how it &apos;s creative people here .
that &apos;s very good .
how many would you choose to make a good memory ?
a few more .
how would it be a fitness ?
a few less .
what &apos;s with longevity ?
ah , the majority . that &apos;s what i like to like , as a doctor .
if you could only have one of them , it would be a whole different world .
is that all right ?
or is it possible ?
evolution is a andauerndes subject here on the ted conference , but today i want to give you the view of a doctor &apos;s opinion .
the big geneticists in the 20th century , t.g. dobzhansky , who was also a kommunikant in russian church , and he wrote a paper that doesn &apos;t make sense of biology except for the lichte of evolution . &quot;
now , if you &apos;re one of those who are not supposed to be evidence for biological evolution , that would be a very good thing to do their personal kommunikationsgerät , and you &apos;ll give you a look at the permission , and maybe you can see them , and you can see them , that &apos;s what &apos;s about to be wrong , because nothing else &apos;s going
but if you accept biological evolution , you remember this : it &apos;s just about the past , or it &apos;s also about the future ?
is it for other geltend or something that &apos;s also ?
this is another one look at the tree of life .
in this painting , i have a bush than a bush , because if you look at the center of the tree of life , all the different aspects of life in the tops of these toxins in the tops of these toxins were success : they &apos;ve survived his surroundings and starches .
the human part of this mass , far more , far , is , of course , is what we &apos;re most of most care .
we used to eliminate a common ancestor to modern chimpanzees , about six or eight million years .
in this period , there was 20 or 25 different varieties of hominids .
some are come and went .
we &apos;ve been around for about rund years .
it seems like we were quite remote of the other parts of life , but actually , in the most part , the basic mechanisms of our cells are quite a same .
is that we can use it from that , and we can use it to use this , and the mechanisms of a shared bacterium , to produce the protein of human well-being that is used to treat the diabetiker ?
this is not like humaninsulin ; this is the same protein that &apos;s chemically ununterscheidbar from what &apos;s going on .
and we &apos;ve already seen bacteria , you realize that each of us are more likely to be more likely to be more bacteria than it &apos;s building in the rest of our bodies ?
maybe 10 times .
i mean , think of antonio damasio after your home , you think about the bacteria ?
our gut is a wonderful gastfreundlichen environment for these bacteria .
it &apos;s warm , it &apos;s dark , it &apos;s feucht , it &apos;s very comfortable .
and you &apos;re going to give you all of the nutrients that you could only want to be without effort .
it &apos;s really a easier way to bacteria , with occasional unterbrechungen , jeodch , forced to the wind .
but otherwise , they &apos;re a wonderful environment for these bacteria , as they &apos;re important for their lives .
they help the digestion of the essentiellen nutrients , and they protect them against certain kinds of pathologies .
but what will happen in the future ?
we are in a kind of a evolutionäres balance ?
or are we going to be something else to be different -- something that might even better to the environment ?
now , we go back to the era of the big bang -- the earth , the solar system , the solar system , the solar system , the solar system , and the first evidence of living , maybe three billion years ago , maybe three billion years ago , maybe much as 800 or a billion years -- and then the human species that turned out to the
in this huge distances of the universe , life is just a long time , the animal kingdom , like a single animal kingdom , and the human life , a little notenverzierung .
we were .
this is also the unterhaltungswert of this speech , so i hope i hope you &apos;ve got to be like it .
well , when i was a neuling on college , i had my first biologiekurse .
i was fascinated by the elegance and beauty of biology .
i fell in the power of evolution , and i posed something very fundamental , and i was doing something very fundamental , in most of life in einzelligen organisms , and all the genetischen cell , and all the genetic information is going to run in both of the cell .
but at the time , when mehrzelligen organisms came to change things .
sexual reproduction in the image .
and importantly , with the introduction of sexual reproduction , which is the genome , the rest of the body is going to be entbehrlich .
indeed , you could say that the unausweichlichkeit of the death of the body in the evolution of the body &apos;s the same time is going to be able to do the sexual reproduction .
now i have to say , i &apos;ve got to say , if i was a college-student , i thought , okay , sex / death , death , the death of sex , but it seemed to be very comfortable with the time , but with every year , it &apos;s got to come .
i &apos;ve come to understand the feelings of george burns , who &apos;s in las vegas in vegas , in the &apos; 90s .
and one night , there &apos;s a pat on his hotelzimmertür .
he opens the door .
front of him is a beautiful style of bekleidetes .
she looks at him and says , &quot; i &apos;m here for super-sex . &quot;
&quot; that &apos;s wonderful , says , &quot; i &apos;m going to take the soup . &quot;
i came to the realization that i was a goal to the other thing that i was in the goal of evolution -- not necessarily widersprüchlich , just a different way .
i tried to preserve the body .
i wanted to keep ourselves healthy .
i wanted to have health after a disease .
i wanted us to live a long and healthy life .
evolution is all about the genome of the genome to the next generation , and survival generation to generation .
from a evolutionary standpoint , they are , and i like booster rockets to send the genetic fracht to the next level of orbit to go back to the ocean .
i think we would all have to get the mood , the woody the woody the woody to the expression , when he said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to do with my work .
i want to do it by not die . &quot;
evolution means not necessarily the longest to be able to prefer the longest .
it doesn &apos;t necessarily have the biggest , the strongest or the fastest , and not even the floor .
evolution priviligiert the creatures that are best to adjust their environment .
it &apos;s a privilege of survival and success and success .
on the ocean , bacteria are there , bacteria , and they &apos;re dadurch the hot steam dampf , and they were wären to me if fish were there , would be a vacuum gekochte , they would have managed to be able to do it a bewohnbare environment for themselves .
so , what does that mean when we &apos;re on the back of what happens in evolution , and how we think about the space in evolution , and particularly as we vorausschauen vorausschauen , i would say that there &apos;s a range of ways of opportunity .
the first is that we &apos;re not going to be able to be .
we &apos;ve reached a kind of balance .
and the reason for that is that it &apos;s inherently , in medicine , a lot of genes are going to get otherwise to get otherwise , and they were made out of the population .
and secondly , we have a species that we have our environment so konfiguriert that we &apos;ve managed to adapt to us , and we &apos;re going to adapt to them as well as we &apos;re going to adapt to them as well as we &apos;re going to adapt to them .
and by the way , we hike and separate and mix so much that they can &apos;t say that they &apos;re necessary for evolution to stattzufinden .
a second option is that there &apos;s a evolution of traditional way of course , of course , is about the forces of nature .
and the argument that here is that the wheels of evolution is , but they &apos;re unerbittlich .
and so far , when we &apos;re going to be a lot of the isolation , if we have a species of gravity , it &apos;s going to be able to produce and the change of environment that can produce evolution in natural ways .
but there &apos;s a third way , a verlockende , fascinating and terrifying , terrifying possibility , and terrifying , and terrifying , and terrifying .
i call it neo-evolution -- the new development that &apos;s not just natural , but led to us as a individuen. in the decisions we do .
well , how could this happen ?
how could it be possible that we do this ?
let &apos;s think of the reality that the people are today , in some cultures , some cultures are making decisions about their offspring .
they are , in some cultures , the choice to have more men than women .
it &apos;s not necessarily good for society , but it &apos;s what the individual and family .
so , think if it &apos;s not just possible to choose the gender of your child , but also to provide genetic health care , the disease and prevent it would be .
what if you could make the genetic change to eliminate diabetes or alzheimer &apos;s disease or to eliminate the smallest of our vehicle ?
would you not want to do this change in their genes ?
if we &apos;re vorausblicken , this kind of changes will be increasingly possible .
the human genome project began to year in 1990 and it took 13 years .
it cost 2,7 billion dollars .
in the following year , when it was finished , they could do the same thing for 20 million dollars in drein to four months .
today , you can only do a sequence of three billion of the human genome to a price of about 20,000 dollars and in the room of about a week of about a week .
it will not take longer anymore , until the reality will be the reality that the 1,000 dollars will be human genomes , and it will be increasingly available for everybody available .
a week ago , the national academy of engineering , the draper prize of engineering , zwei , two scientists , the independent scientists , the most independent of evolution , the natural process of making the natural process of making the natural process of getting more , to lead to the natural process in a way -- which is called &quot; direkte evolution . &quot;
a few years ago , the scientists was verliehen to his research , a erwachsene hautzelle , and through manipulation of the manipulation of four genes , the cell in the cell , the cell in a pluripotenten , um , they &apos;re able to be able to get your cell in your body .
these changes are in the coming .
the same technology that can produce human insulin in bacteria , which cannot make viruses , which cannot just be just not just protection before themselves , but also to mitigate against other viruses .
whether they believe it or not , it &apos;s a experimental study in the hallway with vaccine to influenza in the cells that has been grown in the cells of a tabakpflanze .
can you imagine something good that comes from tobacco ?
this is all the reality and in the future , in the future , it will be much more possible .
so imagine two other little changes .
you can change the cells in your body , but what if you could change the cells in your life ?
what if you could change the sperm and eizellen or the frisch of the ei to give your children a better chance for a life of life -- eliminating the diabetes , the hämophilie of the cancer is taking place of cancer ?
who don &apos;t want to be healthier ?
and then the analytical technology , the same engine of science that can enable the change that can enable the change to prevent disease , could also allow us to adopt a verabschieden super-attribute , hyper-kapazitäten , the better memory .
why not the schlagfertigkeit of a ken jennings hben , especially if you can widen it with the next generation of watson-maschine ?
why not the fast muskelfasern that will be able to get them faster and longer ?
why not live longer ?
these are going to be unwiderstehlich .
and if we &apos;re at a point where we can pass it to the next generation , and we can adopt the attributes that we want , we &apos;re going to be transformed by alt-stil evolution .
we will have a process that we have been doing , and we can put 100,000 years , and we can compress it on a thousand years -- and even on the next 100 years .
these are decisions with those of those grandchildren , or their grandkids , to be able to deal with .
do we use these decisions to shape a society that is better , the more successful is the more successful ?
or we &apos;re going to pick these different attributes that we want for some of us and not for others ?
are we going to be a society , and uniformierter is uniformierter , or more or more and more ?
these are the types of questions that we have to be facing .
and most of all of all , we will ever be able to develop the wisdom , and the wisdom that we need to do to make this decisions ?
in good like the evil , and then they may be used to think that they &apos;re going to be thinking of these decisions .
thank you .
i want you to imagine now , a portable robot that gives you the skills of skills , or another , the rollstuhlfahrern , the rollstuhlfahrern , and go to go back and go .
we call this berkeley bionics , call this robot .
they &apos;re nothing else as something that you put in the morning and you &apos;ll keep your speed and they will increase your speed and you will help them to keep your balance .
that &apos;s actually the true barrier of human and machine .
but not only that -- so that , and each other , they connect with the universe and other devices out there .
this is just a crazy idea .
now , to show you what we &apos;re working on , what we &apos;re working with , we start talking about american american soldiers , which is in the average of the average pound , and it &apos;s the request that they should be more equipment to wear more equipment .
of course , this leads to some major visual , rückenverletzungen -- rückenverletzungen percent of it -- chronic rückenverletzungen .
so we thought we would embrace this challenge , and a exoskelett project that would help with this problem with this problem .
so let me introduce you now to you now -- or the human universal load carrier .
soldier : with the hulc-exoskelett , i can carry 200 pounds of verschiedenartiges , many hours long .
his current design enables it to be deeply , to be able to be able to get to be and highly wendige movements .
it feels what i want to do where i want to go and then go and push my strength .
we are also as far as far as we &apos;re doing this device that &apos;s going to imagine this new exoskelett in this year .
so it &apos;s true .
let &apos;s take our view of our view of the point , something that i &apos;m really passionate about .
there are 68 million people , the world &apos;s in the world .
this is about one percent of the population .
and that &apos;s actually a conservative estimate .
we talk about a very young people with spinal cord , who &apos;s in the blütezeit of their lives -- doctors , the 30er , 40er -- the fate of the destiny is the only option .
but it &apos;s also about the most important population , their numbers .
and so the only option -- if it &apos;s about a hirnschlag , or to make other places -- is the wheelchair .
and so it &apos;s been around the last year since i have to say , very successful .
so we thought we could start to write a completely new chapter in the field .
now , let me show you now , you know , you know , you know , i &apos;m going to announce you &apos;ve carried with amanda boxtel , who was a rückenmarksverletzung erlitt that was going to be a rückenmarksverletzung erlitt that was not going to run over 19 years and now .
thank you .
as i said , amanda are trägt .
it has sensors -- sensors .
his fully fully non-invasiven sensors in the crutches , the signals to our onboard-computer , who &apos;s on your back here .
here &apos;s also batteriepackungen , the motorantrieb , in their hips , as on your kniegelenken , they &apos;re forward to move forward into this very egalitarian and very natural .
i was 24 years old , and in bestform , when a monströser purzelbaum was a skiabfahrt skiabfahrt .
in the fraction of a second , i &apos;ve lost every feeling and every movement underneath my beckens .
long after that , a doctor , after a doctor , a doctor was a doctor , and he said , &quot; amanda , you can never go again . &quot;
and that was 19 years ago .
he steel stahl every fünkchen hope from my consciousness .
anpassungsfähige technologies have been to learn to me , to go back to go back to climb , and even go to the hands .
but nothing was invented to me , let me go back to me , and now .
thank you .
as you can see , we have the technology , we have the platforms to make us and discussing them .
it &apos;s in our hands , and we have the whole potential to change the lives of the life of future generations -- not just for the soldiers or for amanda , but all of you , but for all of them .
thank you .
at home in new york , i &apos;m the ceo of a non-profit organization called robin .
if i don &apos;t bekämpfe the poverty , i bekämpfe as a gehilfe feuerwehr-hauptmanns at a volunteer , löschzug .
now , in our city , in which volunteers had a hochqualifizierte berufsfeuerwehr , you have to be quite early on the brandstelle to be able to be mitmischen .
i remember my first time .
i was the second volunteer of the brandstelle , so i had good opportunities to be able to go .
but it was still a race against the other volunteers to reach the verantwortlichen hauptmann and figure out what our jobs would be .
when i found the hauptmann , he had just had a very serious conversation with the hausbesitzerin , which certainly would have a shot of their lives .
it was in the middle of the night , and they stood in the schlafanzug and three schirm out in the strömenden regen , while her house was in flames .
the other volunteers that was arrived in front of me -- we call him lex -- the first time i was first luther -- first of the first time , and was asked to go into the house and to save the dog the dog .
the dog ! i was sprachlos .
there was a lawyer or vermögensverwalter , who was now going to be the rest of his life , people who could tell people to save a living , only because he was five seconds as i was .
well , i was the next .
the hauptmann winkte me .
he said , &quot; well , you have to go into the house .
you have to go up to the fire , and you have to get some shoes a pair of shoes . &quot;
i swear it .
now , what i was going to show you , but i went to go out -- the treppen , the flur , the flur , the flur , the real &quot; , which was pretty much quite done in the löschen , in the bedroom , to get a few shoes .
i know what you think now , but i &apos;m not a hero .
i carried my prey down to the bottom , where i was going to my wake up and the dog dog .
we put our treasures out outside , where we were to hausbesitzerin , where not surprisingly , its much more attention than mine .
some weeks later , the feuerwache was a letter of the hausbesitzerin that you &apos;re going to be in the brave operation of your house .
one of the most difficult geschätzte kindness : somebody had even got a pair of shoes .
both in my profession , as a volunteer , in my profession , as a volunteer , i &apos;m a freiwilliger feuerwehrmann , and kindness in big scale , but i also see the altruism and the muts of the individual .
and you know what i learned ?
they &apos;re all important .
so , if i look at this room and people see that either has a beachtenswerten success or on your way to your way , i want to be anbieten , don &apos;t wait for the way .
don &apos;t want to do a difference in the life of another one , until they reached their first million .
if you give something something , you give it .
you put them in a suppenküche , and you put a park in the neighborhood , in the neighborhood , on the neighborhood .
let &apos;s be a mentor .
not every day , each day is a chance to save us to save a person to save lives , but every day , we have a chance to change the way .
so they put it out ; they save the shoes .
thank you .
bruno guissani : mark , mark , come back .
thank you .
i just come from a community , the secret of humanity &apos;s humanity .
a place where the women who lead the zepter , &quot; sex &quot; to say , &quot; hi , &quot; and the game is the day , which is a serious matter .
no , it &apos;s not burning , or san francisco .
ladies and gentlemen , your own .
this is the world of wild bonobos in the eastern spectrum of congo .
bonobos are combined with chimpanzees , our next living relative .
that means we have a common ancestor , a evolutionary grandmother that lived about six million years ago .
now , chimpanzees are known for your aggressivität .
but unfortunately , we have this aspect of the human brain in the narrative of human evolution .
but bonobos we show us the other side of the conversation that you have to get the conversation .
as chimpanzees , of great , fear of einflößenden , geführt , the bonobo-gesellschaft of ermächtigten female .
they have really what happens , because that leads to a very serious society in the deadly gewalt in the deadly .
but unfortunately , bonobos are known under the primates .
they live in the depths of the kongolesischen urwalds , and they &apos;re just heavy .
congo is a paradox -- a country of the darkness , and beauty , but the heart of the darkness -- the arena of a violent auseinandersetzung that has been wütet for decades , and so many of the lives is so much more than the first world war .
it doesn &apos;t surprise that these destruction are survival of bonobos .
fleischhandel and the rückgang of the baumbestandes is to lead that you could not have a stadium with the verbliebenen bonobos -- and even there we &apos;re not sure to be honest .
and yet , in this country of violence and chaos can hear a verborgenes laugh that the trees were shattered .
who are these related ?
we know it as &quot; love , &quot; because they have häufigen , also bisexuellen sex , with wechselnden partners , and the rules of conflict and social angelenheiten .
i &apos;m not saying that &apos;s not the answer to all the humanitarian problems -- because life is made of more than the kama sutra .
bonobos -- like humans -- love to play their lives .
play is not just kinderspiele .
for us , and it &apos;s also play in the environment of relationships and the care of tolerance .
and we learn trust and the rules of the game .
and the more important creativity and resilience , and it &apos;s about the power of diversity -- diversity of interactions , diversity of behaviors , diversity of behaviors , diversity of connections .
and if you watch the game , you see the evolutionary origins of human lachens , dance and rituals .
play is the kitt , who &apos;s going forward .
well , i don &apos;t know how they play , but i want to show you some unique footage from the wild .
first of a ballspiel on bonobo-art -- and i don &apos;t think about fussball .
so here &apos;s a young female and males in a verfolgungsspiel .
look at what she makes them .
this could be evolutionary origin , &quot; she grabs him at the eggs . &quot;
except i think it like it , not true .
yeah ! yeah !
so , sexspiele are spread , both of bonobos and in humans .
and this video is really interesting because it &apos;s really interesting , because this video is really interesting , because it shows you the ideenreichtum that you can do new elements in the game -- and also , as the game is both trust , as a symbol -- while it &apos;s going to make it very fun .
but the game is a formwandler .
play is a formwandler , and it can adopt lots of forms of some of these things are really , phantasievoll , neugierig , neugierig -- perhaps to explore the question again .
and i want to show you , this is fuku , a young female , and she &apos;s playing with water .
i think , just like you play , we sometimes play alone , and we loten loten limitations of our inner and outer worlds .
and it &apos;s this playful curiosity that makes us make us do and interact and the unexpected systems that we create are , are the real nährboden of creativity .
this is just a little vorgeschmack of the insights that are taking us into our past and present .
but they also also true a secret for our future , a future where we have to adapt to the law of the challenge of law , and druch cooperation .
the secret is that the game is the key to this skills .
in other words , play is our anpassungsjoker .
so to really adapt us to a world &apos;s world , we need to play .
but are we going to do the best thing from our spieltrieb ?
play is not silly , it &apos;s not silly , it &apos;s not silly , it &apos;s not silly , it &apos;s not silly , it &apos;s not silly .
it &apos;s essential .
for bonobos and people are equally good for their teeth and claws alone .
if it &apos;s not appropriate to be appropriate , maybe you may be at the nötigsten .
and so , my favorite , my favorite , let &apos;s take this gift of evolution and collectively , as we &apos;re going to push creativity and wonder .
thank you .
i want you to imagine two pairs of the mitte , the same one , at the same time , in exactly the same , every single moment -- every single day , every baby -- okay . okay .
so two couples , every zeugt , every baby .
now i don &apos;t want you to be able to imagine too much time , because if you &apos;re going to introduce the whole time , you won &apos;t listen to me .
imagine that just a moment ago .
and in this scenario , you imagine that in a case , the sperma is a y chomosom that &apos;s going to be the x chromosome of the gdp .
and in the other case , the sperm is a x chromosome that &apos;s going to be the x chromosome of the gdp .
both of them are überlebensfähig , both of both .
we &apos;re going to come back to these people .
most of my activities , i &apos;ve got two .
under one hat , i &apos;m going to be with the history of anatomy .
i &apos;m jewish historikerin , and in this case , i study how people with anatomy -- human bodies -- human bodies -- as they were with körperflüssigkeiten umgingen , and how they thought about body .
the other hat i &apos;ve been worn on in my work is the activist , the activist , as a patientinnenanwältin -- or how i &apos;m sometimes saying , as i &apos;m going to say , as a shocking lawyer -- by people , the patient &apos;s patients .
in this case , i &apos;ve been working with people , the körpertypen , the social norms in question .
so i &apos;ve been working with people who are working with people who are identical twins in a body .
i worked with people with zwergenwuchs -- so people who were little as common .
and very often , i worked with people with intersexuellen people whose gender is atypisch -- so people who don &apos;t have the average male or female körpertypen .
and as general term , we can use the word of the word .
intersexualität is coming in many different forms .
i &apos;ll give you just a few examples of the kinds of types of geschlechtsvarianten that &apos;s not the male or female standard .
in a case you might have someone with a xy chromosomenbasis , and the sry gene of y chomosoms , the protogonaden , the protogonaden that we &apos;ve ever been completed to be stadium , too much .
and therefore , the testicles is at the fötalen stadium .
but because this individual is missing the receptors to recognize the testosterone , the body doesn &apos;t respond to testosterone .
and that &apos;s called a androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so much testosterone , but no response to it .
as a consequence of the body is evolving in the typical place of the typical female city .
if the kid is born , it looks like a girl .
she &apos;s a girl . she &apos;s going to be a girl .
but it &apos;s usually it takes until they reached puberty and their breasts grow and develop , but not to get your period , until somebody else is that there &apos;s a little different .
and they make a few tests and find that they &apos;re instead of eierstöcken and gebärmutter , in fact , testicles in the fact that they have a y chromosome .
and it &apos;s important to understand that if you could think that person could be manly for actually , but they &apos;re not really .
women , like men , have something in our bodies , something called adrenalindrüsen .
they &apos;re in the back of our body .
and the nebennieren stellen , which are virilisierende hormones .
most of the women i do -- i think i think a typical woman -- i know my actual chromosomenaufbau , but i think i &apos;m probably probably the typical -- most women like me speak to androgene .
we produce solar and we &apos;re talking to androgene .
the implication is that somebody like me actually has a brain that more androgenen than a woman who was born with hoden and a androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so the gender is complicated ; intersexuelle are not only in the middle of the spectrum of the spectrum -- in some sense , you can be about the entire bandwidth of the entire bandwidth .
one example , i was a few years ago , a 19 son of my son who was born as a boy , he had a girlfriend , he had a girlfriend , who had sex with his girlfriend , was he had found a man , and he had found that he had eierstöcke and had a uterus .
he had a extremes of a angeborenen of a angeborenen .
he has xx chromosome , and in utero , his nebennieren were so strong that they have created a male hormonumgebung .
and as a consequence of a consequence , his genitalien are ausgeprägt , his brain was the most typischeren part of the hormonenspektrums .
and when he was born , he saw how a boy was out of a boy -- no one .
and only when it was 19 , he got enough medical problems , actually , because he &apos;s innerlich , because he was trying to figure out that the doctors found that he was in a inside female .
okay , just another example of a variant of intersexualität .
some people with xx chromosomes , design , something called ovotestis , which is eierstockgewebe by hodengewebe umhüllt .
we don &apos;t know exactly why that happens .
so in the way , gender can occur in many different varieties .
the reason kids with this kind of body -- it &apos;s zwergenwuchs or siamesische twins , it &apos;s intersexuell -- it &apos;s not a intersexuell -- it &apos;s not because of surgeons are adapted to the norm , is not because this is for your physical health of advantage .
in many cases , these people are completely healthy .
the reason why they &apos;re often introduced different species of intervention , they &apos;re going to be very often , because they threaten our social categories .
typically , our system is based on the idea that a certain anatomical anatomical with a certain kind of mental illness .
so we have the concept that a woman is to have a female identity ; a black person is , to be allegedly , a african anatomy in terms of the own history .
so we have this awful idea of idea .
and if we faced with a body , which is actually something that we &apos;re actually very different , and we feel that we &apos;re going to be in a hinblick .
so we have a lot of ideas about individualismus ideas .
and our nation is really based on a very romantic concept of individualismus .
now you can imagine , as i think , as it &apos;s like , if children are born , the two people in a body are in a body .
where i had been told that most excitement was the most südafrikanische läuferin läuferin semenya semenya semenya last year , whose gender in berlin was asked in berlin .
many journalists was called me with the question : &quot; what test you will do , that &apos;s what we believe is whether caster semenya &apos;s female weiblich ? &quot;
and i had to explain the journalists that there &apos;s no test .
we now know that gender is complicated enough that we have to admit that nature is not going to be able to take us to the linie between male and female , and intersexuell and intersexuell , we are the kind of the performance of the performance of course .
so we have a situation where we &apos;ve been going to be so a situation where we &apos;ve been going to have to be so far more , and we need to have more of the things that we have to do with stabile categories , which is very simple zuordnungen to create permanent identitätskategorien , much more unschärfer than we were .
and that &apos;s not just in relation to gender .
it also applies to race , which is what &apos;s happening as a much more complicated than our terminologie .
at our levels , we &apos;re going to go into all kinds of unbequemen .
we &apos;re using the fact that we &apos;re on the fact that we have at least 95 percent of our dna with chimpanzees .
what we &apos;re going to do with the fact that we &apos;re going to tell us that we are just taking them through some nukleotide ?
while we continue to push our science , we &apos;re increasingly moving into a zone of the unbehagens where we need to recognize that the most potent categories we &apos;ve probably had to be too .
we see that in all kinds of areas of human life .
one of the areas we see in the beipiel , in our current culture , in the united states , the fighting of the beginning and the end of life .
we have difficult conversations about what &apos;s going to be a body for people , so that he has a different right as the fötale .
we have very difficult today , very difficult , maybe not as much as medicine -- about the question of any time .
our ancestors had never had to fight the question with the question when anyone was dead .
they have no one of a feather in the nose , and if they moved to the nose , they haven &apos;t been buried .
if you don &apos;t move it , you &apos;ve got them buried .
but today , we &apos;re in a situation where we &apos;re going to take people &apos;s books and take people to take them .
and as a result , we faced with the really difficult question when someone is dead , and that &apos;s what makes us really a really hard situation in which we don &apos;t have more comfortable as earlier .
now they would assume that all of the things that make a lot of the categories of the categories was really happy .
i &apos;m politically progressiv , i &apos;m verteidige people with unusual bodies , but i have to admit , it makes me nervous .
and to realize that these categories are really unsicherer when we thought , power to me .
and it makes me a huge thing in relation to democracy .
so to tell you about this anspannung , i have to first , i first got to first , i &apos;m a big fan of the founding .
i know they were rassisiten , i know they were sexisten , but they were great .
i think they were so tapfer and so strong , and so radically , in which what they did , i &apos;ve been doing all of the schmalzige musical 1776 , and it &apos;s not because of the music that &apos;s absolute to forget .
it &apos;s because of what &apos;s going on with the gründungsvätern .
the founding was from my view of my view , the original aktivisten activists , and that &apos;s why .
what they were doing was a anatomisches concept , and they made it through another , which was radical and a little bit of years for us .
as you remember , our founding gründungsväter the concept of monarchy , and the monarchy that &apos;s actually taken on a very basic concept of anatomy .
the state of the old world had no concept based on the dna , but they had a concept of the geburtsrechts .
they had a concept of blue blood .
they were the notion that people who had political power , that political power has given , because of the vererbten blutlinie of the grandfather &apos;s home and so on .
the fuel wiesen took this idea back and they made it through a new anatomisches concept , and this concept said that all humans were creating .
they nivellierten the space and decided that the public is , the similarities , not the differences , and that was very radical .
now they made this part because they were part of a aufklärerischen system in which two things in common things .
democracy grew up , but at the same time , the science is also going to science .
if you look at the history of the founding , clearly that many of you were interested in science , and they were interested in a concept of a world world .
they went from the erklärungen übernatürlicher species , and meadows things like a psychic concept of power , where the transmission of a very vagen concept of geburtsrecht .
they moved to a naturalistischen concept .
and if you look at the declaration of the declaration , they talk about nature and the god of nature .
they &apos;re not talking about god and nature .
they &apos;re talking about nature to tell us who we are .
and as part of it , they gave us a concept that was written by the anatomischen of the anatomischen .
and so they &apos;ve got a wonderful way to do the future civil rights .
they didn &apos;t think about that , but what they did for us was great .
so what happened after that ?
for example , women , the wahlrecht anstrebten , which is that the concept of the founding is , that we have a uterus and eierstöcke , and they said , &quot; we don &apos;t have significant significant enough that we should have the wahlrecht , that &apos;s right on full citizenship , etc . , etc .
and women are successful .
next year , the successful civil rights , where we saw people like sojourner truth , who said , &quot; am i not a woman ? &quot;
we find men in the marschierenden rows of the bürgerechtsbewegung , who say , &quot; i &apos;m a man . &quot;
again , people , people who are unterschiedlicher hautfarbe , who are struggling to anatomische unterschieden , over again , and then successful .
we see the same thing in the behindertenrechtsbewegung .
of course , the problem is that , we start to look at all the similarities , we need to start asking in question why we &apos;re going to go into certain kinds of trennungen .
now , let &apos;s say , i want to go into certain trennungen , anatomisch , in our culture .
i want to give you a fish that &apos;s not the same rights as a human .
i don &apos;t want to say that we should take the anatomy of the anatomy .
i don &apos;t want to say that 5-jährige should be right , your informed consent to be a einverständnis .
so there &apos;s some anatomic trennungen that make sense to me , and we think , i think , i think .
but the challenge is to try to figure out what it are and why we keep them , and they &apos;re meaningful .
so , we get back to these two creatures that were gezeugt to the beginning of the speech .
we have two creatures , both of the center of the same day .
so let &apos;s imagine that one of them , the one of them , three months , it &apos;s born on the one of the highway .
on the other hand , the other side , is born , so it &apos;s on a 1 märz 1980 , and so on the one of the märz , in the one of the märz , in the 1 , was born in march , in the 1 , in the 1 , in the 1 , in the 1 , in the 1 , in the 1 ,
just because of the fact that maria was born three months , they all have three months of drei , heinrich three months -- the law of having sex to choose that right , right , right , right , right , right , right .
round , in all of this , it &apos;s not to wait because he actually has a different biological age , except for the zeitpunktes of its birth .
we find other people &apos;s other basic idea of what your rights are .
the heinrich , because you realize that he &apos;s male -- although i don &apos;t have to say that he &apos;s going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to do is to be able to be able to do , what was not going to do .
maria , maria can &apos;t be in all the states , the same thing in the same , which is right in all states , and that &apos;s right .
so , in fact , in any state , a woman can marry a woman , but maria can only marry a woman in a woman .
so we have these kinds of anatomischen categories that are in many ways , problematic and questionable .
and for me , what are we going to do is we &apos;re going to do our science in the anatomy of the anatomy that we have to do a point where we have to admit that a democracy that could be based on anatomy , could be auseinanderfallen ?
i want to give science up , but at the same time , it feels sometimes as if the science is going to be a power .
so where do we go ?
it seems like our culture , a kind of pragmatic posture , &quot; well , we need to pull a line somewhere , so we &apos;re going to pull them somewhere . &quot;
but a lot of people are going to be in a very strange position .
so , for example , texas , in a point , is that a man who &apos;s a man that you have no y chromosome , and a woman that you have a y chromosome .
now in practice , people are not tested for people to test .
but it &apos;s also very bizarre because of the story i told you about the androgenrezeptor-defekt .
if we look at one of the founding of modern democracy , dr. martin luther king , he offers us in his &quot; a dream . &quot;
he says , we shouldn &apos;t be people to not reach in their skin , but to the property of their character , and it &apos;s about anatomie .
and i want to say , &quot; yeah , sounds like a really good idea . &quot;
but how do you do that in practice ?
how do you get people from people &apos;s minds ?
i want to point out that i &apos;m not sure that we should be able to get rights in relation to people , because i have to admit that i &apos;m going to know a series of golden that i &apos;m probably going to deserve as some people who are probably going to be more likely to be more than some people i know .
i want to suggest that i &apos;m probably going to know some bright labradorhunde , who are fähiger , more fundiertere , more intelligentere and more decisions about their sexual relations as a few 40-jährige , which i know .
so how do we need to ask the question after the eigenschaften of the character ?
it turns out that it &apos;s really difficult .
and part of me is what if the contents of a personality would be something that would be in the future -- to be visible in the future ?
do we really want to go into this direction ?
i &apos;m not sure where we go .
what i know is that it really seems to think about the idea that the united states is really learning about the way of democracy .
in our own sense of democracy , we &apos;ve done our stuff , and i think we would make our things in the future .
we don &apos;t have the situation , like , in iran , in iran , where a man who feels the sexuell men , it &apos;s being bestraft , it &apos;s ready to be bereit , in which he &apos;s going to stay alive .
the way that we don &apos;t exist .
i &apos;m happy to say that we haven &apos;t heard these conditions -- a surgeon that i talked about a few years ago , a few years ago , who had a few siamesische twins with sich to separate them into a name .
but when i asked him , and he asked him why he made these surgeries -- it was highly riskante surgeries -- was his answer that in his country , that children would be very poorly treated , and therefore he had to do it .
i said , &quot; now you have political asylum in a moment instead of a surgery to separate them ? &quot;
the united states provide tremendous ways to be able to allow people to be able to be able to be without changing the state of the state .
so i think , therefore , we have to be more .
okay , just to be able to get to the conclusion , i want to be talking about the fathers .
and i want to think about the ways of democracy , or what might have been like , if we have the mothers that we have more .
and i want to say something that is radical , and i think , is that there &apos;s a feminist thing , and i think there &apos;s some ways of insights that are different kinds of anatomy , if people are a gruppendenken .
for years , because i was interested in intersexualität , i also interested in research for research in the field of science .
and one of the things that i really found is that the difference between men and women in ways that they think and operate in the world .
what we &apos;ve learned from sergio studies is that women , in average , in average , not every , but in average , social social relationships and the care of people who are in group , very much attention .
and so , if we think about this , we &apos;ve got a interesting situation .
years ago , when i was a graduate student , asked me one of my favorite studienbetreuer who had my interest in a feministin , and i looked like a feminist , so i &apos;m going to ask a really good question .
he said , &quot; tell me what the feminism was female . &quot;
and i thought , &quot; well , this is the stupidest question i ever heard .
in the feminism , it &apos;s about stereotypes about gender , so that &apos;s why the feminism is not female .
but the more i thought about his question to do so much more , i thought that there could be something more weibliches in the feminism .
that &apos;s what we say , it could give something , in average , which is the female brains of male brains , what makes us aufmerksamer for social relationships , and aufmerksamer for the schutzbedürftige for the schutzbedürftige .
so where the founding is very easy to find out how individuals were protected in the state of state , it &apos;s possible that if we were more mothers in this concept , we &apos;re more than just to prevent , but how we can do for each other .
and maybe what we &apos;re going to do in the future , if we were going to go into the future , if we &apos;re democracy over a lot of anatomie -- less about the individual bodies of what identity and more about relationships .
so , if we try to make a perfektere connection , we think about what we can do for each other .
thank you .
i &apos;m a jessi , and this is my suitcase .
but before i show you what i &apos;ve been doing in , i &apos;m going to make a very public confession , and that &apos;s : i &apos;m obsessed with outfits .
i love to find any opportunity to find a different farbenfrohes , to find a different outfit , to carry on , and to go back and to go back to time .
but i don &apos;t buy anything new .
i get all my clothes from the zweiter of the zweiter of the zweiter of zweiter and in second-hand-shops .
ooh , thank you .
second-hand-shopping allows me to bring the impact of my favorite writers to the environment , and also my purse .
i &apos;m going to do all kinds of great people ; my dollars for usually a good purpose ; i &apos;m pretty unique from a good purpose ; i &apos;m really unique to my personal personal schatzsuche .
i mean , what am i going to find today ?
is it my size ?
i &apos;m going to like the color ?
it &apos;s going to cost less than 20 dollars ?
if all of you , i feel like i &apos;m going to win .
i &apos;m going to come back to my suitcase , and tell you what i was doing for this exciting week at ted .
i mean , what do you do with so many outfits with ?
so i &apos;m going to show you exactly what i brought .
i &apos;ve brought seven pairs of underwear , and that &apos;s all .
i &apos;m going to be a week , for a week , everything i did in my suitcase .
i &apos;ve been reading that i might have anything else , what i would find , if i was going to be a springs trip .
and since you didn &apos;t hear about me as the woman who are here at ted in your underwear -- meaning that &apos;s what i &apos;ve found .
and i want to show you my favorite idea for this week .
sounds that good ?
while i do this , i &apos;m going to give you some of the lessons that i believe or not , or not , from these abenteuern , nothing else has to wear .
let &apos;s start with a sunday .
i call this the entire tigers .
you don &apos;t have to spend a lot of money to look at great .
you can almost almost be great to less than 50 dollars a pound .
this whole outfit , including the jacket , i &apos;ve been doing 55 , and it was the most expensive piece that i &apos;ve carried in this whole week .
monday : color is a little bit .
it &apos;s almost impossible impossible to be bad , bad gelaunt if you were wearing hellrote pants .
if you &apos;re happy , you get other happy people .
and then , dienstag : so anpassung is totally überbewertet .
i &apos;ve spent a lot of time in my life trying to be myself , and i was going to be at the same time .
just are you who they are .
if you &apos;re surrounded with the right people , they &apos;re not only understanding it , they &apos;re also going to appreciate it .
wednesday : embrace her kid .
sometimes people say , i saw , as if i &apos;m told that i &apos;m going to play the verkleiden or i remember it .
i then like to go and say , &quot; thank you . &quot;
thursday : confidence is the key .
if you think you &apos;re looking at something good , it &apos;s almost safe .
and if you think that they don &apos;t look good at something , you &apos;re probably right .
i grew up with a mother that was taught me for the day .
but only when i became 30 , i really understood what that means .
and i &apos;ll just try this point for you .
if you think they &apos;re inside and you &apos;re a wonderful person , there &apos;s nothing that you can &apos;t carry .
so there &apos;s no excuse for somebody in this audience .
we should be able to do anything that we want .
thank you .
friday : a universal truth -- five words : golden pailleten .
and finally , saturday : a new , unique , personal style , a great way of telling the world a little bit about a story without saying a word .
and it was always proved to me and over again , when i was going to come to me , just because of what i was wearing . and i had great conversations .
clearly , it &apos;s not going to fit it into my tiny suitcase .
so before i go home to brooklyn , i &apos;ll donate this again .
because the lesson i &apos;m trying to learn this week is that it &apos;s okay to let go .
i don &apos;t need to anhaften these things , because the same thing to be the same thing around the corner , it always always will always be another crazy , strahlendes , strahlendes , that only when i &apos;m a little bit love in the heart , and it &apos;s a little bit like a little bit of love .
thank you very much .
thank you .
good afternoon , all together .
i &apos;ve got something that i want to show you .
think of this as a bildpunkt , as flying bildpunkt .
that &apos;s what we call our lab , wahrnehmbares design .
let me tell you a little bit about it .
now , if you take this picture -- i &apos;m originally , and every boy in italy , with this picture in italy , and the reason i show you this is what i &apos;m going to show you is that in the formula in the last few decades , something really interesting .
and sometime ago , i was so sure that if you wanted to win a formula to race , they took her budget and put her money on a good driver and they put a good car .
and if the car and the driver were good enough , they won the race .
now , you know , if you want to win a race , you want to win a race , actually , a few of the car in real time , some of the things that are going to pass on the system , and then they use information to the system and then use it to send them back to the system and make things in real time ,
this would be , in ingenieurteams , a echtzeit-kontrollsystem call .
and basically , it &apos;s a system that &apos;s made out of two parts -- a spürenden part and a reagierendenteil .
what &apos;s interesting is interesting is the echtzeit-kontrollsysteme start in our lives .
our cities were being used in the last few years , just with networks and electronics .
they &apos;re going to be in the freien .
and as computer in the free , they start to respond to other ways and they &apos;re perceived and driven .
if we &apos;re cities , it &apos;s actually a big deal .
just by the way , i want to mention that cities are only two percent of the earth &apos;s land , but 50 percent of the world &apos;s population lives .
they &apos;re 75 percent of the energiekonsums -- cause to 80 percent of co2 emissions .
so if we do something with the cities , that &apos;s a big deal .
and the cities , and it &apos;s all this kind of thing and driving into objects of the daily life .
this is from a exhibition , the paola antonelli , for moma , in the year , during the summer , organisiert .
it &apos;s called &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot;
now all our objects , our environment , start to talk to us .
in a sense , it &apos;s almost as if every atom is out there , a sensor and a antreiber .
and the changes is radically the interaction that we have to do with our environment .
in a sense , it &apos;s almost as if the old dream was about ...
you know , as michelangelo , it &apos;s a moses , it &apos;s called the hammer , and it &apos;s actually going to be on moses , and they can still see a little bit of a little bit of a place in the end -- and said , &quot; perché non ? &quot; why don &apos;t you do ? &quot;
now today , our environment are beginning to go back to the first time .
i &apos;ll just show you just some examples -- again , with the idea of our environment and power .
let &apos;s start with the perceive .
now the first project i want to show you is in truth of the first of our first project .
it emerged in italy , in italy .
and what we &apos;ve done was , actually , a new way of using the network of network that was used to the world -- that &apos;s a mobiltelefonnetz and anonyme information from this network that are being collected from the betreiber to understand how the city works .
the summer was a happy summer -- 2006 .
it was like italy , the fußball-weltmeisterschaft won .
some of you remember , it was like &quot; italy to france , and then end up on the end , the kopfstoß .
and no matter , italy , the end of the end , the end of the end , the end of the end , the end of the end , the end of the end , the end of the end , the end of the end , the end of the end , the end of the end , the end of the end , the end of the
now , look at what &apos;s happening at this day , just the monitor of activity that happens in the network .
here you see the city .
you see in the middle , the kolosseum , the fluß tiber .
on the morning , before the game .
you see the timeline .
early afternoon , people here and there , and move the calls and move .
the game starts to -- silence .
france makes a gateway . italy makes a gateway .
halbzeit , people make a short call , go to a toilet .
second halbzeit . end of the normal spielzeit .
first of the first time , second .
zidane , in a moment of kopfstoß .
italien wins . yeah .
well , in this night , all of the center to celebrate .
they saw the big ausschlag .
the next day , went to the center to meet the siegerteam and the prime minister of time .
and then all of us went down .
you see the image of the platzes circo , where the römischen time , the people who are going to celebrate the celebration -- to have a big party , and you see the rash at the end of the day .
now , this is just one example of how we can feel the city today , in a way we couldn &apos;t do it in a way .
so , again , another example of evidence : here &apos;s not about people , but to use things that we use and consume .
well , today , we know , all of our stuff .
this is a map that tells you all the chips that &apos;s a mac computer , as they came together .
but we know just little about where things go .
so we actually designed some little markers to pursue the trash through the trash .
so we started with a few volunteers that we have to do something more than a year ago , in seattle , in seattle , who are doing things that they &apos;re wegwarfen -- different kinds of things that you can see -- things that they would like to go .
then we have the little chips , the little brands , and then started to pursue it .
here &apos;s the results we &apos;ve just got right now .
from seattle ...
after a week .
with this information that we realized that there &apos;s a lot of ineffizienzen in the system .
we can do the same things in the fact that we do with less energy .
the data were not available .
but that &apos;s what happens a lot of unnützer and complicated things .
the other thing is , we believe that if we see every day that the cup that we throw away , not just simply disappears , that they still have stuck on the planet .
and the plastic that we still still have every day , still still there .
and if we were to show that people , we can change a behavior for us .
so this is the reason for this project .
my colleague at mit , assaf , assaf , could you tell you about the many other amazing things that you can do with , but i want to talk to you to talk to the second part , which we &apos;re going to be the beginning of the beginning , and that &apos;s the most betätigung of our environment .
and the first project is something that we did in zaragoza , a few years ago .
it started with a question of the bürgermeisters that came to us and said that spain and südeuropa have a beautiful tradition , in public places of the architecture of architecture .
and the question was , how could technology could be technology , new technology with it ?
and one of the ideas that were in a arbeitskreis ermittelt , and they &apos;re going to be a valves , magnetventile , valves , open and closing .
they &apos;re causing it as a wasservorhang with bildpunkten water .
if these bildpunkte are responding , you can write it , you can do patterns , images , text ads .
and you can get him , and it &apos;s open to open up to make them durchspringen , as you can see on this picture .
well , we &apos;ve introduced the mayor .
it has very much .
and we got a mission to design a building in the entrance of the expo .
we called it the digital water .
the whole building was from water .
there &apos;s no türen or windows , but if you &apos;re getting yourself , it will open and you &apos;re going to go .
the roof was also covered with water .
and if it &apos;s been released , if you want to go to the spritzen , you can even get the roof .
or you could see the building and the whole architecture is , as you see , this guy , you know , that &apos;s what you get the roof , they get photos of people who were there and say , &quot; they have the building . &quot;
no , they don &apos;t cheat the building , it &apos;s just that architecture almost disappear .
here you see , how the building works .
you see the person who ask himself , what happens inside the inside .
and here you see me when i was trying to test the sensors that opened the water , not wet .
now , i should tell you what one night happened when all of the sensors to work .
but actually , it was a still more exciting .
all of children came out of zaragoza came to the building , because the way they were playing with the building was very different .
no one of the buildings that open up to make them a building , but a building that still has stronger and holes in the water , you had to be able to be able to be able to get wet .
and that was , very exciting , because when architects , engineers , as designers , we always think about how people are using the things that we use .
but the reality is always unpredictable .
and that &apos;s the beauty that we &apos;re creating things that are used to be used and interact with people .
here &apos;s a picture of the building with the building with the physical bildpunkten , the bildpunkten of water and the projections .
and this is what we &apos;ve got to think about this problem , which i show you now .
imagine that these bildpunkte could really start flying .
imagine you could have little helicopter that you have , which flies through the air , and each of them with a little bildpunkt light with a kleinen light , almost like a cloud that can move through the space .
here &apos;s the video .
imagine a helicopter , like the ones you saw earlier , that &apos;s completely synchron .
you can have this cloud .
you can have a kind of flexiblen screen or display , like this -- a conference formation in two dimensions .
or behavioral , but in three dimensions , where that changes , the light is , not the position of the bildpunkte .
you can play with different types .
imagine the screen could just be in different formaten or sizes in different types of auflösungen .
but then this whole thing could be a 3d cloud of bildpunkten , which they can and move through the way that they can look from many ways , many ways .
here &apos;s a real flyfire-steuerung , the herabsinkt to shape as a gleichmäßiges v .
if you attach the lights , it looks like this . so as we saw it before .
imagine that every single one of people are controlled .
it could have any individual bildpunkt , the impulse , the human condition , the movements of humans or something .
i want to show you something here to you .
we &apos;ve worked with roberto bolle , one of the best balletttänzer of our time -- the étoile theater in new york city in new york city -- we &apos;ve taken his movements in 3d in 3d to use them as an impulse to use for the flyfire .
here &apos;s what you see here is roberto .
on the left side , you see the bildpunkte , the different eingefangenen sensations .
it &apos;s a echtzeit-3d-scan and a bewegungsaufnahme .
so that they can cause the whole movement .
you can do that all the time .
but then , if we have all the bildpunkte , you can play and play with color and drehbewegung .
that &apos;s what we want to use as a possible impulse for the flyfire .
i want to show you the latest project we &apos;re working on .
it &apos;s something that we &apos;re working for the olympics in london .
it &apos;s called the cloud -- the cloud .
the idea is , again , that we &apos;re going to take the people back to do and change the environment -- almost something like we call it , wolkenbewegung einzubauen , as you &apos;re going to be able to move forward , but with a cloud .
imagine that each one of a little donation can give a little donation for a bildpunkt .
i think that &apos;s remarkable of the last years , the last decades that we &apos;re actually about a physical world to a digital world .
this has all been digitized , and it &apos;s going to be available by the internet .
today , we can take the first time -- and the campaign has been shown that -- we can change the digital world , from the netzwerke forces of the world &apos;s largest world .
that can be in our case that we use it to make design and create a symbol .
that &apos;s what &apos;s built in the city .
but tomorrow , it can be to provide us to the challenges of challenges -- think of climate change or the co2 emissions -- how can we change the digital world of the digital world .
so the idea is that we actually actually engage people with it , where they &apos;re doing things together .
the cloud is a cloud of bildpunkten , in the same way that a cloud cloud is a cloud of particles .
and these particles are water as our cloud is a cloud of bildpunkten .
it &apos;s a physical way of london , but with bildpunkten covered .
you can move inside and make different kinds of experiences .
you can actually look at it , and you can see that the most important moments for olympia 2012 and stopped , and it &apos;s as kind of the connection to community .
so both the physical cloud in the sky and you can see them in the very top , how many of the new berggipfel berggipfel .
you can go .
and a kind of digital leuchtturm in the night -- but as a allerwichtigstes , a new kind of experience for all of the experience that go to the top .
thank you .
as an artist , i &apos;m very important .
by my work , i try to express that people who are not separated from nature and all that together .
the first time i was before 10 years ago , in antarctica , where i saw my first charter .
and i was going to get awe .
my heart , i was schwindelig , while i was trying to grab what was going on .
the prime eisberge around me is beinah out of the water , and i could only wonder that this was a snowflake on a different schneeflocke year .
meanwhile , in the case of a heart attack or a half of a glacier or by blowing out of eisschollen .
each one has a constant , his own individual personality .
it &apos;s interacting with a eindeutige way with their surroundings and their experiences .
some of our refuse , and then they were bouncing to the bitter end , whereas others don &apos;t withstand more and more and more passionate about the anfall passion .
if you look at a iceberg , you think they &apos;re isolated and just being isolated and alone , as we see people .
but the truth is far away from it .
while a eisberg melts , i put his vorzeitliche atmosphere .
during the iceberg , he setzt the mineralstoffreiches drinking water , which is a lot of life .
i &apos;m going to go back to my footage of this kind of prime footage , as i was going to do portraits of my ancestors , in which consciousness that they exist in these individual moments , and never again .
it &apos;s not an death , if you melt ; it &apos;s not a end , but a fortführung of your life extension .
part of the ice in the ice is the eisbergen i &apos;m going to be very young -- a thousand years old .
and one part of ice is more than 100,000 years old .
the last thing i &apos;d like to show you to show you is a eisberg that i have in kekertsuatsiak in greenland in greenland in greenland .
very rare , you actually get a zeuge of a rollenden iceberg .
here you see it .
on the left side , you see a little boat .
this is about five feet long .
please look at the shape of the iceberg and where he &apos;s on the wasserlinie .
you can see here , he starts to roll , and the boat has moved to the other side , the man standing there .
this is the average size of a grönland-eisbergs .
he was dying about 120 foot from the water , or 40 meters .
and this video is in real time .
and just like this , you &apos;ll show you a different side of his personality .
thank you .
my life is really amazing by working on the work of work .
but in the coolest , i &apos;ve ever worked , it was about this guy .
his name is tempt .
tempt was one of the leading graffitikünstler of the 1980s .
then one day , he came back from running back and said , &quot; paps , my legs kribbeln . &quot;
and that was the outbreak of the als .
tempt is completely paralyzed .
he can only use his eyes .
i was standing him .
i have a company that &apos;s a company , and the design and the animation is , so , is a complex part of what we admire in the periphery and pay attention .
so we decided to be tony -- tempt -- tempt -- and his thing to support .
i met with his father and his brother and said , &quot; we &apos;ll give you this money to you .
what are you going to do with it ? &quot;
and his brother said , &quot; i want to talk to tony .
i just want to just talk to him , and i asked , &quot; wait , i &apos;m not -- i &apos;ve seen stephen hawking , can &apos;t all the people all the people are communicating with these devices ? &quot;
and he said , &quot; no , only if you hear the higher gesellschaftsschicht , and a remarkable insurance , you can really do this .
normal people are not available to these devices . &quot;
and i was like , &quot; how do you do your job ? &quot;
anybody has the movie &quot; movie and taucherglocke ? &quot;
so they communicate -- so walking down your fingers .
i &apos;m staunte , &quot; very archaisch , how can this be ? &quot;
so i came with the need , just a check , and instead i hired a check that i didn &apos;t know the slightest idea of how i should be einlösen .
i &apos;m going to go to the place and i &apos;m going to place his brother and his dad -- &quot; well , my proposal is , &quot; well , my proposal is , and we &apos;ll find a machine , and we &apos;ll find a way that he can do his art again .
because it &apos;s a farce that somebody who wears in it , it cannot communicate . &quot;
so i spoke some months later , later .
i met these people from grl , and they have a technology that allows you to put a light on any surface and draw with a laserpointer on the surface of the negative surface .
so they &apos;re going to go out and make kunstinstallationen like this .
they say all of things that are being shown down there , a lebenszyklus consequences .
it starts with the testes , then the schimpfwörter , then the bush-verleumdungen , the bush-verleumdungen and the final result is actually making people art .
but there was always a life cycle in your presentation .
so i went home and ate her wife , and told her , &quot; well , if you have this technology , you can do this technology to drive things , we should find a way that they can navigate the way that they can make a laser , so that he can make a laser , so that he can make back to graffiti , so that it would
that was the beginning of the journey .
and about two years later , about a year later , a lot of organization and a lot of things , we &apos;ve reached some things .
first , we have the insurance die , and actually , in tempt , for tempt , he can get a machine that he can communicate with -- a stephen hawking-maschine .
this was incredible .
and he &apos;s really very funny -- i call him yoda , because you talk about him , or you &apos;re talking about him , and think , &quot; i &apos;m so unwürdig , this guy &apos;s incredible . &quot;
and we also have seven programmers from the world -- literally from all the world of the world -- to us home .
my wife , my kids and i are in the garage , and they &apos;re hacker and programmierer and anarchisten and anarchisten our home .
many of our friends thought we were stupid stupid , and we were zurückkämen and all the images to the walls and all of the images in the walls .
but for two weeks , we &apos;ve programmed , we went to the strandpromenade in venice , my children , my children , and we created this .
it &apos;s called eyewriter , and you can see the description .
this is a cheap sonnenbrille that we bought in the strandpromenade of venice , something that is kupferdraht and some things that &apos;s going on and a few things out of the stuff and the elektronikhandel .
we took a ps3-kamera , they have auseinandergebaut , you have a gerät , and we have a device that &apos;s open , and you can build it , we put the code for free , the software can deliver free .
so we &apos;ve created a device that &apos;s completely freely from constraints .
no insurance can be querstellen , querstellen , querstellen .
no hospital .
each one can actually communicate with his eyes or drawing .
thank you .
thank you very much , that was incredible .
and so on the end of the two weeks , we went back to tempts .
i love this picture , because it &apos;s the room from somebody else , and that &apos;s his room .
now all of this rummel is about the big enthüllung of the big unveiling .
and after a year , two weeks , two weeks , nudelparties and durchgemachten nights , tony tony , for the first time , for the first time .
and this is an amazing picture because this is his life support , and he looks at his life support .
we have his bed , so that he can see that it can see .
we have a projektor set of aufgestellt against a wall of the hospital .
and he drew back to the first time , in the beisein of his family and friends , and you can only imagine what was a feeling that was on the parking lot of the parking lot .
and we also had to einbrechen in the parking lot , so we felt as a part of the sprüher-szene .
and at the end of the end , he &apos;s got a email with the inhalt content , &quot; for the first time i &apos;ve got a little drawn for seven years .
i feel the feeling , i was under water , and finally , someone has gone down to the bottom , and i was going to breathe my head , so i can breathe . &quot;
isn &apos;t that overwhelming ?
this is something like our kampfschrei .
that &apos;s going to be told us and let &apos;s continue to develop .
and we need to improve much of this device .
it &apos;s a amazing device , but it &apos;s a zaubertafel .
and somebody who has a system that has a system that has a lot of potential to be so much more .
so we are trying to figure out how to make it better , faster and stronger .
since this time we &apos;ve all got all sorts of recognition .
we won some awards .
remember , it &apos;s free , no one of us deserves .
it &apos;s all coming from our own pockets .
so the rate was , &quot; oh , that &apos;s fantastic . &quot;
armstrong twitterte over us and then , december , in december , the time-magazine is geehrt , as one of the 50 best innovations , which was really great .
the core system is -- and that includes the whole circle -- that it &apos;s this april , beim , in downtown los los angeles , who will give a exhibition called &quot; the kind of &quot; the &quot; of the streets &quot; the streets &quot; of the streets . &quot;
and there are quite a pretty clear vertreter of the straßenkunstszene anwesend , banksy , shepard , shepard , caws , caws -- all these boys are going to be there .
tempt is part of the show , which is quite bizarre .
so basically , i think , if you look something that is impossible , it &apos;s impossible , it &apos;ll make it possible .
all of this room was impossible -- this stage , this computer , this microphone , the eyewriter , the eyewriter -- all of it was impossible .
do it possible -- they all here .
i &apos;m not a programmer , and i never had to do anything with augenerfassungstechnologie , but i just got something so much , and i just surrounded with amazing people , so we could put something on the legs .
and this question is to ask each of you , and every single day you have to do something that has to do something that is done , and if not , when i don &apos;t , who ?
thank you . thank you .
so i write for children , and i &apos;m probably likely to be more likely to be gelesener .
and i &apos;m always saying that i &apos;m not going to come like a scientist .
you can have a farmer , or in leather , but no one has ever chosen .
today i want to tell you about the circles and the other .
well , a enlightenment is usually for usually something that you find out , because you have it down .
you &apos;re going to go around the block and take it as a revelation .
this is a painting of a circle .
one of my friends did it -- richard bollingbroke .
it &apos;s the kind of complicated circle that i want to tell you today .
my circle began in the &apos; 60s in the &apos; 30s in stow , ohio , where i was the klassenschwuchtel .
i was the one who was the jede week in the jungentoilette green and blue beaten , until a teacher saved my life .
they saved my life by letting me use the toilet in the lehrerzimmer .
they did , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly , secretly
she did it for three years , long .
and i had to go away from the city .
i had a thumb , i had 85 dollars , and i was struck by san francisco in california -- i found a lover -- and then in the 1980s , i found it was a work in aids-organisationen .
about three or four years ago , i received the middle of this teacher , woman who said , &quot; i have to see them .
i &apos;m sad that we &apos;ve never learned each other as adults .
can you come to ohio , and please come together with the man , which i know they &apos;ve found that they &apos;ve found that they &apos;ve found .
and i should say that i &apos;ve got bauspeicheldrüsenkrebs , and i want you to go to your mind . &quot;
well , the next day we were in cleveland .
we looked at them , we laughed , we cried , and we knew that they should be in a hospice .
we found one for them , we brought them , and we were going to take care of them , and we gave them to her family , because it was necessary because it needed to be necessary .
it was something that we knew .
and just as the woman who wanted me to learn to know as adults , i decided to take care of them in a box full of mine and turned into my hands .
what happened was that the circle closed , it was a circle -- and the revelation i talked about .
the revelation is , the death part of life is a part of life .
she saved my life , and my mate , and i &apos;m going to give you your mate .
and you know , this part of life needs everything that needs to be the rest of life .
he takes truth and beauty , and i &apos;m so glad that this is so often so often .
he needs as much -- he needs love and pleasure . and it &apos;s about to give us these things .
thank you .
imagine a big explosion , as they &apos;re on 1,000 feet long .
imagine a plane full of smoke .
imagine a fool , the klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack .
this sounds angst .
well , i had a unique spot in this day ; i was sitting on 1d .
i was the only one who could talk to the flugbegleitern .
so i looked at them , and they said , &quot; no problem , we &apos;ve got a couple of birds . &quot;
the pilot had the machine already gewendet and we weren &apos;t so far away .
you could see manhattan .
two minutes later three things happened .
the pilot was going to turn the machine after the hudson river .
it &apos;s usually not the route .
he &apos;s going to bring the engines .
imagine a geräuschloses plane .
and then he said three words -- the emotionslosesten words i ever heard .
he says , &quot; bereitmachen for the &quot; aufprall &quot; &quot; bereitmachen &quot;
i had to talk to the bordpersonal .
i could see it in her eyes , there was horror life that was going to be .
i want to share with you three things that i learned about this day .
i learned that in a moment that &apos;s anything different .
we have this lebensplan , we have these things that we want to do in life and i thought about all the people i wanted to do is to go to a hand , and it didn &apos;t do all the fences i wanted to go , all the experiences i wanted to do .
and while i was going to talk about this , i remembered a phrase that says , &quot; i &apos;m making bad wines . &quot;
because if the wine is , and the person is there , i open it .
i never want to do more .
and this urgency , this goal , has changed my life .
the second thing i learned about this day -- and this was when we verfehlten the george washington bridge , so i thought , &quot; wow , i thought , there &apos;s one thing that i really really bereue .
i had a good life .
in my own humanity and with my mistakes , i would like to become better , and i &apos;ll be better at all .
but in my humanity , i &apos;ve given my face in my face .
and i &apos;m going to get the time i &apos;m going to verschwendet dinge dinge , with people who mean something .
and i thought to my wife with my wife , to friends .
and then , when i was thinking about it , i decided to be negative energy from my life .
it &apos;s not perfect , but it &apos;s much better .
i didn &apos;t have a couple of years with my wife .
it feels great .
i &apos;m not trying to have more , right , i &apos;m happy to be happy .
the third thing i learned -- and this is the innere clock , &quot; 15 , 14 , 13 , 13 , ... &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen . &quot;
you see the water .
i said , &quot; please flieg in the air . &quot;
i don &apos;t want this thing in 20 parts , as you know it from dokumentationen .
while we were talking about , i had this feeling , not to die .
almost almost like we were going to prepare for our lives .
but it was very sad .
i didn &apos;t want to go ; i love my life .
and this is really a really interesting thing that really is really a mind i just wish to me .
i just wish i could see my children &apos;s children .
about a month after , i visited a performance of my daughter -- erstklässler , not much more künstlerisches talent ...
... not .
and i feiere , i &apos;m teaching my little kid .
and in the world , i made a sense of sense of me .
i realized that i was sure that the dots of each other was about to be a great dad .
more than anything , everything else is my life in life , a good goal .
i was going to have the miracle of the miracle that day .
i got one another gift , which is to see the future , and then lead to life .
my call to all the time today , which is , imagine that the same thing in your flight -- please -- but how would you change it ?
what would you do , they would say , because they think they would be forever ?
how would you change your relationships and the negative energy in it ?
and more than anything else , they are the best parents that they can only be ?
thank you .
the idea behind the stuxnet is pretty straightforward .
we don &apos;t want iran to build the bomb .
the most important post there for the development of nuclear weapons is the uran-anreicherungs-einrichtung in natanz .
the gray boxes that you see here , these are echtzeit-kontrollsysteme .
now , if it &apos;s going to be able to do that , the systems , which is drehzahlen and valves , we can actually do a lot of problems with the centrifuge .
these gray boxes don &apos;t run with windows-software ; they &apos;re based on a completely different technology .
but if we can make it happen , a effektives windows-virus , which is used by a laptop of a wartungsingenieur , to konfigurieren this gray box , we &apos;re in business .
and that &apos;s the planning behind the stuxnet .
so we start with a windows-dropper .
the nutzdaten will be transferiert into the gray box , the centrifuge , and the iranian kernenergie-programm are verzögert -- auftrag .
that &apos;s a piece of light , right ?
i want to tell you how we found that .
when we started our research to stuxnet six months ago , was completely unknown , what was the purpose of the meaning .
the only thing we knew is very , very complicated , which is the most fundamental part of the windows- , the dropper- part , he made unzähligen zero- schwachstellen schwachstellen .
and it seemed like something vorzuhaben , with these grauen boxes , this echtzeit- kontrollsystemen .
the erregte of our attention and we started a labor- project where we were our environment with stuxnet infected , and we &apos;re seeing this .
and then something weird happened .
stuxnet verhielt , like a laborratte that &apos;s not like our cheese , schnüffelte , but didn &apos;t want to eat it .
that &apos;s not a sense in my mind .
and after we had different kinds of cheese , and i was on that this is a gezielter attack .
completely , in a certain sense , which is going to be a specific destination .
the dropper streift is active on the gray box , when a special configuration was discovered , even when the special program is to try to infect this goal .
and if not , then nothing does not do anything .
so , that was really my interest , and we started working with this , almost 24 to watch the clock , because i thought , well , we don &apos;t know what the goal is .
it could say , &quot; for instance , for example , a us- american power , or a chemieanlage in germany .
so we should find better find out what the goal .
so we extrahierten the angriffs- code , and we found that he &apos;s in two digital warheads of sprengköpfe , a smaller and a bigger .
and also , also , as they also found , they were very professional constructed , and the people who had all the information technology had available .
they knew any bits and bytes that they had to attack .
probably , you know , they even know the schuhgröße of the maschinenbedieners .
so they knew anything .
and if you &apos;ve already noticed that the dropper of stuxnet and high-tech , let me tell you , the nutzdaten are a science for themselves .
it &apos;s much more difficult than anything we ever seen .
here &apos;s a clip from this angriffs- code .
we &apos;re talking about -- about 15,000 lines of the code .
looks pretty much like the altmodische assemblersprache .
and i want to tell you how we were able to be able to be able to be smart .
so what we were looking for , as first we were first , systemfunktions- aufrufe , because we know what this is .
and then we searched for timern and datenstrukturen , and trying to bring these with the physical world in relation to the physical world .
so we needed to learn about these goals that we &apos;re making or .
so to get this theories , we call us in memories that it &apos;s definitely about hochgradige sabotage , it has to be a hochwertiges goal , and it &apos;s probably a very likely to iran because there were most infections .
now , in this field , there &apos;s not a thousand goals .
it &apos;s basically hinaus on the buschehr and on the urananreicherungsanlage in natanz .
so i said to my assistant , &quot; i &apos;m going to give me a list of all the experts for zentrifugen and kraftwerke from our kundenstamm . &quot;
and i called them and zapfte her to do their geese with what we had in the code and in the data .
and that worked very well .
so , it was possible to bring us the little digital digital technology with the rotorsteuerung .
the rotor is that moving moving in the centrifuge , these black object that you see .
and if you look at the speed of this rotors , you actually actually have to crack the rotor , and even after the centrifuge .
what we also found is that the goal of the attack was actually , and actually let me start doing it , and actually , in the attempt to allow us to make sure that they &apos;re not going to be able to get to the quickly .
the great digital sprengkopf -- we received a glimpse of what we &apos;re seeing is very much exactly the data and datenstrukturen .
so , for example , the number of 164 is very , very much out of this code , you can &apos;t miss it .
i started to durchzuarbeiten scientific literature , the scientific literature , like this zentrifugen in natanz , and found that they &apos;re strukturiert , and they &apos;re enthält 164 .
so this made sense , it &apos;s got together .
and it was better .
these zentrifugen in iran are divided into 15 levels .
and guess what we found in the angriffscode ?
a nearly structure of structure .
so again , it really got good together .
and this was great confidence that we studied here .
well , don &apos;t get me wrong , that didn &apos;t just go .
these results were done by several weeks in a couple of weeks .
and often we just got out to a solar panel and we had to collect us .
anyway , we found that both digital warheads are added on a digital operation , and the same goal , but from different directions .
the little sprengkopf takes a kaskade , and überdreht the head and slowed down and the big sprengkopf , and the big sprengkopf of tritt is to be connected to six kaskaden and manipulated .
so , in the large and all , we are very optimistic that we actually have determines what the goal is .
it &apos;s natanz and it &apos;s just natanz .
so we don &apos;t have to worry that other goals are going to be hit by stuxnet .
this is a really cool stuff that we discovered -- has really made me really look at the socks .
there is the gray box , and you see , you see the zentrifugen .
now , what this thing is , that it &apos;s the rise of sensors to sensors , so , for example , von and vibrationssensoren -- and it provides legitimen code that &apos;s still affecting the attack , which is to falschen , with wrong data .
and in fact , this false wisdom is covered by stuxnet before .
so it &apos;s like hollywoodfilmen , where during the verfolgungsjagd , the überwachungskamera die die with the vorher überwachungskamera .
that &apos;s cool , isn &apos;t it ?
the idea is obviously not just that maschinenbediener in the kontrollraum .
in fact , it &apos;s more dangerous and more aggressive .
the idea is to cheat a digital sicherheitssystem .
we need digital sicherheitssysteme there where a human maschinenbediener can &apos;t respond to quickly .
so in a power station , for example , if the big dampfturbine will quickly get fast , you have to break out within the milliseconds .
of course , this cannot be done by a human genome .
so , this is what we need to do digital sicherheitssysteme .
and if the endangered , then really bad things happen .
the power plant can explode .
and neither the maschinenführer , the sicherheitssystem will notice it .
that &apos;s frightening .
but it &apos;s even worse .
and what i &apos;m saying is very important .
think about this . this attack is generisch .
he has nothing to do with zentrifugen , with urananreicherung .
so , he would be so good doing this as well -- in a power or a automobilfabrik .
it &apos;s generisch .
and you don &apos;t need to -- as the attacker -- you don &apos;t have to be a usb- stick on a usb- stick as we &apos;ve seen it in stuxnet .
you could also use ordinary wurm- technology to spread .
you have to spread it as far as possible .
and if you do that , you get a cyber- massenvernichtungswaffe .
that &apos;s the implication that we have to ask .
so unfortunately , the greatest number of goals is the largest zielen of these attacks .
they &apos;re in the united states , in europe and japan .
so all of these green areas , these are the most zielreichsten environments .
we need to ask ourselves the consequences , and we &apos;re going to start better at us .
thank you .
i have a question .
ralph , it was very much , that people assume that the mossad is the hauptorganisation .
is that yours ?
okay , you want to know that ?
yeah . okay . okay .
i think , in my opinion , the most mossad , but the driving force is not israel .
so the driving force is the cyber- superpower .
there &apos;s only one and that &apos;s the united states -- fortunately , happiness .
because otherwise , our problem would even be even bigger .
thank you , you have a heidenangst eingejagt . thank you .
i &apos;ve spent the last few years to get me in situations that usually are very difficult and simultaneously , kind of dangerous .
i went into jail -- hard .
i worked in a kohlebergwerk kohlebergwerk -- dangerous .
i filmed in kriegsgebieten gefilmt -- difficult and dangerous .
and i &apos;ve spent 30 days to eat this -- but the same thing at the beginning , a little hard in the middle , very dangerous at the end .
i actually have the most most of my career in my career , and i &apos;ve been feeling all of the most important part of my career , and all of this is just for trying to study social outfits , and hopefully , and hopefully in a kind of sense that they &apos;re doing for the audience and available to the audience .
so when i knew that i would come here and see a tedtalk in a tedtalk of branding and sponsoring , i knew i would make a little bit different .
some of you may have heard of that i &apos;ve been going to be a display in ebay .
i &apos;m going to send some facebook-nachrichten , some twitter-nachrichten , and i gave people the opportunity to erstehen the namensrechte of my tedtalk .
really , some of these happy people , and firmen , for-profit and non-profit , the most amazing thing that i &apos;m sure was sure that chris anderson will never let me go back to the talk that you &apos;ve just seen a title and not many evidence to the point of what was going on .
so what you got was : my name was : my tedtalk , which you have no idea what the subject is going to be , and the you &apos;ll have the content to be able to fly the ears , especially if i was doing their company their loved ones .
but it &apos;s time , it &apos;s a very good social opportunity .
you know how many people are looking at these tedtalks ?
a whole bunch of .
this is just the arbeitstitel .
so despite this warning , i knew that anyone would buy the namensrechte .
if you had this year before i would ask this year , i would not have been able to say this with certainty .
but in the new project that i work , my new film , we study the world of marketing , the advertising .
as i said , i was in some pretty awful situations , but nothing could i remember , nothing could rüsten me , and so i couldn &apos;t go on anything , and so on these guys like this guy .
you know , i had the idea of a movie .
what i want to do is a film about product placement , marketing and commercials , and the whole film is finanziert through product placement , marketing and advertising .
and the movie is called &quot; the greatest movie sold . &quot;
so what happens in &quot; the greatest movie sold , &quot; everything is from the beginning , from the beginning , from the beginning , from the beginning , from the beginning , in the beginning , in the beginning , you &apos;ll see that &apos;s the brand x. x. .
now , this brand , the qualcomm stadium , the staples center ...
these people are being connected to be connected to be connected to be used for the movie .
and so the movie is going to investigate this whole idea -- this is what ? in eternity , forever ?
i &apos;m a redundante person .
this was more to the emphasis .
it was &quot; in &quot; in &quot; in &quot; in &quot; in eternity . &quot;
but we &apos;re not just going to be just the brand x as a titelsponsor , but we &apos;ll make sure that we &apos;re going to sell any possible things in the movie .
so we may have a shoe , and he will get the greatest shoe that you &apos;ve ever carried on .
the greatest car that you have ever been the dangers , &quot; the greatest movie sold &quot; that they &apos;ve ever had , a attention of &quot; the greatest movie sold sold . &quot;
so the idea is , well , of course , some of them are being part of life , actually , to bring them to finance the film ?
and we actually show that whole process of how it works .
the goal of the whole thing is transparency .
they &apos;re going to see the whole thing in the movie of the city .
so this is the whole concept of all the movie , the whole movie , from beginning to end .
and i would love to be happy if ceg would help it be able to do this .
you know , it &apos;s funny because when i first heard it first , it &apos;s the ultimate respect for the audience .
i don &apos;t know how empfänglich people will be .
have you -- i don &apos;t want to use &quot; blickwinkel &quot; because that has an negative konnotation -- but you know how to develop ?
how much money is required to realize that ?
1.5 million .
i think it &apos;s hard to meet you , but i think it &apos;s definitely worth doing , some really hard in the very hard experience .
who knows when the movie comes out , we might see how a horde vollidioten .
what do you think the answer will be ?
the answer is probably going to be a probably &quot; no . &quot;
but it &apos;s a difficult thing for the movie or a difficult thing to me ?
jk : both both .
so ... means not as optimistic .
so , my gentleman , you can help me help me ? i need help .
i can help .
okay . okay .
fantastic fantastic .
we need to think about what brands brands .
yeah . yeah .
if you look at the people , they have to do it with it ...
there are some places that we can bring to .
so , you &apos;re going to take the camera out .
i thought , &quot; imagine the camera &quot; dignity &quot; we want to lead to a hintergrundgespräch .
it turns out that it meant that it meant to be really meant to do nothing to do with their film . &quot;
and just so different companies , all these companies , one after the other .
no one wanted to do something with the movie .
i was amazed .
they wanted to be absolutely nothing to do with the project .
and i was confused , because i thought the whole concept of advertising is to present your product as much as possible as possible as possible as possible as possible .
especially in the world today , in the world of this interface of new and old media and the zerstückelten media and the zerstückelten media landscape -- it &apos;s not the idea of being aufregenden in this new machine that the masses is going to be .
no , that was what i thought .
but you see , the problem was that my idea had a fatalen mistake , and that was the following .
it &apos;s actually no , that wasn &apos;t the mistake .
this is not a problem at all .
that would be okay .
but that &apos;s what this picture is , is a problem .
see , if you &apos;re transparency in the google-suche , this is -- this is one of the first pictures that seems .
i really like that , sergey brin . now .
this was the problem : transparency , frei and tücke , just to explore and durchschauen , and verständlich , and charakterisiert of sichtbarkeit and access to information , especially what geschäftspraktiken angeht -- the last line is the biggest problem .
you know , we &apos;re going to hear a whole bunch of transparency .
our politicians say , our president tells it , even our ceos say it .
but if it &apos;s like that , it &apos;s being implemented , changes anything .
but why ? well , transparency is fear -- like this strange bear , the immernoch of the merkwürdige .
it &apos;s unvorhersagbar -- like this strange landstraße .
and it &apos;s also very risky .
what else is that ?
a whole schale cool foods .
that &apos;s very risky .
so when i started talking to the companies and tell them that we wanted to tell this story , they said , &quot; no , we want to tell a story .
we want you to tell a story , but we just want to be just to tell our story . &quot;
and you see , when i was a kid , and my dad had a kid -- and my dad , and he &apos;s sitting in this view , and he &apos;s sitting with this look -- &quot; my son , there &apos;s three of history .
there &apos;s your version , there &apos;s my version , and there &apos;s the true version . &quot;
so you see , this film , we wanted to tell the real version .
but there was a company , one of the reasons , and that &apos;s just because i had john bond and richard kirshenbaum , i found that i needed to do it to do this , i had to go back to the mittelsmann and to the team with my team .
so what you suddenly started to understand -- or what i started to understand -- was that if you start to talk to these companies , the idea of how your brand is understood , a whole problem .
i have friends , the big , gigantic hollywood-filme , and i have friends , the little independent-filme ones i do .
and my friends , the big , gigantic hollywood-filme , which is why the reason why your films are so successful , the markenpartnern that they have .
and then my friends , they say , little independent-filme , &quot; well , how are we going to compete with these big , giant gigantischen compete ? &quot;
and the movie is called &quot; the greatest movie sold . &quot;
so how do we get to see any other ?
always , if i go to the path , and i always end up , if i open the medizinschrank , you will see a ban .
and every time i &apos;m going to go , i can say , &quot; are you fresh enough for this interview ?
are you like ? you see a little nervous .
i want to help you , to calm yourself .
so maybe you should be a little bit of a little bit of this auflegen . &quot;
and then we provide one of these great düfte .
either fusion , &quot; or &quot; a &quot; paradise winds &quot; you &apos;re going to have the choice .
we &apos;re going to be both for men and women , and they &apos;re missing , roll-on , or a stick , whatever .
this is the kurzfassung .
now , i can answer all your questions and give them a more inclusive version .
we are a smaller brand .
so as you talked about the smaller movies , we are a herausforderer .
so we don &apos;t have a budget like others .
so these things are doing -- you know , reminds people in the age -- that &apos;s kind of why we &apos;re interested .
what words would you describe ?
it &apos;s a ban ban .
this is a great question .
woman : überlegene technology .
technology is not the way you should describe something that &apos;s going to do under the achseln .
we &apos;re talking about bold , fresh .
i think , &quot; well , &quot; well , &quot; well , &quot; well , &quot; well , &quot; this category really is really something that really makes it really positive , unlike &quot; fighting odor and humidity . &quot;
it keeps you .
how can we keep them more comfortable -- better , more fresh , three times .
these things have a positivere effect .
and that &apos;s a millionen-konzern .
what about me ? what is the druchschittstypen ?
i have to talk to the guy on the street who are like me .
she &apos;s supposed to tell me something about my brand .
how would your your brand be ?
hmmm , my brand ?
i don &apos;t know .
i really like really happy clothing .
woman 80er trifft meets skaterpunk , except for the waschtag .
well , what &apos;s the brand gerry ?
unique .
i think the genre , the style i have , &quot; dark glamour . &quot;
i like many black colors , lots of grautöne and stuff .
but usually i have a accessoire , like sonnenbrillen , or a jewelry , and so on .
woman , if dan &apos;s a brand , it would probably be a classic mercedes mercedes .
man : the brand i &apos;m , i would say , lässige fly .
the second one , part of the country , partly yogi , partly brooklyn-mädchen -- i don &apos;t know .
man three : i &apos;m the schmusetyp .
i &apos;m going to go across the entire country , worldwide .
so i think that &apos;s my brand .
this is my brand in my little , verzerrten industry .
four : my brand is fedex , because i was ausliefere .
man : brand marke alkoholsüchtiger .
is that ?
lawyer : i &apos;m a anwaltsmarke .
i &apos;m tom .
well , we can &apos;t all be the tom-marke , but i &apos;m often seeing the interface of dark glamour and lässiger fly .
and what &apos;s realized was that i needed a experts .
i needed somebody who could get into my head , someone who really help me understand what you call &quot; markenpersönlichkeit . &quot;
and so i found a company called the olson zaltman in pittsburg .
they have companies like nestle , febreze , hallmark , to rediscover these markenpersönlichkeit .
if you could do it for the people , they could also help me .
they have their pictures , yes ?
i have this . the first picture is a painting of my family .
just tell me a little bit like that with your thoughts and feelings about it .
these are the people who are doing my worldview .
tell me about this world .
md : this world ? i think the world is the world , in the world , in which you live in -- how people around one , the friends , the way you live your life , the way that you live and so on .
all of these things come and start from a place , and for me , and i start with my family in west virginia .
what &apos;s the next thing you want to talk about .
next . this was the most beautiful day of my life .
what correlation is to talk about the idea and emotions ?
it &apos;s like i like to be like .
i like things that are different .
i like things that are kind of neat , and i like that stuff .
tell me about why &quot; why &quot; -phase &quot; -- what do you choose ?
what &apos;s the machete ? &quot; what &apos;s currently currently ?
why is it important ? what is the red ?
tell me a little bit about this part .
a little bit more about them , that &apos;s not them .
what other people have made them together ?
... that &apos;s not a fear of being afraid , which is what you are ?
eeeeee ! no , thank you !
thank you very much for your patience .
yeah . now , fine .
yeah , i don &apos;t know what to be turned out .
there were lots of crazy things happening .
the first thing i saw was this idea that their markenpersönlichekti getrennte , but sich pages -- the morgan spurlock-marke is a achtsame / brand .
the supplement is very well .
and i think there &apos;s almost a contradiction .
and i think some companies are just going to focus on a strength , rather than both .
many companies tend to do -- and that &apos;s the human nature -- things that they &apos;re not sure , they &apos;re not sure they &apos;re afraid , and they &apos;re going to be able to say these , and they turn them into something positive , and that &apos;s a geschickter schachzug .
what other people act ?
the first is a clever , apple .
and you can see it here , target , wii , mini mini from mini and jetblue .
well , there are verspielte brands and achtsame brands , these things that come and go , but a verspielte , achtsame brand is a very strong thing .
a achtsame , verspielte brand , how is your brand ?
if somebody would ask you to describe your markenidentität , your markenpersönlichkeit , how would you like ?
you &apos;re a up-attribut ? are you something that &apos;s going to bring blood into wallungen ?
or are you more likely to a down-attribut ?
are you a little puppy , reservierter , conservative ?
up-attribute are things that are playful , frisch like the fresh prince , zeitgemäß , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , ausgefallen and lieblich , wendig , profan , profan , magisch and mystisch .
or are you rather like a down-attribut ?
are you mindful and mondän and mondän like 007 ?
are you , traditionally , pflegend , pflegend , mitfühlend , mitfühlend ?
they &apos;re reliable , stable , stable , familiär , definitely , heilig , bedacht , and the way the dalai lama or yoda ?
in the course of the movie , we had more than 500 companies that were up and down-firmen and the no &quot; no &quot; said , &quot; because they were not part of the project .
they wanted to do anything with this film , because they had no control , no control over the finished product .
but it &apos;s been fanden 17 markenpartner , who were willing to do this , and we wanted to do with someone who are willing to do with someone who are so eager to do so much , and we finally have to tell stories that we don &apos;t have to tell -- stories that would never support a werber otherwise .
they befähigten us to tell the story of the neuromarketing , as we tell the story in this video that you &apos;re using nowadays mris to make the lustzentren of the brain , both advertising and making films .
we went to sao paulo , where außenwerbung was forbidden .
in the entire city , no anzeigentafel , no posters , no flyer , no flyer , nothing .
and we were going to be in southern schulbezirke where companies are going into into verarmte schools , in america .
the incredible thing for me is that the projects that i got most feedback , or where i was the greatest success , which i interacted with things .
and that &apos;s what these brands did have , what did they do .
because they umgingen the mittelsmann , they umgingen the agencies , and they said that the medicines may not really have their interests in meaning .
i &apos;m going to negotiate with the performer with the performer .
i &apos;m going to work with him , and something completely different , something that people think about the way that our system are .
and how did you do it ? what it &apos;s going to happen ?
well , since the film was the film film film film , we can see that &apos;s going to look at this time .
according to the burrelles , the premiere was in january , and since then -- and that &apos;s not the whole thing -- there was 900 million copies of this film .
that &apos;s actually a zeitraum of two weeks ago .
this is just online -- no press , no tv .
the film was not yet .
there &apos;s no even even though it &apos;s not even online . no streaming .
it &apos;s not in other countries .
well , finally , the film has a very big deal .
and that &apos;s not bad for a project where almost every werbeagentur we talked to languages , their clients who are going to be with the fingers .
something i believe is that if you &apos;re going to take your chance to stop your chance , risk , is that in these risks are put in these risks .
i think if you &apos;re going to get people from it , you get closer to failure .
i think if you were to get your employees to avoid hazards , you &apos;re going to be able to get a profit for a profit .
i feel that we have to encourage people to encourage risks .
we need to encourage people , not afraid of the possibilities that you might be verängstigen .
finally , the problem should be the fear of the fear .
we should put the bear into the cage .
they &apos;re called the fear . they &apos;re doing the risk of risk .
one big full of full full full of the risk of the risk .
and finally , we should be heißen transparency .
nowadays , more than ever before , it makes us a little bit more likely .
and that said , &quot; with honesty and transparency , my entire gesamter , &quot; which was heißen by my guten , &quot; which was presented by my good friends , the $ $ $ for the namensrechte of the namensrechte .
huge data are being transformed for organizations around the world in large opportunities .
emc presents &quot; hot , &quot; hot &quot; buy transparency &quot; . &quot;
thank you very much .
now , morgan , in the name of transparency , this is what &apos;s going on with the $ 50,000 7100 ?
this is a great question .
i &apos;ve got a check to check a check , watching the oberorganisation of the ted-organisation , the sapling-stiftung -- a check in height of dollars to finance my ted-auftritt year .
my name is amit .
so 18 months ago , i did something else , and i was talking to the museen and art , and my favorite , my favorite , that &apos;s also , to me , and i was going to get a green light .
and it took 18 months .
a lot of spaßiger negotiations and stories , i can tell you , with 17 very interesting museums from nine countries .
but i &apos;m going to focus on the demo .
there &apos;s a lot of stories about why we &apos;ve done this .
i think my personal view is very simple with this slide and their access to their access .
i grew up in india .
i was going to be a great education -- i don &apos;t know -- but i had too many museums and this kind of artwork didn &apos;t have access to .
and then i went to visit this museums , i started learning a lot .
and while i was working for google , i tried to do this desire -- art -- art -- with technology .
we then expand a team , a great team , and we started with this .
i &apos;m going to start with the demo , and you &apos;ll tell you some interesting things that happened since the launch .
so you just go to googleartproject.com. googleartproject.com. too easily .
you can take in all these museums here .
there &apos;s the uffizi , the moma , the hermitage , the rijks , the van gogh .
i even get in one of my favorite , the metropolitan museum in new york .
you get two because of it in it -- very simple .
click , and wumms , you &apos;re in the museum .
it doesn &apos;t matter where they are -- bombay , mexico , it doesn &apos;t make any difference .
you go out and get yourself .
they want to be in the museum ?
open the map , and you jump it with a click .
in the front of them , they want to be the end of the inner-city .
just keep . much fun .
audience look like it .
thank you , but the best thing is .
so i &apos;m a front of my favorite lieblingsbilder , erntearbeiter von of pieter breugel in the middle .
i see this pluszeichen .
if the museum has given us that , you click it .
this is one of the pictures .
this is all the metadata .
those of you who are really interested in art , can you click here -- but i &apos;m going to go away .
this is one of the pictures we have transformed with the so-called gigapixel-technologie .
this image for example , for example , about 10 billion , i think .
and a lot of people ask me , &quot; what do you get for 10 billion ? &quot;
i &apos;ll show you now , &quot; i &apos;m going to show you .
you can get very easily and rauszoomen .
you see a little funny here .
i love this guy ; his expression is priceless .
but then they really want to go deep .
and so i started playing around , and i found that there &apos;s something there .
and i thought , &quot; wait , this sounds interesting . &quot;
i went close to close , and realized that this kids actually really reflect .
i &apos;ve been talking about a little bit , a little bit of a bekannten , and actually found that it &apos;s a game called squail , which is a gans at a gans .
apparently it was quite popular .
i don &apos;t know why they did , but i learned something about it .
really close to walk , you can go to the fractures .
just to give you to give you to give you to give you to give you to give you , i &apos;ll see you what you get .
here we were , and this is the painting .
the best thing is , but it &apos;s still a second .
let &apos;s take quick to moma , again , back in new york .
another lieblingsbild of mine , sternennacht .
in the previous example , it was about finding details , to find a detail , to find a detail , to find a detail , to find a detail , to find a detail , to find a detail , to find a detail , to find a detail
but what if you want to see the pinselstriche ?
and what only you want to see is like van gogh &quot; van gogh &quot;
you &apos;re going to go inside . you can really go into .
i &apos;m going to zoom in one of my favorite painting , and i really am really in the &apos; rissen .
this is sternennacht , probably never seen before .
now i &apos;m going to show you my favorite feature .
there are many other , but i &apos;m missing the time .
this is really cool part , it &apos;s called collections .
each of them , everybody -- the same -- the rich or poor , whether you have a great house -- doesn &apos;t matter .
you can go and can put your own museum , you can create your own museum -- from all these images , you can use your own collection .
simple , you go into -- and i &apos;ve created this , it &apos;s called the power of the zoom -- you can umherzoomen .
this is the gesandten , in the nationalgallerie .
you can get everything with some of you , and so a conversation begin to think about what you feel like that if you look at this animal .
i think , finally , for me , the main thing that all the wonderful things are here is not about google .
they &apos;re not going to be from my mind .
i should not say that .
they come from the artists .
and that was an experience for me .
i mean , i hope that we &apos;re going to be really interested in this digital medium of art , and they &apos;re going to represent online online .
and the biggest question that i asked to me is , &quot; did you make this for the experience of a museumsbesuchs ? &quot;
the answer is no .
it &apos;s supposed to be able to capture the experience .
it &apos;s about it . thank you .
thank you .
this is a representation of your brain . your brain can be avoided in two journals .
this is the left half that the logical side is , and then the rights half that is the intuitive side .
if we have a scale to measure the aptitute of each hemisphere , we could use your brain .
for example , this one is that anybody who &apos;s completely logical .
this is somebody who &apos;s completely intuitive .
now , where would you put your brain on this scale ?
some of us may have decided to one of these extremes , but i think that for most people in the audience , your brain is about something like this -- with a high aptitute that &apos;s at the same time in both two hemisphären .
it &apos;s not as if they &apos;re both of them or something .
you can get logical and intuitively .
and so i &apos;m looking at myself as one of the people , with most other experimental quantenphysikern , which is a good component to add the complex ideas together .
but at the same time we need a good intuition to actually try to do experiments .
how do we develop these intuition ? well , we love to play it with things .
so we go out and play and see how it responds to do it , and then we start to develop our intuition .
basically , they do the same .
so one of the intuitions that they &apos;ve developed about years , probably , is that a thing can be at the same time .
i mean , it can sound really funny to think that a thing at the same time , at two different locations , but they were not born with this idea , they &apos;ve designed it .
i remember a kid playing on a bodenschwelle .
he was a toddler , and not very well at it and he was constantly .
but i bet that it &apos;s going to play the play with the bodenschwelle , a very valuable lesson , which is the big things you just want to go back and keep them on a place .
and this is a great konzeptionelles model of the world , so long as long as you &apos;re not a teilchenphysiker .
it would be a very extreme model for a teilchenphysiker , because they don &apos;t play with bodenschwellen , but with these little strange particles .
and if you play with your particle , you &apos;re going to do all kinds of weird stuff -- how they fly directly through walls , or they can be at the same time at two different locations .
and so they all wrote this observations , and they called it the theory of quantum mechanics .
this was the state of the physics of the physics of a few years ago , and you needed to be quantum mechanics to describe the little bits of tiny particles .
but you didn &apos;t need them to describe the big alltäglichen objects around us .
this has not been gemocht my intuition , and maybe that &apos;s just because i don &apos;t often play with particles .
well , i &apos;m games to them , but not very often .
and i &apos;ve never seen them .
i mean , no one has ever seen any time .
but my logical side has not been comfortable .
because if all of these things are made out of particles and all these particles are going to follow the rules of quantum mechanics , then not just the rules of quantum mechanics ?
i don &apos;t see any reason why that should be .
so i would like to be a lot better with the whole thing , if we could somehow show that alltagsgegenstände is also going to follow the rules of quantum mechanics .
so i decided to do this in a few years ago .
i created one .
this is the first object that you can see that was superposition in the quantenmechanischen .
so what we &apos;re looking at here is a tiny computer chip .
and you can see this green dot there in the middle .
this is the piece of metal i &apos;m going to talk about .
this is a picture of the object .
here &apos;s a little bit , i &apos;m going to do something . we &apos;re looking right here .
and here &apos;s a really big deal of this little piece of metal .
so what we &apos;re looking at is a little bit of metal it is like a springboard and it &apos;s about the top above .
so i made this thing in similar ways that you make a computer chip .
i went to a virtual space with new siliziumscheiben , and rackerte for 100 hours to all the big devices .
for the last little bit of my own machine , i had to build this as a swimming pool , and get the thing .
this thing has has the ability to be the ability to be the ability to be the ability to be a little help to do it .
let me give you a analogy .
you know how to be unbehaglich in a crowded way ?
i mean , if i &apos;m alone in the elevator , i &apos;m going to get all kinds of weird stuff , but then i &apos;m going to get other people to do all these things , because i don &apos;t want to be doing it , or frankly , they &apos;re verschrecke .
so , quantum mechanics says , unbewegliche objects feel as well as it feels .
the mitfahrer for unbewegliche objects are not just people , but the light that seems to them , and the wind , the wind of the room .
and so we knew that if we wanted to see this piece of metal , we had to go out and we had to go out all the mitreisenden raus .
and we did that .
we have the light , it &apos;s got into a vacuum and saugten it out of the air , and it kühlten out to almost all the time , and it &apos;s been in the elevator , and the metal metal , was the metal metal and the metal , to behave like it .
so we measured his movement .
we found that it really can move .
instead of , instead of just quiet , it &apos;s vibrierte , and the way that it was like this -- like this is a ausdehnender and together zusammen .
and we gave him a little push , we could actually get it to the same time and not to hurt -- something that &apos;s just in the quantum mechanics .
so what i &apos;m just telling you is what &apos;s really awesome .
what is it to be a object for the same time and not to hurt ?
let &apos;s think about the atoms .
so the first case : all the trillionen of atoms that are just hanging out there , and at the same time , the same atoms and down the same atoms .
just to just say , just to say hello , you agree .
the rest of the time is delokalisiert .
that means that every atom of the same time is at two different places , which means that the entire piece of metal is to two different locations .
i think that &apos;s really cool .
really .
it was worth me for all of these year in the building space , because , you check that , the massstabsunterschied between a single atom , and this piece of metal is about something like the difference between the metal and you .
so if a single atom of the same time , at two different locations , this piece of metal , you can be two different locations , why not ?
i mean , this is just what my logical side says .
so , imagine you would be too much at the same time , how would you feel that ?
how would you think your consciousness is to do that your body is in the room ?
there &apos;s another aspect of history .
when we aufwärmten it , the light that we put on the lights and the box , we saw that the piece of metal was in a piece of metal .
and so i had to develop this new intuition that it looks like this as if all the objects are just quanten objects that are in a small room .
you hear a lot about talk about how quantum mechanics says everything is connected to everything .
well , this is not quite right .
there &apos;s more behind it , it &apos;s still deeper .
it &apos;s so that these connections , their ties with all the things that you &apos;re around is who they are they are , and that &apos;s the most tiefsinnige and strange of quantum mechanics .
thank you .
in 2007 , i decided we should think about economic development as we think about economic development .
it should be our goal that if families are thinking about where they live and work , you have to have the ability to have a chance to be able to be filled with any of these opportunities in between the air to a very different set of different cities that everybody are in the competition .
we &apos;re far away from this goal .
there are billions of people in developing countries , which is not one city to available to the fact that they would be welcome .
but the amazing thing about cities is that they are so much more worth than it to build them .
so we could just do the world with duzenden , maybe hundreds of new cities .
now this may sound like you , you might never have to have been thinking about new cities .
and they just keep the building construction of apartments against the cities .
imagine about half of the people who want to live in homes , they already have already , but half of them haven &apos;t yet .
they could try to extend the capacity of the existing of the existing .
but you know what they would be to do to you , in these homes and their environment are herrschen laws to avoid alternate and the gdp of gdp .
so it turns out that it &apos;s very hard to get all of these big .
but you could go to a completely new place , a completely new new way , the laws of the laws would be like that , and it would not be able to support it .
so i suggested that governments will create new surfaces that provide the place for a city and have a name : charter .
and later i found out that , about the same time , javier and octavio over the challenge of a reform .
they knew that every year , every year , about 75,000 , she walked into the united states to auszuwandern what they could do to ensure that these people can stay in their country and can do exactly the same thing in honduras .
at this point , javier said , &quot; what happens when we &apos;re going to go through a message of the american embassy , and if you want to go to the kanadischen of our country , and if you &apos;re going to work out of the kanadischen , and if you &apos;re going to work underneath the vereinigten , and then you can do on the area of these
in the summer of 2009 , it was done under a sample of a heftigen .
in the next elections elections , gewann lobo in a turnaround , which is the program that neuerungen and versprach .
he was challenged to be forderte octavio .
meanwhile , i &apos;m going to prepare myself in a talk on my own .
and by improvement , try and through the investigation of consumers , i tried to reduce this complicated concept of the charter city of the essential city .
the first thing is the importance of laws , laws who determine you don &apos;t have to be stören .
we need to be a sensitive new technology , but for the progress , it uses it and laws , and it &apos;s usually for the usually laws that were killing us .
in the fall of 2010 , a friend of guatemala was sent out to the link .
and again , it showed him .
the two was me to me .
and said , &quot; let &apos;s put us the head of our country . &quot;
so we ended up in december in december in december of a hotels in miami .
i tried to make sure how valuable cities are as much as you are as they are .
and i used this chart to show how valuable is in a place like new york , and remember that a field in some cases is going to be a surface in some cases , thousands of dollars worth of dollars .
but it was a pretty abstract discussion , at a point where there was a pause , and i said , &quot; paul , we might look at the tedtalk . &quot;
so the key thing is in very simple form that a charter city is a place that &apos;s the beginning of the laws of land that supports the laws of the laws that are going to be able to decide and to decide that the ability to decide either or not to live in these rules .
i was asked by the president of the car , the meant that we have to have this project that it &apos;s important , and that this is the way that we &apos;re going to bring our land .
i was asked to get to tegucigalpa and even on the fourth and fifth of january .
so i have another with a very fakten talk , which is a chart that has a chart that has tried to replicate that if you want to create a lot of value in a city , it needs a big city .
this is a painting of the city , and the sketch is the new airport that was built in denver .
and this airport has a area of 100 quadratkilometern .
so i tried to convince the honduraner of it , if you want to build a new city , you have to start with a field of at least 1,000 1,000 quadratkilometern .
that &apos;s more than 250 thousand tomorrow .
they have all got all the applaudiert .
the faces of the audience were very serious and carefully .
the head of the satellite came on the stage , and i said , &quot; professor romer , thank you for your talk , but we might be able to look at the tedtalk .
i have him on my laptop . &quot;
so i &apos;ve been visiting , and they have a tedtalk .
and i &apos;ve come to the punch that a new city gives new choices .
there were a way to live in a city that would be in honduras , rather than hundreds of miles away from the north .
and a new city includes new possibilities for leaders .
the leaders of the government in the government were dependent on the help of partnerländern , they could benefit from their partnerländern , which they could be able to support the laws of the law , and the applications would be able to be able to trust that everybody can trust that the charter is really going to be a really big .
and the insight of president lobo , that the implication of the durchsetzung that i thought was to be a way to get the foreign investors of the foreign investors and building this city for all of the parties in the honduras for all of the parties in the honduras and mistrust .
we &apos;re in a field .
this painting is from this place .
it &apos;s just a thousand square miles .
and shortly after that , at the 19th of january , they voted in a change for a change in the constitution for a change for the constitution that &apos;s entwicklungsgebiete for special entwicklungsgebiete .
in a country that has a combination of a combination of a heftige crisis , in the congress , who was a stimme for diese to a vote .
all parties , all the fraktionen of society , the unterstützten , they supported this .
to become part of the constitution , but it has to be twice by congress .
at the 17th time , it was launched to a second time with a voice .
immediately after that choice between the 21st and the 24 , a census of 30 hunduranern , a census of the two places of the world that were most of the world that are in the business of the städtebaus .
one place is south .
this is a picture of a big , new position that &apos;s built in südkorea großer , and the stadtzentrum bostons .
all you can see on this picture , within four years , after four years has given four years to get the permissions .
the other place that was very interested in the most important , singapore .
there were two cities in china and the third is in preparation .
so if you think about it , it &apos;s about this , it &apos;s where we are today .
they already have a baugrundstück ; you &apos;ve already been able to do this area for the second city .
it &apos;s already worked in a legal system that managern allows it , and it &apos;s going to work on a particular system .
a country has already offered its arms available to be available to the obersten , as a dish for the entgültige berufung system .
also städtedesigner and -bauer are very interested .
they actually bring funding with a finanzierung .
one thing you already know , has been geklärt , there &apos;s lots of mieter .
there are lots of betriebe that would like to be in america with a place with a freihandelszone , and there are many people who would like to live there .
there &apos;s been 700 million people , the ones that they want to live to a different place .
a million people left and migrate to the united states and migrate into the united states .
many of you are fathers who are forced to do their families to get to work in work , sometimes they &apos;re doomed mothers that make enough money to eat and clothing .
unfortunately , sometimes they &apos;re even kids who are trying to find their parents , they &apos;re not going to be in some cases , and not seen a decade .
so , what &apos;s a idea of thinking about this in a way to build a whole new city ?
even duzende of these cities , or hundreds of the world around the world ?
so what &apos;s been to insist that every family has a choice between several cities that are going to stand up and are new people ?
this is an idea that &apos;s worth spreading .
my friends made me asked me to say , thank you ted .
you know how many decisions make them on a typical day ?
you know how many decisions you make in a typical week ?
i &apos;ve been doing a survey with 2,000 americans and the average number of decisions that would have a typical american american amerikaner in a day , a typical americans in a day is a typical american amerikaner in a day , is a typical american amerikaner in a day , is a typical american amerikaner in a day , is a typical american amerikaner in a day of a
and also , the trial was done a study with ceos in which she was looking for the ceos .
and these scientists have just been the different issues that these ceo are engaged with these ceo and how much time they make decisions that are making the ones that relate to the issues .
and they found that a durchschnittlicher ceo in the week with 139 tasks .
every of these topics , of course , many of them are inherently .
50 percent of their decisions were within nine minutes or less .
just for about 12 percent of your decisions , they spend an hour or more of their time .
think of your own decisions .
you know how many decisions you &apos;re going to meet in the nine minutes ?
how good , think they &apos;re making decisions ?
today , i want to talk about one of the greatest entscheidungsprobleme of our modern time , which is entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem .
i want to talk about the problem and talk about some possible solutions .
now , if i talk about this problem , i &apos;ll ask you some questions and i want to know your answers .
if i ask you a question , you get your hand , because i &apos;m blind , just the hand , if you want to burn some calories .
i think , please , i ask you , if i ask you a question , and your answer is , my first question is , my first question is , are you ready to hear something about the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem ?
thank you .
when i was a abschlussstudent at stanford university , i went to this very very , very uncomfortable , at least he was really exclusive .
it was a shop , the draeger .
this business , it was almost like a vergnügungspark .
they had 250 different kinds of mustard and neanderthal and over 500,000 different kinds of fruit and vegetables and vegetables and more than two dozen different ways of water -- and that was actually a time when we actually have a time .
i loved to this business , but i was asked to be a moment , well , how do you get that you never kaufst anything ?
here &apos;s the olive gear .
they had over 75 different varieties of these different varieties , including those who were embedded in the boxes that came from a thousand years of old olivenbäumen .
so i decided to visit the filialleiter , and i asked the ladder , &quot; works that they really offer all of these possibilities ? &quot;
and he showed up on the busladungen of tourists that every day and usually had their cameras .
we decided to do an experiment , and we chose marmelade for our experiment .
here &apos;s your marmeladen gear .
they had 348 different types of marmelade .
we have a little verkostungsecke right at the entrance of the geschäfts .
we &apos;ve got six different strains of marmelade , or 24 different geschmacksrichtungen , and we &apos;ve looked at two things : first , i would have to stay more people and marmelade ?
it &apos;s more people who are when it were 24 percent , when it was six percent , about 40 percent .
and then we saw ourselves in what people are doing more marmelade .
now we saw the most fundamental effect .
and by people who were standing when they were 24 , just three percent of actually a glass of marmelade .
from the people who are standing when they were six , now , we saw 30 percent of them actually bought a glass of a glass of marmelade .
now , if you get it , bought the people , they &apos;re just going to be six times a glass of marmelade , who they had six to choice than they had 24 to choice .
now , to choose no glass program , it &apos;s probably good for us -- at least it &apos;s good for our own -- but it turns out that the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem is affecting us in very konsequenzreichen decisions .
we don &apos;t decide to decide , even if it &apos;s going to be a whole thing to our own .
so the theme of the day : no save .
i &apos;m going to describe you a study that i was with gur huberman , emir kamenica , wei jang , which we &apos;re doing the decisions for retirement for retirement , almost a million americans in the entire room , in the entire united states .
and what we looked at was whether the number of the fondsangebote that was a rentensparplan , the 401 plan , the probability of civic plan , whether it &apos;s going to be saved for tomorrow .
and we found that there was a correlation .
so in these plans , we had about 657 plans that people have been doing something between two to a different fund .
and what we found was that the more fund , that was indeed , in fact , the participation was going to be .
now , if you look at the extremes , the plans that are missing , a teilnahmerate in the 70s , still not as high as we want .
in the plans , the nearly almost 5,000 , the teilnahmerate is going to be about the sechzigsten .
now , it turns out even if you &apos;re going to participate if more choices to choice , even it has negative consequences .
so the people who decided to be involved in more , more , more of them , more and more of them to be more likely to choose the aktien and fonds .
the more of them , they have available , the more they put their money into the whole money .
none of these extreme decisions , to the decisions that somebody else would recommend , if you care about their future well-being .
now , in the last 10 years , we have three degrees negative consequences of unintended consequences , which is saving more and more choices .
they &apos;re going to push the decision -- they &apos;re going to be on even if it &apos;s going to be a eigenes .
they make more decisions -- schlechtere and most powerful decisions .
they decide to be more likely to provide yourself less happy , even if you make it better .
the main reason that it &apos;s been that we might enjoy this enormous shelves of mayonaise , mustard , essig and marmelade , but we can &apos;t use the cracks and abgrenzungen and then actually choose something from the fantastic repertoire .
so what i want to suggest today is four simple techniques -- techniques that we have tested in different types and different forschungsorten of forschungsorten -- they just can use them in their business .
first : the first thing .
they &apos;ve heard earlier this before , but it was never true than today , less more than today .
people are always worried when i say , &quot; push . &quot;
they always worry that they lose weight .
but in fact , we see it more and more , more and more , that if you &apos;re willing to go into a distance , and the unwichtigen gleichartigen are going to be going to be , and then there &apos;s a major increase of sales , it &apos;s going to be the cost of the &amp; , and there &apos;s a verbesserung of the entscheidungswahrnehmung .
as a proctor and gamble , the different head , shoulders species of 26 reduzierte , they had a spike of gdp in 10 percent .
when the golden cat corporation corporation to 10 , katzenstreus , they were sold to 10 , they were able to cut the revenues to 87 percent of the verkaufszahlen , a result of the sales and reducing the energy efficiency .
you know , the average supermakrt today , they &apos;re going to give you some products .
a typical wal-mart would give you a little bit more like this today .
but the most neuntgrößte supermarket , the most independent supermarket in the world today is aldi , and they &apos;re offering them only affordable products -- a kind of tomato sauce in cans .
now , in the world of the sparens , i think one of the best examples that we &apos;ve been going to come to the marketplace , and the best auswahlmöglichkeiten , was something that &apos;s the best managt , which is a program that &apos;s very strong mitgestaltet , it &apos;s a program that &apos;s going to be at harvard .
every single harvard employees is automatically put automatically on a lebenszeitfond .
the ones that really want to make a choice , 20 fund , not 300 or more .
you know , as people say often , &quot; i don &apos;t know how i should be doing it .
it &apos;s all important possibilities . &quot;
and the first thing i &apos;m the more optimistic is , &quot; tell me how the possibilities of each other .
and if your employees don &apos;t get to auseinanderhalten , you can &apos;t even get your customers . &quot;
well before we started now , i &apos;ve got a conversation with gary .
and the director said that he would be willing to be willing to all the people in this audience to the most beautiful road .
here &apos;s a description of the road .
and i &apos;d like to read you .
and now i &apos;ll give you a few seconds to read and ask them to clapping if you &apos;re willing to embrace the gary of the offer .
okay . each one is willing to embrace the angebot .
are all of that ?
okay , let me show you something more about it .
they knew it was a trick , or ?
now , who &apos;s ready for this journey .
i think i &apos;ve probably heard more hands .
good .
the fact that they &apos;re looking at the front of the first time , when the second time , but i would make it dare to make sure that they were going to be a second time .
because the pictures was put it for them .
and what makes me the second technology that helps you with the problem with the problem of the entscheidungsüberlastung , it &apos;s the konkretisierung .
it &apos;s about that people to understand the difference between ways to understand what consequences are to be able to have the consequences with the individual choices and that they have to be really supported .
why are people to be average 15 to 30 percent more , if you use a ec-karte or a credit card than a kreditkarte , than a bargeld ?
because it doesn &apos;t mean we &apos;re going to be able to get .
and it turns out that if you make it a little bit of a specific tool , so that it &apos;s a very good tool to save people to save more .
so we &apos;ve done with shlomo benartzi and alessandro previtero , we have a study with ing -- which was a study with ing -- which was the alle for the ing -- and these people were all in a gathering in a gathering where they were having their participation for their participation .
and during this session , we have this convention exactly as much as she was always , we just added a little bit .
the little thing that we &apos;ve been hinzu , was that we were asked to think about the people who would have been going to be doing all positive things that would happen if they were saving money .
and in the process we did this simple thing , there was a spike of the number of the number of people who were willing to save the willing to save , or a five-meter percent to the amount of people who were willing to pay for the sparkonto .
the third technology : kategorisierung .
we can better deal with more categories than more choices .
here &apos;s one of the study that we &apos;ve done in a zeitschriftengang .
it turns out that it &apos;s in the wegmans supermärkten and down down in the northeast , the number of different types of different ways of magazines to 664 .
but you know what ?
so if i show you 600 magazines , and you &apos;re going to show you a little bit of the kategorien , and i &apos;m going to show you 400 times , and they have given them to the 20 categories , and you have a better auswahlerfahrung , and you have given them to you , when i gave you the 400 of time , if i gave you
because the categories tells me how i can keep them apart .
here &apos;s two different schmuckauslagen .
one is called &quot; jazz &quot; and the other name . &quot;
if you think that the left is swing , and the ad is jazz , then you clap in the hands .
okay , there &apos;s a few .
if you think that the thing on the left is jazz , and the thing on the right is , then you clap .
okay , some more .
well , it turns out that they &apos;re right .
the thing on the left is jazz and the on the right is swing , but you know what ?
this is a very highly unnützes unnützes .
the categories have to say something that tells something that is not the selection .
and this problem , you often see that if you look at the long time all of these .
who would you actually want to be doing this ?
my fourth technology : exxon for complexity .
it turns out that we can actually deal with more information than we think we &apos;re going to use them .
we have to increase the complexity .
i &apos;ll show you an example of what i mean .
let &apos;s take a very , very complicated decision : the purchase of a car .
here &apos;s a german autohersteller that gives you the opportunity to give you a chance to konfigurieren their car .
you need to make 62 decisions about their car .
now , this decisions in the number of choices that provide a choice .
autofarben , außenfarbe of the car -- i have 56 ways .
motors , gears -- four ways .
what i do now is , i make sure the order of decisions .
half of the customers are going to be about the many ways to get 56 autofarben , to the geringen , four .
the other half of customers are about the geringen possibilities , four ways to 56 , lots of opportunities .
what do i do ?
how are they are .
if you &apos;re going to use the standardauswahl in the decision , you can use that they &apos;re overwhelmed , the heisste , i take it .
what they find is that the people who are going to go from the many of the geringen to the geringen and over again .
we &apos;re losing them .
just go from the little choice to the many , they &apos;re staying to stay .
it &apos;s the same information . it &apos;s the same amount of possibilities .
the only thing i &apos;ve done is the order of the order of the order of the order of the order of this information that &apos;s going to be in this information .
if i start with the simple , i &apos;m learning how i &apos;m auswähle .
even though the gears is select , nothing about my preferences in the west says , i still have to be on the board .
it also collected me into excitement over the big product that i &apos;m going to zusammenstelle , and so i &apos;m willing to get to be interested in caring with interest .
let me summarize .
i &apos;ve told you about four techniques that are going to take the problem of the entscheidungsüberlastung -- -- -- they &apos;re going to take the überflüssigen alternatives out of the entscheidungsüberlastung , konkretisieren -- -- we can make it better with more categories , fewer ways .
each of these techniques that i think you &apos;re going to be able to help you to help them to help the possibilities -- well , for them , they can use them for themselves , good for the people they &apos;re known .
because i think the key to the best choice is that you &apos;re going to be a auswahl .
and the more we are wählerisch , the better we will be able to practice the art of the decision .
thank you .
hi . i &apos;m kevin allocca , trends-manager bei , and i &apos;m looking at me .
that &apos;s true .
today , we want to talk about how videos are going to be , and then , why is that it &apos;s important .
we all want to be more than a little bit more , sänger , comedians -- when i was a young , seemed to be so difficult .
but , webvideos , we have enabled that we all have been insanely or all of our creative activities , in part of the culture of our world .
each one of you could be about the internet to the internet to the next to the next time .
but in youtube , more than 48 hours a minute .
again , a tiny percentage ever ever ever since , and then thousands and thousands of times , and so that &apos;s what &apos;s going to be the cultural moment .
so how does that work ?
three things : tastemaker , teilnahmecommunities and unexpected .
well , we want to do .
oh my god . oh my god .
oh my god !
woah !
ohhhhh , wowwww !
last year , sendete vasquez , this video that he was in his house in his house in his house .
and in 2010 , it was a 23 million times .
this chart shows what it looked like , when the video was popular for the first time .
actually , it didn &apos;t want to make a viral video .
he just wanted to share a rainbow .
because you get this to do that , if you &apos;re called yosemite mountain .
he had a lot of naturvideos uploaded .
and this video was actually sent in january of january .
what &apos;s happened here ?
there was jimmy kimmel .
jimmy kimmel sendete sendete the tweet that was so popular in the last day and the last day .
because tastemaker wie , like jimmy kimmel , new and interesting things , and show you a big audience .
it &apos;s it , friday . gotta get on on to , weekend s , friday . gettin &apos; to , friday . gettin &apos; : gettin &apos; , and her didn &apos;t thought we would lead this conversation without talking about this video without talking about this video .
rebecca blacks &quot; friday &quot; is one of the most controversial of the year .
it was looked at this year , almost 200 million times .
so the chart looked out .
just like &quot; the &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; double &quot; seems to be made of nowhere .
what &apos;s happened about this day ?
well , it was friday , that &apos;s true .
if you want to know , these other peaks are also freitage .
but what about this day , this particular friday ?
well , tosh.0 gabelte , it &apos;s on a lot of blogs , and then started writing about it .
michael j. nelson from the science science was a first person who was making a joke .
important is that one of the individual or a group of tastemakers a point is going to be a very , very publikum audience , and that &apos;s the process to use the process .
then these community came out of people who shared these big insiderwitz , and started talking about it and to talk to it .
now , there &apos;s 10,000 parodien of &quot; friday &quot; in youtube .
already in the first seven days , there was a spoof for every single driver .
unlike the most einseitigen conversation of the 20th century , the average of the community is our way to be part of this phenomenon -- either by we can distribute it or something new .
&quot; nyan cat &quot; is animation and music in endlosschleife .
that &apos;s just easy .
this year , it was almost 50 million times .
and if you think that for crazy , you know , you know , that there &apos;s a dreistundenversion that &apos;s been a dreistundenversion of the four million times .
even cats look at this video .
cats look at the cats that look at this video .
important is creativity that are in the internetkultur of the techies and geeks .
there were plenty .
somebody made a very early version of this .
and then it was international .
a whole remix-gemeinde of the ground that was from the ground that made it from a dummen joke to something we can all relate to .
today we &apos;re not going to just find just a genuss of something we do .
who could have done this ?
who would have &quot; double rainbow or rebecca black or &quot; nyan cat . &quot;
what drehbücher could be able to write your write where something that &apos;s going on ?
in a world where each minute is uploaded to video , every minute , it can only be really unique and unexpected hervorstechen like the beginning of video .
i &apos;m going to admit , i was not interested in a great deal , i said , &quot; i &apos;m going to look at this great video , about a guy who was in new york to the bicycles for bicycles .
i got a ticket because i &apos;m not on the radweg dangers , but often they don &apos;t have a mess on the radweg .
it was completely surprising and humorous , casey niestats became witzige and his argument for five million times .
this approach applies to everything we do creatively .
and that &apos;s all of us to tell us a big question ...
what does that mean ?
ohhhh .
what does that mean ?
tastemaker , creative teilnehmergemeinden , completely unexpected , the properties of a new kind of media and culture , to the audience , and the audience has been shaped .
and as i said , one of the largest most largest stars -- justin bieber -- did his beginning to youtube .
no one has to give your ideas to light .
and today we &apos;re also feeling as owners as a owners of our culture .
and these are not the properties of old media and they &apos;re also not going to make the media from the media , but they &apos;re going to determine the conversation of the future .
thank you .
how can i talk about three generations about three generations , and how the amazing strength of this connectedness is , in a little bit of the chinesischen , and i had a connectedness mädchens , and i &apos;ve been verschwand in a little vierjährigen , and i &apos;ve been verschwand in a little bit of the chinesischen of the chinesischen , and i &apos;ve never been rebuilt , and
the story is not over .
she &apos;s a puzzle that &apos;s going to be even more .
i want to tell you about some of the most puzzlestückchen .
imagine the first piece , a man who &apos;s going to be a man .
he &apos;s a poet , a writer , a man whose whole life of unity of unity and freedom of his home was held .
hold it into saigon der in saigon front of the time , as he has to recognize that his life was a single waste .
the words , so long his friends , spotteten his friends .
he moved to the silence back .
he died , broken through history .
he &apos;s my grandfather .
i never met him .
but our lives are so much more than our memories .
my grandmother never had never forget my life .
i had to worry that it wasn &apos;t free , and it was my job to learn that the story was trying to zerdrücken us , we &apos;re trying to zerdrücken us .
the next puzzleteil shows how a boat in the early morgenrot leise in the frühen .
my mom may be 18 , 18 , when her father died -- already in a arrangierten marriage , with two little girls .
for she had a job to ask her to her , the escape of your family and a new life in australia .
it was completely exempt that she could fail .
after a vierjährigen , filmreifen saga glitt , a boat still on the lake , as a fischerboot .
all adult adults were aware of the risk .
the biggest fear was before , and he was in , rape and death .
now , most of the adults in the boat , my mom had a little giftflasche .
one of my sister would have only my sister and i , and then she was going to drink my grandmother .
my first memories are from this boat -- the most of the motors of the motor , the clapping of a wave on the page , the vastness and white horizon .
i remember not remember the pirates that many times came , but moving from the todesmut of men in our boat , or on the ausfall of the motor , the six hours of the motor .
but i remember the lights of the ölplattform coast of the malaysischen , and on the young man who woke up and died , the end of the journey was a lot of the journey , and at the taste of the first apfels that was one of the men in the platform .
no apple ever has ever been again .
after three months in a refugee camp , we landed in melbourne .
and the next puzzlestück is about four women in three generations that are building a new life .
we were going to break down into footscray , one of the arbeiterklasse bewohnten vorort , whose population is made out of immigrantenschichten .
unlike the alteingesessenen mittelklassevororten , whose existence was completely unknown , there was no anspruchsdenken .
the smells from the ladentüren came from the rest of the world .
and the fetzen gebrochenen paid between people were identified , which had a thing in common , they were beginning to redesign .
my mom worked on farms , then in a turtle , six days , six days , twice .
it was kind of going to find the time , and they &apos;re going to be anzueignen .
we were poor .
each dollars was developed and in another training education , and the math , in the english , no matter what we had to do with it , and they were usually the new things that came out of the day .
two paar for school , every one to get the rest of the other .
a schuluniform to the knöcheln , because they had to go to six years .
and there was the rare seltenen of the schlitzauge , &quot; schlitzauge &quot; and there , &quot; asiaten , go home . &quot;
after home ?
something versteifte in me .
there was a meeting of reconciliation and a quiet voice , &quot; i &apos;ll go out of the way . &quot;
my mom , my sister and i slept in the same bed .
my mom was exhausted every night , but we were told each other from our day , and then listening to the movements of our grandmother in the house .
my mom suffered from the boat from the boat .
and it was my job , every night , to stay awake , until their alpträume came to her , so i could put them together .
they opened a computergeschäft , then a kosmetikerausbildung , and then turned a business .
and the women came with their stories about men who don &apos;t ertrugen the change , angry and unflexibel , and sorgenerfüllte kids , and then sorgenerfüllte , in two worlds .
darlehen and sponsoren became .
possession was built .
i lived in parallelwelten .
one of the classic asian asian student , the unerbittliche of the unerbittliche of himself .
in the other hand , i was living in the unsichere of violence , the tragic scars of violence , and the isolierung .
but so many of the years .
and because of this help i became in my last year , as a boy australierin of the year .
and i was brought by a puzzlestück to the next level , and the edges didn &apos;t get together .
tan le , anonymous bewohnerin of footscray , was not le , and social activist that was invited to be the lectures of places that they never heard , and in habitats , they could never imagine .
i was not familiar with the etikette .
i didn &apos;t know how to use it .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about wine .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about anything .
i wanted to routine into routine and the comfort of life -- a grandmother , a mother and two daughters , who was going to be a mother and two daughters , as they were told by their day , and they were told by each other , and einschliefen , we still are three and einschliefen , we still still have three times .
i told my mom , i wouldn &apos;t do this .
she remembered me that i was now so old as she was the boat .
no , no way , no way .
&quot; do it just &quot; &quot; do &quot; , &quot; she said , &quot; and not what you &apos;re not . &quot;
so i talked about jugendarbeitslosigkeit and training , and the neglect of the marginalisierten and entrechteten .
and the more i talked to the more , i should tell the more i should tell .
i met people in all lebenslagen , so many of you were doing what they loved , and they were living in the limits of the possible .
and although i had my degree , i realized that i couldn &apos;t get me with a career in an investment .
it had to be another one more specific .
and i realized that it &apos;s okay for the same time that it &apos;s okay to be a maverick , a neuankömmling , new neu , new neu , new neu , but not just what you have to be grateful , maybe what you have to be grateful .
because dazuzugehören can lead to collapse for the collapse of the horizons , so easily , that you are akzeptiert the assumptions of the environment .
i &apos;m enough enough to know enough of my bequemlichkeitsbereich to know that , yeah , the world is auseinanderbricht , but not as you do it .
opportunity that didn &apos;t have been allowed to be inspired .
there was a energy , a unerbittlichen optimism , a strange mixtur of humility and the wagnisses .
so i decided to be my gut .
i collected a little team of people to me , &quot; not &quot; a unwiderstehliche challenge . &quot;
we had no one year .
at the end of a tags , i &apos;m going to add a huge ripple of soup that we shared .
we worked in the night .
most of our ideas were crazy , but it was a few brilliant , and we managed to the breakthrough .
i met the decision to pull into the united states , to pull the united states .
after just a trip .
my gut again .
three months later , i was moved and was going to go .
before i abschließe the talk , i want to tell you about my grandmother .
she grew up to a time , in the konfuzianismus , the social norm and the local talent is the most important person .
life had been changing since centuries .
her father died soon after her birth .
her mother moved on her alone .
with 17 , they became the second woman of a man whose mother was going .
without your own man , she was worried about a sensation , by putting it out of trial and anklägerin in her own case , and a greater extent when she won .
&quot; don &apos;t &quot; feel &quot; erwies . &quot;
i &apos;m just going to duschte into a hotel in sydney , when she died , 1,000 kilometers away in melbourne .
i looked through the duschtrennwand and she saw it on the other side .
i knew she was coming to be able to be .
my mom called me a few minutes after that .
a few days later , we went into a buddhist temple in footscray and sat around her interior .
we told her stories and versicherten her , we were still in her .
and midnight came to the monk and said he was going to end the sarg .
my mom asked us to take your hand .
they asked the monk : &quot; why is your hand so warm and the rest of her is so cold ? &quot;
&quot; because they were going to hold it for tomorrow , &quot; he said .
&quot; you don &apos;t have them . &quot;
if there &apos;s a band , it &apos;s been through women .
you see , who we were and how life has been shaped , we can see that the men would be able to come in our lives , who were going to come into the quere .
the defeat would be too easy .
now i would like to have my own children , and i think i think the boat .
who would ever ever have one ?
yeah , i &apos;ve been afraid of privilege , front before ago , front of berechtigungsanspruch .
can you give you a bug in your life , the brave of every ripple , the unbeirrte , the unbeirrte , the unbeirrte , the big bang that &apos;s not a surprising thing ?
i don &apos;t know .
but if i could give this , and you might be sure , i would do it .
also , the tans mother &apos;s mutter today in the fourth direction or five .
i &apos;m here to share my photography with you .
is it really photography ?
because this is a picture that you can &apos;t absorb with your camera .
but i was interested in photography when i received my first digital digital year .
i &apos;m using it with my former predilection for drawing , but it was a little bit different because the camera was the process in planning .
and if you look at a painting with a camera , the process , if you squeeze on the trigger .
so for me , it &apos;s been more likely to go to the right place to be right at the right time .
i believed , everybody could do that .
so i wanted to create something else , something that starts when the trigger is going to be .
pictures like this : a construction along a construction road .
but it has a unexpected twist .
and behaltet still , a realistic level .
or photographs like these -- dark and farbenfroh , but all with the shared goal , a realistic level .
when i say reality , i mean , i mean .
because of course , it &apos;s not something that you really can capture , but i would like to look like this , as if you could have this picture .
photographs , where you need to think a brief moment to figure out the trick .
so it &apos;s about to capture a idea of a very idea than a moment .
but what &apos;s the trick that &apos;s going to be realistic ?
is it about the details or the colors ?
is it &apos;s about light ?
what does the illusion ?
sometimes the perspective is the illusion .
but ultimately , it &apos;s about how we interpret the world , and how they can be made in a two-dimensional area .
it &apos;s not about what realistic is , but what we think about what we think .
so i think the basics are very simple .
i see them as a puzzle of reality , where you can take different pieces and make a zusammensetzen to create an alternative reality .
and let me show you a simple example .
we &apos;ve got three of the perfect vorstellbare of objects , which we all can identify in a three-dimensional world .
but in a particular way , you can create something that you can still see , that &apos;s still what it could be .
but at the same time , we know that that &apos;s not possible .
so we &apos;re doing our brains because our brain simply don &apos;t just want to make sense .
and i see the same process in the walls of photographs .
it really is just about making different realities .
so the things that look like a picture , i think it &apos;s the things that we &apos;re not thinking about , the things around us in our everyday lives .
but if we combine photographs , it &apos;s really important to think about it , because otherwise they just look like this .
so i would say that there &apos;s three simple rules to obey a realistisches outcome .
you can see , that &apos;s not three senses pictures .
but then they can put something special like this .
so the first rule is that the human fotos have taken the same perspective .
secondly , the other thing is the same fotos .
and these two pictures are going to attach these two , and the same altitude , and the same beleuchtungsart .
third , it &apos;s about to do it impossible to tell where the individual images and end by making them together .
makes it impossible to say how the photo was actually composed .
so by the other color , contrast and contrast to the periphery of the individual images , fotografische colors , entsättigte colors , entsättigte colors , entsättigte colors , and let &apos;s say , &quot; störungen , we verwischen the limitations between different pictures and then , as a single photo , although a picture of the levels can contain hundreds of levels .
here &apos;s another example .
you may think that &apos;s only a landscape , and the bottom is being manipulated .
this is actually completely composed , from photographs of different locations .
i personally personally , it &apos;s easier to be easier to create a place when a place to find a place because you don &apos;t have to get a compromise with the ideas in his head .
but it requires a lot of planning .
and when i had this idea in winter , i knew i needed to have several months to plan them to find the different places for the pieces of the puzzle .
for example , the fish had taken on a anglerausflug .
the shore was from one another place .
the unterwasser-teil comes from a quarry .
and i &apos;ve even got the house on the island of red , to be schwedischer .
to get a realistisches outcome , so it &apos;s been looking for me to look at it .
i always start with a sketch , one of a idea .
and then it &apos;s about the combination of different pictures .
and here &apos;s every piece of very good .
and then you can make good shots , the outcome can be pretty beautiful , and also quite realistic .
so it &apos;s all tools that are tools , and the only thing that we know is our imagination .
thank you .
i would love to talk to you about this , why so many electronic gesundheits-projekte fehlschlagen .
and i think the most important thing that we stopped with , we stopped talking about our patients .
and one of the things that we introduced on the radboud-universität , was a haupt-zuhörer .
it &apos;s not particularly scientifically scientifically -- she &apos;s got a cup of coffee or tea , and ask the patients , families , relatives , &quot; how do you go ?
how can we help you ? &quot;
and we think we want to think that this is one of the main reasons , why all of the electronic gesundheits-projekte fehlschlagen , because we stopped listening .
this is my wlan-waage . a very simple thing .
she has a button , on / .
and every morning i get to it .
and yeah , i have a job , as you might see .
i &apos;ve got my job at 95 pounds .
it works just , every time i can put the libra , you can use my data .
and there &apos;s also from my allgemeinarzt abgerufen , so that he can see where my gewichtsproblem can see where my body is , and not only in the moment where i need to support or so , but with a look at the past .
but there &apos;s something .
maybe you &apos;ve known that , i &apos;ve got over 4,000 follower on twitter .
so every morning i &apos;m going to talk about my wlan-waage and people talk about me before i &apos;m sitting in the car , &quot; for lunch , it &apos;s just a little lettuce today . &quot;
but this is the netteste thing that can happen because this is the gruppenzwang , gruppenzwang , to help patients , because that could be used to help obesity , or it could be a patient &apos;s smoking .
but it could be used to get people from their chairs , and they get them to play any kind of game to control their health better .
and the next time , the next week is to get this on the market .
it &apos;s going to give this little blutdruck-messgerät that you &apos;re on a iphone or something like that .
and it will allow people to measure the people of home to their blood , and to share it for a doctor and to share with others , for a little more than 100 dollars .
at this point , the patient come to the game , they cannot be able to take control of the control , but can also help us digitize health care , but also helps us to help us digitize health care , and the kostenexplosion of the health , and so on .
they make ways that are easy to use and start with this one of the patients in the team .
and that can be able to do it through such methods , but through with a crowdsourcing .
and one of the things that we did , i want to share with you with you through a short video .
we all have navigationssysteme in our cars .
maybe even in our mobile phones .
we know exactly where all these atms are around around .
we know one thing , where all of petrol are .
and yeah , we can find fastfood-ketten .
but where the next aed to help this patient ?
we have herumgefragt , and no one knew it .
no one knew where the next slide was going to be right now .
so what did we do ? we did a hurricane in the netherlands .
we have a website and asked a menschenmasse , &quot; if you see a aed , please share where he is , &quot; because sometimes it &apos;s on , &quot; because sometimes it &apos;s closed during the geschäftszeiten , of course .
and over 10,000 years of aeds were going to be done in the netherlands .
the next step was to find the apps that we find .
and we have a ipad-app .
we &apos;ve developed a app for solar system , augmented reality , to find this aeds .
and if you &apos;re in a city like maastricht and somebody else , you can use your iphone , and within the next weeks , you can find your neighbor to find the next aed , the next thing to save lives .
and today , we don &apos;t want to just like to be just as aed4u as the product is called , but as a aed4us .
and we want to bring this to a global level .
and we ask our colleagues around the world , from other universities , to help us to help us to behave like knotenpunkte , to make these aeds around the world .
and if you &apos;re in vacation and somebody &apos;s inability to be able to be your own or someone else , you can find a aed .
the other thing we want to ask is that companies are going to help us all the world in the world .
this could be kurierdienste , or for instance , for example , just to make sure that the gemeldete aed is still in its place .
please help us and try and try and do the health , not just to improve something better , but to do in your hand .
thank you .
today i &apos;m going to tell you about unexpected discoveries .
i work in the solartechnologie-branche .
and my little startup wants to make us to make the company by making it ...
... it &apos;s the kind of crowdsourcing .
here &apos;s a short video about what we do .
oh . a moment .
it might be , it &apos;s probably until it &apos;s been completed .
now -- we can just just -- and we can just look at this -- i &apos;m going to just look at the video that video ...
no . no .
that &apos;s not ...
okay . okay .
solartechnologie is ...
oh , my time is already over time ?
okay . thank you .
so a few years ago , i launched a program to get the stars in technology and design to work and work in a environment that are pretty much everything that they hate , we have them to work in the government .
the program is &quot; code for america , &quot; and it &apos;s a bit like the friedenscorps for breast cancer .
we choose a few years , and we &apos;re going to work with stadtverwaltungen .
instead of sending them in the third world , we send them into rathäuser .
and there they were doing great apps , working with urban collaborators .
but what they really do is to show what is possible with technology .
so they make al .
al is a hydrant in the city of boston .
this looks like it looks like , but what he really looks like , but what he really looks like , someone who &apos;s really cute , because he knows it , because he knows , he &apos;s not very good at the brandbekämpfung when he &apos;s von from a meter schnee .
how did he get to look at this particular kind of help ?
we had a team of fellows in boston in boston to the code for america . &quot;
they were there in february , and it has last februar , much more nuanced .
and they found that the city never had this fire freely .
but a great fellow , a man named erik michaels-ober , was a little bit different , and that was that the residents that the residents were freely frei , right ?
so he did what everybody was doing good entwickler , he was writing a app .
it &apos;s a nice little app where you can adopt an fire .
you get to ihn it freely , if it &apos;s fine .
if you do that , you can give him a name , and he called the first al al .
if you don &apos;t do that , you can get somebody else .
so there &apos;s a nice little marks .
this is a very humble little app .
it &apos;s probably the smallest of the 21 of the 21 of the 21 that was written in last year .
but she does something that doesn &apos;t do anything else .
it &apos;s going to be secure .
there &apos;s this guy in the i.t. abteilung of the city that has seen that he could use these app , not for snow , but to adopt the citizens of the citizen .
it &apos;s very important that these tsunami-sirenen work , but people steal the batteries .
so he got the citizen of the citizen .
and then , then , decided to use the app to get the citizen to clean the citizen .
and chicago has just launched it , so that people are freischaufeln , if it &apos;s going .
we now know nine cities that plan to use these app .
and she has a great deal , organic , of course .
if you know something about regierungstechnologie , you know that it &apos;s not that way .
the beschaffung of software , there &apos;s a few years .
we had a team that last year was working in boston for three people for three people .
it was a way to find a method with the parents that the right public schools are for their children .
we told us that if it would go over the normal channels , it would have taken over two years , and it would have been over two million dollars .
and that &apos;s not anything .
there &apos;s a project in california that has the taxpayer charges two billion dollars , and it doesn &apos;t work .
and there are projects like this on any level of government .
so a app that &apos;s written in a few days , and then it &apos;s about selbt , is a kind of shot on the page on the institution .
it shows how the government could work better -- not like a private company , how many people think that they should think .
and not even like a technik-unternehmen , but rather like the internet itself .
and that means free , that means open and productive .
and that &apos;s important .
but more important to this app is that they represents a new generation of the government , the problem of government -- not as the problem of a verknöcherten institution , but as a problem of collective .
and this is a very good news because it turns out that we &apos;re very good at collective action with digital technology .
now there &apos;s a big community of people who make the tools that we need to do things together .
it &apos;s not just &quot; code for america , &quot; there are hundreds of people in the country , the most and regierungs-apps , and write , every day in their own communities .
they don &apos;t have given the government .
they &apos;re terribly wrong with her , but they don &apos;t complain about it , they fix them .
and these people know something we &apos;ve lost from the eyes .
and then , if you all your feelings about politics and the snake on the arbeitsamt , and all the other things that we really are really upset with , in the core , in the words of tim o o , &quot; which we do with common , we can &apos;t do that . &quot;
today , a lot of people have given the government .
and if you &apos;re a true man , i ask you to make you feel about that , because things change things .
politics changes not ; the government is in change .
and because the government will take their force out of us -- erinner , &quot; we &apos;re going to do people ? &quot; -- how we think about it , how that &apos;s what this change is happening .
i didn &apos;t know much about government than i was going to .
and how many people , i thought that it &apos;s about to choose people in a office .
now after two years , i &apos;ve got to conclude that it &apos;s mostly about kommunen .
this is the mini for service and information .
there &apos;s a little bit out there when you &apos;re in your city 311 .
if you ever have the opportunity to work in your städtisches , as our fellow scott silverman silverman , as part of the program , you know , all of the things that you do -- you &apos;re going to see that the people who are going to call the government in many different problems , including a beutelratte in their house .
so scott &apos;s got this anfruf .
he tippt &quot; beutelratte &quot; in the official database .
and he didn &apos;t really have a idea . he starts with the tierfänger .
and he says , &quot; look , you see , you can just open the doors in your house and really playing music and see if that &apos;s going to be vieh ? &quot;
and that worked . round of scott .
but that wasn &apos;t the end of the beutelratten .
boston boston has not just a sealed .
it has a app , a web- and handy-app , called &quot; citizens connect . &quot;
we didn &apos;t have this app .
this is a very smart people in the office in the office of new urban urban .
one day -- this is a actual report -- this is , &quot; beutelratte in my mülltonne , &quot; beutelratte in my mülltonne . can &apos;t say it &apos;s dead .
how do i get them ? &quot;
but what &apos;s happening with &quot; citizens connect . &quot;
scott unterhielt , he &apos;s talking about human being .
but on &quot; citizens connect , &quot; is all public , so everybody can see it .
and in this case , it saw a neighbor .
and the next entry we received , &quot; i went there and found out there , the mülltonne behind the house .
beutelratte ? yeah . yeah ? yap ?
turned out the mülltonne on the page . went home .
good night , sweet beutelratte . &quot;
pretty simple .
that &apos;s great . here &apos;s the digital physical .
and it &apos;s also a good example of how the government is going to the plan .
but it &apos;s also a great example of the government as a platform .
and i &apos;m not necessarily not necessarily a technical definition of the platform .
i &apos;m going to talk about a platform for people to help themselves and help themselves to help .
a citizen of a different citizen , but the government was a central role .
they &apos;re blind these two people .
and you would have them to connect with government , if these needs were made , but a neighbor is a far better and billigere alternative to services .
if a neighbor is helping another one , we strengths our communities .
we call the tierfänger , it costs a lot of money .
one of the most important things that we think is that we have to think that government is not the same as politics .
and most people understand that , but they believe that one is the input of the other .
that our contributions to vote is to vote .
as many of the leaders we &apos;ve chosen to do -- and sometimes we have a lot of energy to choose to choose a lot of energy to do a new political leaders , and we &apos;re going to expect that the government , our values and then have a lot of change ?
this is because the government is like a continued ocean , and politics is the top 15cm .
and what &apos;s below , is what we call the bureaucracy .
and we use this word with such a contempt .
but it &apos;s this contempt that we have , and for us to pay for the things we pay for , something that works against us , and then we &apos;ll give ourselves ourselves .
people seem to think politics is sexy .
if we want this institution for us , we have to make the bureaucracy sexy .
because that &apos;s where the actual regierungsarbeit is going to happen .
we have to have to be the response of government .
so the occupythesec-bewegung did it .
you &apos;ve seen these guys ?
it &apos;s a group of the most powerful citizens that has written a very detailed report that has a answer to the sec-memo of the gesetzesvorlage .
this is not politically active , that &apos;s bürokratisch active .
now , for those of us who have given the government in the government , it &apos;s time that we think about the world that we want to leave our children .
you have to imagine the enormous challenges you have to ask .
do we think we &apos;re going to get what we have to do , without having a institution to improve the names of us in the names of us ?
one government is absolutely vital , but it needs to be more efficient .
the good news is that technology is possible to make the function of the government in a fashion that actually can actually achieve something that you can do something about the society .
and there &apos;s a generation that grew up the mitdem internet , and the knows that it &apos;s not so hard to do things , you have to do just right now .
now the average age of our studies is 28 , so i &apos;m sorry , almost a generation of time than most of them .
this is a generation that grew up with it , their voice as a granted .
they &apos;re not fighting that battle , we all fight , who are talking to talk about ; they &apos;re all allowed to talk .
you can think they can be able to think , on each one channel , and they do it .
so , if you faced with the problem of the government , they don &apos;t care about it so much that they &apos;re going to use their voices .
they use your hands .
they use your hands to write applications that improves the work of government .
and these apps , our hands are using our hands to improve our communities .
this could be an infectious hydranten , unkraut unkraut , a trash with a beutelratte .
and sure , we would have this fire that &apos;s going to be able to put all the time , and many people do that .
but these apps are like little digital memories that we &apos;re not only consumers , and we &apos;re not only consumers that are the regierung and leistungen .
we are more than that , we are citizens .
and we &apos;re not going to improve the government , until we improve the record .
so the question i &apos;ve been here for you here : if it &apos;s about the big , important things we have to do together , we &apos;re going to be just a bunch of voices , or we &apos;ll be a lot of your hands ?
thank you .
and so , my role is to explaining people like a new technologies that are being in the way , i &apos;m going to tell you what i really think is , and i &apos;m going to talk to you , and try to understand what &apos;s going on , and to understand what &apos;s going on , and that &apos;s what i &apos;m going to do is to look
i &apos;ll start with you just a single one , a whole thing in the time .
... could you just show the slide .
this is a slide which i &apos;ve ever selected from my folder .
it &apos;s not about the details of the slide , but rather than the general form .
this slide shows a analysis of a analysis of us about the power of risc prozessoren compared to the performance of a local .
the interesting thing here is that this slide is that this slide , as we &apos;re often in our field , a kind of a kind of a straight line on a finite curve .
in other words , every step here is a force in the leistungsskala .
and this is a very , very , that we have to use this guy on semi-logarithmischen curves in the field of technology .
something very strange is happening here .
this is basically what i &apos;m going to talk about here .
so , if you could turn the lights back again .
even more accurate , because i &apos;m going to draw something on the paper here .
now , why do we draw graphs in the technology in the technology ?
the reason i would do is , if i was going to draw on a regular graph , where we &apos;re going to be the timeline of a kind , so that &apos;s the timeline of a kind of kind of art , and this is a very basic mass of technology that i want to be with a graphs , then the graph will be .
you see that look like this .
and that tells us not much .
now , if i want to get another technology , we &apos;ll say a transporttechnologie , then it would be a auf , in the semi-logarithmischen , sehr , in shape , in a flat line .
but if something like this is going to happen , then this is the qualitativen conditions .
so if the transporttechnologie would be so fast as quickly as the mikroprozessor-technologie , we could put forward into a taxi and 30 seconds we were in tokyo .
but that &apos;s not so fast .
this was never before in the history of the technologie-entwicklung , this kind of rekursivem growth , which is going to increase the grössenordnung of the grössenordnung of the grössenordnung of all the paar of the world .
the question i want to ask you is to ask you now , if you look at these exponential curves , you &apos;re not going to go on forever .
it &apos;s not possible that everything is always forever and more quickly as quickly as it is now .
there are two ways : two ways : two ways .
either you will be a classic s-kurve , like this , until something completely new , or it &apos;s going to happen here .
that &apos;s it in about something .
well , i &apos;m a optimist , so i think i &apos;m going to happen in the way that &apos;s going on .
is that really , that means we &apos;re right here in a transition .
we &apos;re here on this line , in a transition of the world of the world of the world of the world of the world .
so the question i want to ask is i often think of myself as this new world is going to be ?
what &apos;s this new state of state , the world would be more ?
because the transition seems really , very confusing , if you &apos;re in the middle of it .
when i was a kid , there was the future somewhere in 2000 , and people often talked about what would happen to be in 2000 .
now we have a conference here where people talk about the future , and you realize that the future still lies in 2000 .
and we &apos;re not going to go .
so in other words , the future is every year for me to have a year since i was on this world .
i think the reason for this is that we realize that something is something that &apos;s underway .
the transition happens . we can all feel all .
and we know that it &apos;s simply not going to try and try to try and see a sense of a sense of a way to look at 30 or 50 years , because everything is so different that a simple hochrechnung of what we &apos;re doing now makes no sense .
i want to talk about what that might be , this transition in which we &apos;re right now .
to do this , i &apos;m going to talk about some other things that really doesn &apos;t have anything with technology or computer .
because i think to understand this really understand , we need to go back and look at the point of a longer zeitskala .
and i want to look at this on the zeitskala of the life of the earth .
i think this makes sense of the big sense , if you &apos;re in some milliarden-schritte .
so let &apos;s go back , and we &apos;re going back , 2.5 billion years . the earth was a big , steriler steinklumpen with lots of the darauf chemicals .
now if you look at the way that chemicals were organized , then we have a pretty good picture about how they were throwing the anstellten .
i think there &apos;s been a theories where everything started to understand how everything started with rna , but i &apos;ll tell you a story about this , which is that this time is small öltröpfchen , which are different types of rezepten of chemicals .
some of these öltröpfchen effects are a special combination of chemicals that makes them to be able to use other chemicals from the outside and to grow .
everybody who were so so aufzuteilen .
these little öltröpfchen were in the sense of the primitivste .
but , these aren &apos;t about the öltröpfchen of the öltröpfchen in the far sense , because each one of them was just a little , zufälliges recipe of chemicals .
and every time it turned out , the inside of the chemicals is going to be able to get into the opposite cells .
so every tröpfchen was a little different .
in fact , the tröpfchen , which had a public optimalere zusammensetzung , and more and more chemicals and more chemicals and more chemicals .
so this is the way that we tend to survive , and they &apos;re living in grösserem .
so this is just a very simple form of life , but more interesting , it &apos;s going to be a trick over a trick over abstraction .
so , in a way that we haven &apos;t really fully understand , this is the ability to have the ability to capture information .
they learned that the recipe of the cell as information , and that &apos;s where we &apos;re doing a particular chemical , which we call dna .
in other words , you have found in this geistlosen , evolutionary way , which allowed them to be able to be able to be bestanden , so they could be used to be able to get them and copied .
the amazing thing about this is that this kind of information is about to store the amount of 2.5 billion years in the time that they were made , right .
in fact , the recipe for us , which is our genes , from the exact same code and the same .
and each of these things are using exactly the same exact same letters and the same code .
we are so far as we can , just to the vergnügungszweck , itself can write itself in this code .
and i have 100 mikrogramm of a camera pulvers , which i try to keep in airports from sicherheitspersonal .
in this case , i &apos;ve been doing -- what i &apos;ve done is i &apos;ve taken this code -- the code of normal letters that we use to use the symbolisieren -- and i &apos;ve written my visitenkarte on the symbolisieren -- and i &apos;ve got my visitenkarte on a play , and i &apos;ve got 10 ^ times .
so if somebody wants to talk about a hundred million copies of my visitenkarte , i have enough for everybody in this room and even for everybody in this world , and it &apos;s right here .
if i was a egoist , i would have written them on a virus and in the room .
so what is the next step ?
the niederschreiben of dna was a more interesting step .
and the veranlagten that cells -- that made them happy for another billion years .
but then another , very interesting step , which is completely different , and they &apos;ve been completely different , and they &apos;ve got to communicate these cells and to have information , so that communities from cells .
i don &apos;t know if you knew that , but bacteria can actually replace their dna .
this is why the reason is going to be cut out of antibiotics .
some bacteria have found how to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to written and other bacteria in dna , and we have lots of bacteria , which are necessary to penicillin , because the bacteria are communicating .
this communication allowed to be the reasons of communities , which were in a sense , in a sense , in the same boat ; they were synergetisch .
so they were either survived together , or they went together , or they went together , and that meant that if a community was successful , all the individuals of the community were repeated and all of the most people &apos;s community .
the übergangsstelle is now there where these communities are so close to that , they decided to be determined to write the recipe for the whole community to write the dna .
and the next interesting phase took about another billion years .
at this point , we &apos;ve got mehrzellige communities , communities from many verschiedlichen zellentypen , which together as a single organism .
indeed , we &apos;re also a kind of mehrzellige community .
we have lots of cells , which is not to be on themselves .
your skin cells are useless without heart disease , muscle cells , and so on .
so these communities began to weiterzuentwickeln , so the level of the evolution , not the individual cell was , but the whole zellengemeinschaft , which we call organism .
next step happened within this community .
the zellengemeinschaften started to abstrahieren information again .
and they developed the special structures , which nothing else did not have to be more than information in the organism .
and these are the neural structures .
so the neurons are the informationsverarbeitungsapparat that these zellengemeinschaften have built this zellengemeinschaften .
they started to sign in spezialisten , the special structures , which were responsible for learning , and that &apos;s what &apos;s going to be from information .
and this was the brain and the nervous system of this communities .
this gave you a evolutionary advantage .
because at this point , a individual -- learning now , within the time of the time of the lebensdauer of the lebensdauer of the lifespan of the world &apos;s life of a single organism , rather than having this evolutionary .
so , a organism , for example , a lot of people are eating not to eat a certain fruit because they were bad and sick , the last time he was eating .
now , this is what happens in the lifetime of a single organism , whereas from hundreds of thousands of years , because these transmissions had to learn from the individuals that are required to the individuals that were dying of the individuals , because that &apos;s not there .
so the nervous system has the evolutionsprozess to produce this special informationsstrukturen because evolution could occur within one individual .
she could go inside a zeitlichen lernrahmens .
what happened after that , the individual organisms found a way to communicate .
even as an example , the raffinierteste of this kommunikationsart version is the human language .
it &apos;s quite amazing , if you think about it .
i have a very complicated , unordentliche and verwirrte idea in my head .
i &apos;m sitting here and i basically basically give you a grunzende sound of mine that &apos;s a kind of a delightful idea in your head that has a certain resemblance to my imagination .
so we take something very complicated , it changes in sound , a sequence of sound , and produce something very complicated in the head of others .
so this allows us to work again as a unified organism .
and what we did , we have humanity , we &apos;ve begun to have a abstrahieren .
we &apos;re killing the same stages of the same stages , which were durchgemacht , and the abstraction of our ways we have to capture data , present , to make it .
the invention of language is a little step in this direction .
telefonie , computers , videobänder , cd-roms and so on , all our own mechanisms that we have built in our community to do this information .
and it connects us all together , which is much bigger , and also able to continue to develop faster than we were .
so nowadays , evolution can happen in the time of microseconds .
you &apos;ve also seen tys little evolutionsbeispiel where he was a little bit of evolution in the &quot; convolution &quot; program , right , right in front of your eyes .
so now we have the zeitskalen again .
the first steps of history , which i told you , a billion years per piece .
the next steps , like the nervous system and the brain , a few hundred million years .
then the nächstens steps , like language and so on , less than a million years .
and these next steps , like electronics , seem to take a few decades .
the process of itself itself and becomes so , i think , is the word for this -- when something is happening in its own terms .
the more it changes , the faster changes .
and i think that &apos;s what we see here in this explosionsartigen curve .
we see the process that &apos;s going to be improving .
i &apos;m living in the building of computers and i know that i &apos;m going to build the mechanism that i use to build computers , not able to use the rest of progress in the world .
my current activity is to make objects with such a high complexity that it &apos;s impossible to me to design this in the traditional sense .
i don &apos;t know what every single person in the verbindungsmaschine power .
it has billions of that .
what i do instead , and what &apos;s also about the designers of thinking about thinking , we think of this machine , and the machine makes something that makes our ability to make our ability better , better and faster than we could ever do it .
and it makes it part of the ways that we don &apos;t even understand .
one method which is particularly interesting , and which i &apos;ve been used in last time , is evolution .
and we install a evolutionsprozess in the machine , which is in the mikrosekunden-bereich .
to call an example , in the extreme cases , we can make a program that &apos;s going to be developed from random .
we say , &quot; computer , generiere , einhundert , a hundred million randomly chosen randomly chosen by the instruktionen .
now , please , all of these randomly chosen instruktionen , all of the programs out , and then finally , finally , the most people who are the next mate . &quot;
so in other words , i &apos;m going to point out what i want to do .
let &apos;s say , i want to be numbers of the things that would be a simple example that i &apos;ve been using for it .
so , what &apos;s the programs that are the most likely to be able to do .
of course , the chance of happened in random , the chance of the fact is very small , that she would be nummern by chance , so you don &apos;t know that the evidence is actually going to do this .
but one of those who may have two happy to do with the right hand .
now i say , &quot; computer , take 10 percent of the sequences of the sequences of the sequences that are going to come to the next .
this is the break , lösche .
now all of the übriggebliebenen that have the numbers that you have to do .
and with a method of the rekombinierens , to bring it to the reproduction . &quot;
take two programs , and they produce children through the exchange of their subroutinen , and the kids are the characteristics of the subroutinen of the two programs .
so i have a new generation of programs that emerged from combinations of programmen , which are a little closer to the people who are more than others .
say , &quot; please repeat this process . &quot;
bewerte again .
maybe some mutations .
and try and try and see this again with another generation .
all of these generations are just a few milliseconds that are very few milliseconds in .
and so i can make a evolution over the computer within a few minutes , or in the komplizierteren , some hours .
and then i get programs that can be perfectly perfect .
the fact is , these programs are so much more efficient than any program i could ever have to write .
if i look at these programs , i can &apos;t say how they work .
i tried to understand them .
it &apos;s diverse and strange programs .
but they do the job .
i know , and i &apos;m sure you can do the job because they come from a series of hunderttausenden programs that do the job .
because your life depended on whether they were really going to get the job right .
i sat in a 747 with marvin minsky , he ale a card hervorholt and says , &quot; oh look . look at this . look .
there &apos;s this airplane , which is made of hunderttausenden kleinteilen , which together work together to make their flight safer safer . &apos; don &apos;t you do that ? &quot;
we know that a entwicklungsprozess isn &apos;t optimal to be a complicated thing .
so we &apos;re going to leave us on computers , for a process that &apos;s different from classical locally .
he allows us to do things with a much higher complexity than it would allow the normal way to produce .
and yet , we don &apos;t understand the opportunity in the process .
so gewissermassen überflügelt is the technology .
we use these programs to make the computer much faster , so that we can do that , we can do this ability to do this processes .
so it &apos;s a rückkopplung .
it &apos;s going faster and faster and i think that &apos;s why it seems to be so confusing .
because all of these new technologies are being able to feed themselves .
we raise it .
we &apos;re at a point , the analog is to be in the back to the analog when a einzeller-organismen sich .
so we are the amöben and we can &apos;t really have a sense of what we &apos;re doing in the hell here .
we are in the middle of this übergangpunkt .
but i really think that &apos;s going to us .
i think it &apos;s very hochmütig from us to say that we are the most honest of evolution .
and i think we &apos;re all here in the creation of the creation of whatever &apos;s next .
well , the lunch is before , and i &apos;m going to hear that now i &apos;m going to go on to even more rausgewählt .
my story starts right here in rajasthan , about two years ago .
i was under the sternenhimmel in the desert with sufi-sänger mukhtiar ali .
we talked about that nothing changed since the time of the ancient indian indian epos . &quot;
if we wanted to travel back to the indians , we would find into a car and schwirrten over the sky .
now we do this with airplanes .
back then , when the great indian kriegerprinz durst had durst durst , he took a bow , fired down in the ground and water .
now we do this with bohrern and machines .
we came to the conclusion that magic and magic were replaced by machines .
that was really sad .
i got a little freaked .
it was afraid that i could lose the ability to lose the sunset , without a camera and without my friends .
i found that technology should be possible , and not kill .
when i was a little girl , my grandfather gave me his little silberne .
this piece of 50-year-old , old technology was became the magischste thing for me .
she became a goldener access to a world of pirates and verunglückter ships and bildern to photographs in my performance .
i came to mind as a thought that our send our send our send our send our send our send our send and cameras .
they kept us to become inspired .
and so i went into the world of technology to see how i could use them to be able to use magic magic instead of being able to kill .
and i started making books .
when i saw the ipad , i saw it as a device to storytelling , the readers of the world .
it can know how we think it .
it can know where we are .
it &apos;s taking pictures and text together , and animation , sound and touch .
the storytelling is always more senses .
but what do we do with this ?
i just go to khoya , a interactive effort .
here &apos;s : &quot; i &apos;m going to put your fingers on every light . &quot;
and so , here &apos;s , &quot; this box is heard ... &quot; i write my name . &quot;
and i &apos;m going to make a character in the book .
and again , a letter goes down to me -- and the ipad know about gps , where i live -- that &apos;s right .
the kid in me is really excited about this .
i talked about a lot about magic .
i mean , i &apos;m not talking about that , and kites , but the magic of childhood , those ideas that we all had as children .
fireflies in a glass , i always found quite exciting .
so you have to get the ipad , and the fireflies are rauslassen .
and the beleuchten the path through the rest of the book .
another idea that was as a kid , that a whole galaxy is in a single murmel .
and so every book , and every world is a little murmel that i &apos;m going to be here in the public literature .
and this opens up a map .
fantasybücher had always been cards , but these cards were static .
this map grows and leuchtet and is to the guidance in the rest of the book .
it &apos;s also showing you to other locations of the book .
i &apos;m going to go here .
it &apos;s also important to me , to create something that is indisch , but also a very zeitgemäß .
these are the apsaras .
we &apos;ve heard all of feen and nymphen , but how many people outside of india , their indian colleagues , who are apsaras ?
the poor apsaras were thousands of years into indras , in a old muffigen book .
and we bring them back , in a contemporary story .
a story that was helping with new issues like the umweltkrise .
and the theme of the umweltkrise , a big problem of the last 10 years is that children sitting in their own lives , in their computers , without having .
but now , with mobile technology , we can take our children in the natural world with their technology .
in a interaction of the book , you &apos;re going to go to a search , you have to go out and use the camera with the camera of the ipads bilder .
as a kid , i had collections of stöckern , rocks , kieseln and muscheln .
somehow , they don &apos;t do the children anymore .
this is kindheitsritual zurückgebracht . you have to go to a chapter of a flower , and tag a picture of a flower .
in another chapter , you have to have a piece of baumrinde and tag .
so , actually , you actually actually create a digital collection of photographs that you can ask online .
a kid in london , the image of a fuchses and says , &quot; oh , i &apos;ve seen a fox . &quot;
a kid in india says , &quot; today i have seen a monkey . &quot;
this creates a kind of social network surrounding a digital collection of photographs that you actually recorded .
there &apos;s a variety of ways of thinking about the world and technology .
in the next book , we are using a interaction where you use the video of the ipads and through augmented reality , a animation of the elfen that you see in a plant in front of the house .
at one point , the screen of the screen .
you have to do the sound of the winds , they &apos;re going to read and read the rest of the book .
we all move to a world where the world &apos;s brain is getting closer and technology and technology .
we use the energy of the sun .
we bring our children and we &apos;re closer to the natural world and to the magic , and the love of our childhood , through the simple medium of a story .
thank you .
this is really extraordinary honor for me .
i spend most of my time with people in untersuchungshaft , prisons or todeszellen .
i spend most of my time with the socially schwächsten schwächsten in the sozialbausiedlungen and places that there &apos;s been much bigger .
here at ted to be ted , and to hear how is that , it &apos;s got a lot of force .
in short time , i was clear to me : ted has a identity .
you can say things that have influence in the world .
and sometimes , if something comes about ted , it gets meaning and force that wouldn &apos;t otherwise .
i say that because i think that &apos;s very important .
we &apos;ve seen some fantastic presentations .
i think we &apos;ve learned that the words of a successful meaning , but that &apos;s what the words of a dedicated person is meaningful .
as a physician can do good . as a physician , you can do more or you can do more .
and so i want to talk about the power of identity .
i didn &apos;t learn that in my work as a lawyer .
i learned this from my grandmother .
i was used to a family , a traditional afroamerikanischen household , who was a matriarchin dominiert , who was my grandmother , and this matriarchin was my grandmother .
she was a taffe , strong woman , she had impact .
she had the last word in each other .
she was also the baseline of many of the people in our family .
she was the daughter of a sklavenfamilie .
their parents were born in virginia in virginia as slaves .
she was born in 1880 and the experience of slavery , your weltbild and the experience of the world .
my grandmother was strong , but she was too familiar .
when i met them as a little boy , she came to me and umarmte me .
she was so sure i couldn &apos;t breathe , and then she got me going .
one or two hours later , if i was going to her , she came to me and said , &quot; bryan , you know my embrace ? &quot;
and if i said no , &quot; i said , &quot; i said , &quot; yeah , &quot; i said , &quot; i got me in quiet .
and then you was something that was done , that &apos;s always going to be in your near .
the only problem that they had 10 children .
my mom was the youngest of their 10 children .
sometimes i was going to spend time with her , it was hard to get your attention .
my cousins was around all over there .
i remember i have to have eight or nine , i was going to be a morning and went to the living room . all my cousins was around .
my grandmother was sitting at the end of the beach and starrte .
first i thought that this was a game .
i looked at them and smiled , but she looked very seriously .
this was 15 or 20 minutes . then she stood up and came to me . she took me on hand , and i said , &quot; come on , &quot; come on , and i have to talk .
i remember it was yesterday .
i &apos;ll never forget it .
she took me out and said , &quot; bryan , i &apos;m going to tell you something , but you &apos;ve got to promise you &apos;re not going to be weitersagst . &quot;
i said , &quot; ah , grandmother . &quot;
she said , &quot; ehrenwort ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
she sat down and looked at me . she said , &quot; i want you to know that i &apos;ve observed you . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you &apos;re special . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you can do anything you want to do . &quot;
i &apos;ll never forget that .
then she said , &quot; you &apos;ve got to promise three things , bryan .
i said , &quot; ok , grandmother . &quot;
she said , &quot; first of all , i &apos;m going to feel like you &apos;re always love your mom . &quot;
she said , &quot; your mom is my baby and you &apos;ve got to promise you &apos;re always going to be going to take care of them . &quot;
i &apos;m going to take my mother , i said , &quot; yeah , grandma , i will do . &quot;
and then she said , &quot; next time i &apos;m going to ask you , you &apos;re always going to do the right thing . &quot;
i thought , and i said , &quot; yeah , grandma . i promise it . &quot;
and then she said , &quot; the last thing you have to me is that you never drink alcohol . &quot;
well , i was nine years old and so i said , &quot; yeah , grandma . i promise it . &quot;
i grew up on the country , in old , rural , and i have a brother who &apos;s older and a year and a year of mine .
when i was 14 or 15 , i got my brother home and took this sixpack slide with my sister and i went to the forest .
we just alberten there , just as though it &apos;s like .
then he took a drink of beer and six of my sister &apos;s one of my sister &apos;s one , and she was doing , and then i offered me .
i said , &quot; no , no , no . you know , you &apos;re just doing beer .
my brother said , &quot; well , now , do you know , now we do that , you know , whatever we do .
i had what had your sister had . go ahead , trink .
i said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to do . just do it .
my brother staring at me .
he said , &quot; what &apos;s going on with you ? now , what &apos;s going on .
and then he saw me in my face , and i said , &quot; oh no , you &apos;re still crazy you still crazy because of the conversation with grandmother ? &quot;
i said , &quot; what do you know ? &quot;
he said , &quot; grandma tells all the grandchildren that they are special . &quot;
i was devastated .
i &apos;ll give you a little bit .
i should probably not do this .
this is maybe being transmitted in publicly .
i &apos;m 52 years old , and i was gestehe that i &apos;ve never had a drop of alcohol .
i &apos;m not saying that because i think it &apos;s tugendhaft . i say that because identity is power .
if we create the right kind of identity , we can say the people around us , they don &apos;t believe it .
we can get them to do things , you know , they couldn &apos;t do it .
of course , my grandmother would say all of their grandchildren , they were special .
my grandfather was during the prison institute in prison .
my uncle died at alkoholinduzierten disease .
and they believed that this is the themes that we have to do .
i tried to say something about our justizsystem .
this country is different than 40 years ago .
drug were 300,000 people in haftanstalten and prison .
today , there are 2.3 million .
the united states has the highest incarceration of the world .
seven million people are on the end of the end of the end of the end of the time .
i think , in my opinion , our world has altered our world .
in socially weak and black parts of the population , despair and hopelessness , because of these changes .
one of three male black male between 18 and 30 is in prison , in prison , in prison , on the prison , or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
in urban municipalities , in the country , los angeles , over the country , the 50 to washington -- are 50 percent of all the black men in prison , in prison , in prison , in prison , on the prison , or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
our system will not only just have shaped by questions that have to do with self-reflection , it will also have a lot of other things .
we have a justizsystem , a justizsystem that you are treated much better if they &apos;re rich and guilty of an arm and innocent .
assets , not verschulden , it affects the outcome .
but we seem to be completely comfortable with this .
politics and zorn has convinced us that these problems are not our problems .
we lost the contact .
i think that &apos;s interesting .
there &apos;s a few hochinteressante .
my home program is going to change the wahlrecht , if they &apos;re killed .
and today , in alabama , 34 percent of the male population were lost by their wahlrecht .
we prognostizieren that in 10 years , the ratio of the neuron will be so high as high as the verabschiedung of the wahlrechtsgesetzes .
silence is ohrenbetäubend .
i vertrete children .
many of my clients are very young .
the united states is the only country in the world , the dreizehnjährige children in the death of death row .
in this country , there &apos;s been kinder for children without bedingte haftstrafen .
we &apos;ve already run a lot of progress .
the only country in the world .
i packaged people in todeszellen .
the question of death is a interesting question .
we think because you &apos;ve taught us that the real question is , has a person who &apos;s going to die for a von crime for him ?
that &apos;s a very sensitive question .
but you can think differently about how we see our identity .
the other view is , someone has a crime for a crime of death , but , we have to kill it ?
i think that &apos;s what i think .
the death penalty in america is defined by the time .
on nine people we &apos;ve executed , one of the things we have for innocent is the entlastet and out of the death of death .
an amazing fehlerquote . one of nine innocent .
i think that &apos;s what i think .
we would never get somebody to fly somebody , if you &apos;re going to fly a plane , if nine airplanes , the declining , one .
but somehow we create it from this problem .
it &apos;s not our problem .
it &apos;s not our burden .
it &apos;s not our struggle .
i &apos;m talking about this questions about this questions .
i talk about race and the question , whether we have to kill the right .
and it &apos;s exciting because i &apos;m going to beibringe my students to beibringe history . i &apos;m talking about slavery .
i talk about terrorism , the time to the end of the rekonstruktion , until the beginning of the second .
we don &apos;t really know much about it .
but for the sun in this country was a time of terror .
in many areas , people had to be afraid of lynchmobs in front of us .
or before bombs .
it was fear of terror , who was shaped their lives .
these older people come to me and say , &quot; mr. , stevenson , they talk about talks , they say , &quot; they say , &quot; they say , &quot; they should stop to say that we have to do it in the history of our nation , after 9 / 11 . &quot;
they say , &quot; no -- they say the people that we grew up with it . &quot;
and after the terrorism , of course , the rassentrennung and decades of the rassistisch motivierten and a apartheid .
and yet there are a dynamic -- we don &apos;t want to talk about our problems .
we don &apos;t talk about our history .
and so we don &apos;t really understand what meaning our actions in the historical context .
we &apos;re constantly consistently aufeinander .
we &apos;re always creating new tensions and conflict .
it &apos;s hard to talk about race , and i think that &apos;s because we &apos;re not willing to be willing to be the process of truth and reconciliation .
in south africa , people who understood that the rassentrennung is not too much without the willingness to truth and reconciliation .
even after the genocide in rwanda , there were these willingness to be able to use this , but not in this country .
i &apos;ve been making some talks in germany , in germany .
it was fascinating because one of the scientists after my talk , and said , &quot; you know , it &apos;s profoundly disturbing , you &apos;re talking about listening . &quot;
he said , &quot; in germany , there &apos;s no death .
and of course it can never give you more . &quot;
it was fully quiet . then one woman said , &quot; with our story , we ever thought that we ever have ever been again for the systematic age of humans .
it would be gewissenlos from us , consciously and people &apos;s hinzurichten .
i thought about it .
how would it feel like to live in a world where the german state were hinrichten , especially if you were a lot of jews .
it would be unerträglich .
it would be gewissenlos .
and yet , in this country , in the united states , in the united states , we &apos;re going to be the risk of old verurteilt , and the risk of the room is , when the victim is , when the victim is , if it &apos;s black , the angeklagte black black is , and the victim knows -- in the same states , in its own
and yet there &apos;s this mental workload .
i think our identity is threatened .
if we don &apos;t deal with this , with these tough topics , they are the positive and wonderful things that are affected .
we love innovation .
we love technology and creativity .
we love conversation .
but finally , this realities of leid , leid , abuse , herabsetzung , ausgrenzung .
i think it seems to be important to unite both .
because we &apos;re talking about that we need more hope , more engagement , more of more , more , more of more , more , to be able to pass in a complex world .
for me , for me , for me , for me , for the time , and talk about the poor , the benachteiligten that never will be at ted .
but think about a way that &apos;s integrated in our own lives .
we all need to think about the last thing we can &apos;t see .
we do this . so we &apos;re also doing so much , so we &apos;re going to appreciate so much .
innovation , creativity , and development are not just just from our heads .
they come from ideas , the powered powered by the persuasion in our hearts .
it &apos;s this kopf-herz-verbindung , which i think they &apos;re really comfortable with us , not just open to all the bright and begeisternden things , but for the dark and problematischen .
vaclav havel , the great politician , once said , &quot;
and when we were the oppression to the oppression , we wanted to be able to do anything , but what we needed was a mental guidance , the willingness to be a mental guidance , the willingness to be hoffnungslosen places , and being witness .
this mental orientation is the core of the core of what i think is that the ted-gemeinschaften is to engage in that .
there &apos;s no nuclear energy technology to be able to be able to be able to be able to be fully and even human , as we &apos;re not too much , and ears for poverty , and injustice .
i want to warn you . this kind of identity is much more of us than if we don &apos;t kick .
she &apos;s going to touch them deeply .
when a young lawyer hatt , i was the big privilege to meet pink parks , pink parks .
the woman came back to montgomery , where they were zwei the älteren of their oldest women , johnnie carr , who had a tremendous afroamerikanerin -- a tremendous afroamerikanerin -- and virginia , a white , white , deren durr , clifford durr , dr. king vertrat .
so these women were meeting , and it was easy to move .
and then i went to rief and then carr me and said , &quot; bryan , wife &apos;s park , and we want to talk .
want to be dazukommen and listening ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; yeah , really , really . &quot;
she said , &quot; and what are they going to do when you &apos;re here ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m going to listen . &quot;
and i went to just and listened to .
it was always inspiring , so inspiring , so beflügelnd .
and one day i sat there and listened to this women , and after a few hours to me , i was going to say , &quot; well , bryan , tell me what the most exciting thing is .
what do you try to do ? &quot;
i started with my usual talk .
i said , &quot; we &apos;re trying to be a against injustice .
wr want people to help people who were convicted of innocent .
we want to fight and fight in the strafvollzugssystem .
we want to lebenslängliche lebenslängliche haftstrafen without bedingte strafaussetzung for children .
we want to do something against the death penalty .
we want to lower the number of the solar number .
we want to be masseninhaftierungen . &quot;
i was holding my usual talk , and then she looked at me and said , &quot; mhmm . mhmm . &quot;
she said , &quot; that &apos;s going to be very , very tired . &quot;
then woman carr carr me to my face , and he said , &quot; and so they have to be very , very tapfer .
and so i think that the ted is being tapferer .
we need to reframe this challenges : this challenges , this is this thing .
because ultimately , our humanity , our humanity , from all of our humanity .
in my work , i learned very simple things .
i learned a few simple things .
that we all are more , as the worst thing we ever did .
i think that &apos;s true for everybody people .
if somebody lying , he &apos;s just just a liar .
if somebody assumes something that doesn &apos;t belong to him , it &apos;s not just a thief .
even who kills somebody , isn &apos;t just a murderer .
and because that &apos;s how there &apos;s a basic human dignity that has to respect the law .
i think that in many parts of this country , and with certainty in many parts of the earth , the opposite of poverty is not wealth .
i don &apos;t believe that .
i think that in many places , many places of poverty is .
and i think even though it &apos;s so dramatic , so beautiful and inspiring , and so exhilarating , we &apos;re not measured at the end of our technology , not to the things that we &apos;re developing , not to our intellect and minds .
and finally , a society is not measured how they were to provide their rich and powerful and privilegierten , but it &apos;s just as you with the poor umgeht , the verurteilten , the verurteilten .
because in this context , we start to understand the most amazing things that we &apos;re going to happen .
sometimes i &apos;m a equilibrium . a story .
i sometimes i &apos;m going to be in very much .
i &apos;m going to tired , how we all .
sometimes these ideas are ahead of the way that we think about very important ways .
i vertrete these kids who were convicted of very hard people .
i go into the untersuchungsgefängnis and a half a place , the 13 or 14 years old , and the erwachsener of the court should be .
then i ask myself , how could this happen ?
how can a judge someone can transform somebody that he isn &apos;t ?
the judge looks like a adult , but i see a child .
one night i went to long and thought my god , if a judge can transform us into something else , then he must have zauberkräfte .
right , bryan , the judge has zauberkräfte .
you should have you .
and because it was late , and i couldn &apos;t get more right , i started working on a factor .
i had a 14jährigen , poor black young boys .
and i started with this piece . the headline was said , &quot; antrag , my poor , 14jährigen black , wie black , white , white , white topmanager topmanager .
in my life , i explained that the signature of the staatsanwaltschaft and the police and the police officers were to be able to be berücksichtigen .
there was a crazy line about that in this country , that &apos;s not more rechtens , that there &apos;s only exists .
the next morning i woke up and couldn &apos;t know if i was just making this crazy thing or actually .
and my horror i had written him written , but also sent out to court .
a few months went back and i had just forgotten all .
but then i decided to me , my god , i have to get into the court and this crazy case .
i got into the car , and really struck -- was overwhelmed .
so i went to court .
and i thought that &apos;s so hard to be so hard .
and finally , i went from my car and went to the treppe .
when i was the staircase to court , there was a elderly , black man , the janitors in the court .
when he saw me , he came to me and said , &quot; who are you ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m a lawyer . &quot; he said , &quot; you know , &quot; you &apos;re a lawyer ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
he came to me and umarmte me .
then he whispered me into the ear .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m so proud of you . &quot;
and i have to say , there was strength .
it was something very deep in me , identity that &apos;s the ability to each other , something that &apos;s a community , to a perspective of hope .
well , i was walking to the gerichtssaal .
once the judge was saw me , the judge was saw me .
he said , &quot; mr. stevenson , they have made this crazy medications ? &quot;
i said , &quot; yeah . &quot; and then we started to debate .
more people come in , just because they were angry , they were angry .
i &apos;d written this crazy stuff .
polizeibeamte came in and stellvertretende and büroangestellte .
in the handumdrehen , the gerichtssaal full of people who were angry , that we were talking about skin color , about poverty .
from my favorite painting i saw the janitors and go down .
he looked over the window , and then the whole tohuwabohu hear .
he went on and down .
and finally , this older black man was a very low gesichtsausruck gesichtsausruck in the gerichtssaal and sat down behind me , almost in the verteidigungsbank .
ten minutes later , the judges announced a pause .
and during the pause came a polizeibeamter , the hausmeister , the hausmeister was the hausmeister in the gerichtssaal .
this deputy ran on the older black .
he said , &quot; jimmy , what do you do in the gerichtssaal ? &quot;
the older black man was on the front page , he saw the deputy , and he said , &quot; i &apos;m happy to say that guy &apos;s boy don &apos;t want to be the goal of eyes . don &apos;t give them up .
i came to ted because i think many of you have understood that the moral pendulum of the universe , but that it &apos;s the justice of the justice .
that we &apos;re not completely completely completely developed , as long as we don &apos;t care about human rights and grundwerte .
that our survival survival is connected to survival .
that we have our visions of technology and design , from entertainment and creativity , to humanity , and justice .
and especially , i want to see that , which is just the case that you just see , just say , don &apos;t lose the goal out of the eyes . don &apos;t they don &apos;t .
they have seen this audience , this community , and i heard you to help them and do something .
what can we do ?
bryan stevenson : well , there &apos;s everywhere .
if you live in california , there &apos;s a one-way volksentscheid that &apos;s about to do a effort , something that is a effort , something of the geldstrom umzuleiten , who otherwise the politics is flows into the politics .
here , in california , for example , you will get a billion dollars for the death penalty worth of the death penalty .
and yet , 46 percent of all the tötungsdelikte nicht don &apos;t have a verhaftung .
56 percent of all the vergewaltigungsfälle are not born .
here &apos;s the chance to do something .
this is a referendum , which is going to suggest to invest in more sicherheitskräfte and safety .
i think there &apos;s all sorts of ways .
during the last three decades , the verbrechensrate is gesunken in america .
this fact is often put in a context with the elevated inhaftierungszahlen .
what would you say someone who believes ?
now , in fact , the number of the gewaltverbrechen is not very much .
most of the most dominant in this country was not really in the class of the most gewaltverbrechen .
it was the fehlgeleitete kreuzzug against drugs .
so the population are the population population in the street .
we have hinreißen hinreißen from the rhetoric of the punishment .
now we have » « , the people who are fighting to gitter , for a fahrraddiebstahl , for the theft of diebstahl , rather than they &apos;re forcing them to make the victims of zurückzugeben .
i think we need to do more to help people who have become victims of a straftat .
and i think our apes will help &apos;t help anybody .
i think that &apos;s what we need to change .
bryan , they really have a string to the schwingen .
they &apos;re a inspiring personality .
thank you , they were at ted . thank you .
ladens death is a cultural gefahrenrisiko gefahrenrisiko .
famine : famine in somalia . it &apos;s three : spray of the police .
four : bösartige . it &apos;s a five : dangerous kreuzfahrtschiffe .
6 : social networking : a 7 , and it &apos;s a total of dead .
tsunamiwarnung . it &apos;s a 9 : cyber-attacken : cyber-attacken cyber-attacken .
different speaker : drogenkrieg . mass massenvernichtungswaffen .
recession . gridlock . egypt . egypt . syria . syria .
crisis . death . disaster .
oh my god .
so this is just a few of the clips that i &apos;ve been collected over the last six months -- but also the last six days , or the last six years .
the fact is that media is to be able to show us negative topics , because our minds are going to emerge .
and there &apos;s a very good reason for it .
every second day , our senses is much more information than our brain can ever be able to process .
and because we don &apos;t care about our survival as our survival , is the first appropriate information that information is a part of our temporallappens , the amygdala .
so the amygdala is our early detection , our gefahrendetektor .
it removes the sortiert and durchkämmt the entire information on the quest to create a jeglicher of danger in our surroundings .
so , if we see the news , we prefer to keep a little bit of news .
and the old adage , &quot; if it &apos;s blutet , the demand is very true .
now , with all our digital devices , we took us about seven days , the week , the week , the last diese news , it &apos;s not a miracle that we &apos;re pessimistic .
it &apos;s not a miracle that everybody thinks that it &apos;s always going to be the world .
but possibly , this is not the case .
possibly , possibly , is that the reality .
perhaps the enormous progress is to have been done in the last century , we &apos;ve done in a series of forces , so strongly that it will be possible to create a world of abundance .
now , i &apos;m not saying we don &apos;t have big problems -- climate , artensterben , water and energieprobleme -- we &apos;ve already done .
and as humans , we are much better at the very much better , and we &apos;ve been able to get a lot of long , but they were finally overcome .
let &apos;s see what we &apos;ve achieved in the last century , so we can use the development .
in the last 100 years , the average life expectancy has more than doubled , which is the inflation , the world &apos;s population growth .
child mortality has a 10th .
and the way that the ernährungs- , elektrizitäts- , and it &apos;s cheaper to have a business model .
steve pinker has shown us that we &apos;re currently going into a very peaceful time in the world .
and by charles kenny , the alphabetisierungsquote is the alphabetisierungsquote in the last 130 percent over 80 percent .
we live in a really extraordinary time .
and many people forget this .
and we &apos;re going to increase our expectations on our expectations .
in fact , we have a new set of poverty .
remember that a great percentage of americans who live under poverty , access to power , water , water , kühlschränken , tv , mobile , mobiltelefonen and cars .
the richest , the richest of the last century , the imperatoren of earth , never could have erträumen .
the basis of the vast of them , and they &apos;re growing in the growing of these growing .
my good friend of mine was shown us that every tool that &apos;s going to be built to information , on the curve of moore &apos;s law , and the preis-performance-quotient of moore &apos;s gesetz , and the preis-performance-quotient of the 12 months of the 12 .
it &apos;s about the mobile phone in your pocket , and it &apos;s less than a million times less and more than a supercomputer &apos;s 70ern .
now look at this curve .
this is moore &apos;s law &apos;s last hundred years .
notice two things on this curve .
the first thing you &apos;re going to do is to be in the geschmeidig , in good times , war or peace , recession , depression and hochkonjunktur .
this is the result of the faster computers , the elderly computers .
they slows down to none of our big problems .
also , despite your logarithmic verlaufs on the left side of the left side .
so the rate itself is accelerating .
and on this curve , on this graph , the backs of moore &apos;s law , we find a set of technologies that are available to all available .
&quot; cloud-computing , &quot; something that my friends in autodesk , &quot; sensoren , &quot; and networks , the ability to democratize our bodies , to democratize our bodies , to democratize our own , synthetische biology , and food , digital medicine , digital medicine and artificial intelligence .
how many of you have the victory of ibms supercomputer in the front of the day ?
that was yet .
i &apos;ve got the newspapers durchforstet and looking for the best headlines that i could find .
i love this : &quot; watson bezwingt menschlichen human enemy . &quot;
&quot; risk &quot; is not a simple game .
it &apos;s about understanding the french of language .
imagine that these artificial intelligence of each other is a mobiltelefones of a computer system .
four years ago , ray kurzweil , and i &apos;m here at ted a new university , called singularity university .
we bring our students all these technologies with this , with focused on how this used to solve these big challenges of humanity .
and every year we ask the students , businesses , products and services , that within a decade , the lives of billions of people can get the lives of billions of people .
think about that a group of students today can affect the lives of billions of people .
thirty years ago , this was ridiculous .
today , we can use dozens of companies that are done that .
if i think about , i think , überfluss , i don &apos;t mean a life full of luxury for everybody on this planet , and it &apos;s about to create a life full of possibilities .
it &apos;s about making some knappen goods .
and the scarcity is kontextbezogen , and technology is a resource of force .
here &apos;s an example .
this is the history of napoleon iii. in the middle of the middle century .
he &apos;s the guy on the left .
he &apos;s got the king of siam to dinner .
napoleons soldiers got silber-besteck , napoleon himself .
the king of siam , but got aluminium-besteck .
the aluminum was at this time , the most valuable metal on the planet , valuable and platin .
this is why the dome of the washington-monuments was made of aluminum .
even though aluminum 8,3 percent of the erdmasse , it doesn &apos;t matter that it &apos;s not as a reines metal .
it &apos;s going to be connected by oxygen and silikate .
but then the technology of the elektrolyse developed and made aluminiumherstellung aluminiumherstellung , that we use it with our wegwerf-mentalität .
then we &apos;ll be able to see this analogy in the future .
we think about energieknappheit .
ladies and gentlemen , we live on a planet with 5.000-mal more energy than we use a year .
16 energy energy , all the 88 minutes on earth .
it &apos;s not about the most difficult , the problem is .
and there &apos;s good news .
in this year , you &apos;ve done it for the first time that cost the cost of 50 percent of the solar system in india -- 8.8 rupees in comparison to 17 rupees .
the cost of solar energy costs in the last year for 50 percent .
last month , this has been published with a study that shows that until the end of this decade has been solarenergie 6 pro per kwh , compared to 15 cents in the national average .
and if we have a energieüberschuss , we &apos;ll also have water in abundance .
talk about wasser-kriege .
remember , when carl sagan was sagan , when it was 1990 , when it was at saturn , was going back to earth ?
he took a famous photograph . how did it mean ?
&quot; a pale . &quot;
because we live on a live life .
we live on a planet that &apos;s 70 percent of water .
yeah , it &apos;s 97,5 percent saltwater , two percent are vereist , and we &apos;re fighting to 0.5 percent of water on the planet , but there &apos;s also hope .
and there &apos;s new technologies , not in 10 or 20 years , but now .
it &apos;s new nanotechnologien on the path , nano-materialien .
and from a conversation with dean kaman , one of the innovators , i want to share with you , and i &apos;d like to share with you , and i &apos;ve got to give me the permission -- his technolgie , and by many of you may have heard of the size of a kühlschranks in the studentenheim .
it can produce thousands of gallons of water , a day from different sources of water -- whether i use saltwater , polluted water , and all that for less than two cents a gallon .
the director of coca-cola has just eingewilligt , a big test-projekt test-projekt with a hundred units in developing countries .
and when everything goes well , and i &apos;m very optimistic , then , this technology is going to apply to the technology globally in the world in the entire planet .
this is technologieunterstützte innovation that &apos;s today .
and we also have seen this in the machine .
my god , we &apos;re going to reach the 70 percent of the mobiltelefonen of the developing world in developing countries from the end of 2013 .
just think that a massai-krieger with a mobile phone in the middle of kenya , a better mobil-kommunikation mobil-kommunikation als 25 years ago .
and if you look at your smartphone on google , they have more access to knowledge and information than president clinton &apos;s 15 years ago .
they live in a world that information and communications in abundance , as nobody ever could ever predict .
and it &apos;s even better , and it &apos;s been a lot of things that you have to spend , and i &apos;ve spent several thousand dollars -- gps , hd-video and foto , and musik , technology to medical diagnostics -- are literally entmaterialisiert and cheaper to their mobile phone .
and the best part is possibly what &apos;s going on in the domain health .
last month i had the pleasure , the qualcomm-stiftung , the qualcomm-stiftung , &quot; $ 10 million qualcomm x prize . &quot;
we &apos;re taking our teams on the world , all of these technologies in a mobile phone , that you can talk to the device that you can talk to the machine , because it &apos;s equipped with ai , you can test reinhusten or your blutwerte .
and to win , the machine has to be a better diagnosis than a team of a team .
imagine this device . right in a developing country where there are no doctors , but 25 percent of the krankheitslast and 1.3 percent of the fittest .
if this machine is a rna- or dna-virus , who &apos;s not known as it is the readers of the learning and proposes a pandemic before .
but now the biggest force that will lead us to a world of abundance .
i call them &quot; the next billion . &quot;
the whites lines are standing for population .
we just have the 7-milliarden-marke .
and by the way , the largest absicherung against a population is a better education and food in the world .
and we had this in 2010 , we had just been two billion people online .
we get up to the 2020 , we &apos;re going to voraussichtlich by two billion of five billion .
three billion new minds that we never heard before , will be a global communications .
what do these people ?
what are they going to consume ? what are you going to lose ?
and instead of ecological , i see one of the greatest economic anschübe of history .
these people represent several trillion dollars that will flow into global economy .
and they &apos;re going to be healthier by the use of the tricoders , and they &apos;re getting better trained through the khan-akademie , and by doing that they will have the opportunity to be able to use 3d printers and so much more productive than ever before .
so what can three billion productivity , healthy , educated , productive members of the menschengemeinde of the menschengemeinde ?
how would it be a set of new , never before gehörter .
how would it mean to work , where they &apos;re , the voice to be a voice to make a voice to make a difference and create change , for the first time ?
what are these three billion people ?
how would we do with beiträgen , which we can &apos;t even even predict ?
one of the things i learned through the x prize , is that small teams that are driven by passion and focus , things that are able to create extraordinary things , and they could only do the big businesses and governments in the past .
i want to finish with a story that really excites me .
there &apos;s a program that some may know .
it &apos;s a game that means respecting .
it was developed at the university of washington in seattle .
and it &apos;s a game where people can take a sequence of amino acids , and to explore how that &apos;s going to develop .
the way that after his behavior can be the structure and function .
and this is very important in the medizinforschung .
so far , this was a problem for supercomputers .
and this game was played by the university of 2003 .
and there are hundreds of thousands of people who played the game online .
and it turns out that the human brain is better better than the proteins that the best of the best .
and when these people came together , and the best protein-ordner of the world was no mit-professor , no caltech-student , it was no caltech-student , it was a woman who was in england , a woman who was in a assistentin reha-klinik in a reha-klinik , and at night the best protein-ordnerin in the world .
ladies and gentlemen , what i &apos;m sure of thinking about trust in our future , the fact that we have more power to be more than individuals to ask us to challenge the big challenges of our planet .
we have access to tools with tools with the same technology .
we have the passion of a diy-innovatoren .
we have the capital of the capital of the techno-philanthropen .
and we have three billion new minds that we can work online to be able to master new challenges , and to do that , what necessary is .
we expect a few extraordinary decades .
thank you .
i think we have to have something against a universal piece of medical culture .
and i think it starts with a medical program , and i &apos;m a mediziner .
and maybe i &apos;ve been a long enough time enough , as i can tell you to give me a piece of my own wrong prestiges .
but before i get to the actual theme of my talk , let &apos;s start with a little baseball .
hey , why not ?
we are the saisonende and move towards the world .
we all love baseball , or ?
baseball is full of great statistics .
and there are hundreds of them .
&quot; moneyball &quot; is soon , and turns out to be statistics and to use this great baseball team .
i &apos;m going to make a statistics on a statistics that i &apos;ve heard most of you have heard .
it &apos;s the durchschnittsleistung of the schlägers .
we &apos;re talking about 300 , if a bat beats .
that means that the player is going to be three of 10 beats .
this is called the ball into the außenfeld , he goes , he &apos;s not going to go , and he &apos;s going to go to the first base , it didn &apos;t have time to be done in time and the judge was in safety .
three of the 10th 10 of the 10th 10 of 10 years ago .
you know how to baseball a 300ter in major baseball in baseball ?
well , really , really good , maybe a all-star .
you know how to call a 400ter ?
this is one of the smartest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the last four of the rest of the day .
legendär -- like ted williams williams -- the last major league baseball baseball of the während baseball was a regulären saison saison .
let &apos;s go back to my new medicine in my medicine , which i &apos;m really happy to feel about a lot of time or maybe a little bit less than i talked about it .
suppose they have a blinddarmentzündung , and you &apos;re going to be a operateur überwiesen , whose durchschnittsleistung 400 of it is on blinddarmentzündungen .
that &apos;s not how it doesn &apos;t work , isn &apos;t it ?
suppose you live in a particular remote area , and they have a beloved people with verstopften herzkranzgefäßen and hausarzt überweist , and you &apos;re hausarzt with a kardiologen that &apos;s durchschnittsleistung in 200 .
but , you know , what ?
it &apos;s a lot better than that . she &apos;s on the side of the line .
and she &apos;s punching a 257 .
somehow it doesn &apos;t work .
but i &apos;ll ask you a question .
what do you think like the durchschnittsleistung for a kardiologen or a nurse or a orthopäden , a geburtshelfer , a rettungsassistenten , a rettungsassistenten ?
1,000 , very good .
the truth is that no one in the whole thing is , what a good surgeon or doctor should be or rettungsassistent .
what we do is we &apos;re going to do everybody from them , including me , in the world , to be perfect .
never make a mistake , no one is going to think about the details as that is going to be before .
and that &apos;s the message i &apos;m in the medical care .
i was a zwanghaft obsessiver student .
in high school , a mitschüler said that brian goldmann would learn for a bluttest .
and so it was .
and i learned in my little dachstube in the nurses at the nurses at the toronto , the general hospital , unweit from here .
i learned everything .
in my anatomievorlesung , i learned the origins and the tail of each other , every branch of any artery , which is from the ascending aorta , obskure and ordinary differentialdiagnosen .
i even knew the differentialdiagnose to classify renale tubuläre .
and the whole thing i do is really , more and more .
and i was good , i closed with cum laude .
and i left the public that i knew everything was known and everything that i knew everything was possible , or at least as much as possible as possible as possible as possible that i was doing to do things that i was doing .
and it was done for a while , until i met a woman .
i &apos;m going to residierte in toronto in toronto than a woman in the hospital of the hospital .
at this point , i was the most kardiologischen layer in the kardiologischen .
and it was my mission , when the notfallpersonal kardiologischen was studied , the notfallpatienten rat .
and she &apos;s sending my oberarzt .
i examined a woman and she was in atemnot .
and when i was her to her , she made keuchende sounds .
and when i was ihre her chest with the stethoskope , i could hear a knackendes noise on both sides of both sides , told me that she was suffered under kongestiver .
this is a state in the heart , instead of putting all the blood on the entire blood , and it &apos;s going to be a part of the blood vessels in the lung and it &apos;s going to be able to get this kurzatmigkeit .
and that was not a hard time to be stellenden .
i posed them , and i made the treatment .
i gave her aspirin . i gave her medicine to take the pressure from heart .
i gave her medicine that we call diuretics , water , water , so that they &apos;re the liquid .
and over one of the time of a year , two and two hours , she started feeling better .
i felt really good .
and then i made my first mistake ; i sent them home .
i was actually two mistakes .
i sent them home without talking with my oberarzt .
i didn &apos;t have the core , and i did what i should have to have to have a call in my oberarzt , so it would be abzuklären to him , so he would have an opportunity to make a very a picture .
and he knew it was able to get additional information to her .
maybe i did it with good reason .
maybe i didn &apos;t want to be the doctor doctor .
maybe i wanted to get so successful and so able to do this responsibility that i was so so so so so so i would have to be able to talk to my patient without having to help him .
my second mistake was worse .
so , i sent them home , i was trying to say , &quot; goldman , i was trying to say , &quot; goldman , no good idea . do not do it . &quot;
so , in really , i was really interested in the nurse , i was asked to the nurse , which was the women who were doing , &quot; do you believe it &apos;s right , if you go home ? &quot;
and the nurse thought about it and said , &quot; yeah , i think it &apos;ll go all the good . &quot;
i remember it was yesterday .
so i went down the entlassungspapiere and a lawn and rettungsassistenten and they got her home .
and i went back to work .
the rest of the day , the night i had this nagende emotion in my stomach .
but i was working on .
and at the end of the day i grabbed my stuff , verlies the hospital and went to the parking home to drive home when i did something i did not .
i went through the notfallabteilung on my journey .
and there was another nurse , not the sister who had seen a woman in the woman , but one of the three words to me and these three words , most of the most notfallärzte i know .
other doctors are terrified that , but the notfallmedizin is particularly special , because we &apos;re just seeing the patient &apos;s only as big .
the three words : remember ? remember ?
&quot; remember the patient who she was looking at home ? &quot;
asked the nurse .
&quot; so she &apos;s back back , &quot; she said , &quot; she said in this particular tonlage .
so she was back .
she was back and in dying .
about one hour after she was home , after she had sent her home , she was taking her home , and the family called 911 . the rettungsassistenten took them back to the notfallstation , and that &apos;s a blutdruck schockzustand .
they were barely atmete , and was blue .
the notfallpersonal zog was all the strands .
they gave her her blutdruckerhöher .
they put them on the beatmungsmaschine .
i was shocked and to the inner zerrüttet .
and i was using this , because they went to the stabilisation , and i hoped that she would recover .
and after two , three days , they were never going to get back to it .
she had a didn &apos;t erlitten a behandelbaren .
your family was going to be remembered .
and over the course of the next eight or nine days , they put the geschehenen .
the day on the table , they take them down -- woman printer , a woman , a mother and grandmother .
you say that you never have the names of the versterben .
and that was the first time i learned this .
the next weeks i took the vorwürfe , and i learned the first time in our medical culture , which was in our medical culture -- i felt alone , not the kind of healthy shame that you &apos;re when you &apos;re driving , because you can &apos;t talk to the colleagues about it .
you know all the healthy shame , if you give a secret to the best friend of the best friend , and then you &apos;re going to be able to get a schrecklich and a schrecklich discussion , and i &apos;m going to be a terrible discussion , but you get a terrible thing , and you realize that you never make a mistake .
if you do wiedergutmachung , and never make the mistake .
this is the kind of lehrreicher shame .
the unhealthy way i &apos;m talking about is that one of the innersten sick .
it &apos;s one that &apos;s one that tells you what you did was bad , but you &apos;re not bad .
and that was what i felt .
and it wasn &apos;t to my oberarztes , he was very gentle .
he talked to the family and i &apos;m sure that he &apos;s got the wogen glättete and sure i was not going to have sued .
but i asked myself that questions .
why haven &apos;t i asked the oberarzt ? why do i go home ?
and then in my worst moments , how could i make such a stupid mistake ?
why am i left in medicine ?
but slowly , it &apos;s got it all over .
i started feeling better .
and then at a bewölkten day , there was a hole in the clouds and the sun broke , and i might feel better feel better .
and i was like i was going to announce my efforts to perfection , and never beging a mistake that the voice could be verstummen .
and she did .
and i was working on .
and then it happened again .
two years later , i had service in a kommunalen hospital north of toronto , and i was begutachtete a 25 year-old man with gereiztem rachen .
it was much more about and i was in a hurry .
he always showed me here .
i looked into the rachen , and it was a little bit pink .
and i gave him a prescription for penicillin and sent him .
and even when he went from the door , he showed his rachen .
two days later , i came to my next notfalldienst and my chefärztin asked me to be a conversation .
and she said , &quot; do you remember ?
&quot; do you remember you about the patient with the patient &apos;s patient with the gereizten ? &quot;
it turned out that he &apos;s a streptokokken-infektion .
he had a potentially lebensgefährliche disease called epiglottitis .
you can probably the google , but it &apos;s not a infection of the rachens , but the top quartile is atemwege and causes the size of the atemwege .
and fortunately he died .
he got intravenöse antibotica and erholte a few days later .
and i went back to the same tortur of shame and self-doubt , and i was going to get me and went to work and went to work and back to it again and back again .
in a notfallschicht , i have two mal .
there &apos;s a lot of work on , especially if you consider that in a hospital that you had only 14 patients at this time .
in both cases , i didn &apos;t get them home , and there was no imperfections in your treatment .
in one thought i thought he would have nierensteine .
i ordnete the röntgen of kidneys . when the ohne was a befund , my colleague , my colleague , was a verhärtung verhärtung in the lower right , and called the operateure .
the other had strong diarrhea .
i ordnete fluide to rehydrieren him and asked my colleagues to the other .
and that &apos;s what he did and when he &apos;s a verhärtung in the right sector , he called the operateure .
in both cases , operierte and it was fine .
both of the cases of me , fraßen me .
and i would be happy to tell you that my worst mistake is just what &apos;s been doing in the first five years , which is many of my colleagues , but total nonsense is .
some of my favorite years of my klöpse happened in the last five years .
alone , and beschämt and without support .
this is the problem : if i &apos;m not talking about my sleeve and talk about you , if i &apos;m going to talk about my own voice , which i &apos;m going to say , what really can &apos;t really find to my colleagues ?
how can i teach them my mistakes so that they don &apos;t have the same ?
if i &apos;m in a room -- like now , i have no idea what you think about me .
when you hear the last time someone &apos;s last time someone talked about fehlschlag about fehlschlag ?
oh , you know , they go to a cocktail party and you like to hear about any other doctor , but you won &apos;t hear someone about your mistakes .
if i was going to take care of a room with colleagues , and to tell you about their immediate support , and i &apos;m going to tell you what i just told you about , and i would not really have to tell you that , before you would really appreciate that , anyone would have a joke to do this , you would change the subject .
and in fact , if i knew my colleagues knew that a orthopäde in my hospital would be someone in my hospital , you would think , i believe that i would have trouble to look at him in the eye .
this is the system that we live .
it &apos;s totally a complete denial of mistakes .
it &apos;s a system where there are two basic positions -- those who are doing mistakes and those who are doing , and those who are no , the ones that are schlafmangel and the ones that are einschränkung and the ones that are ergebnissen and with good results .
it &apos;s almost a very different response as antibodies that are people .
and there &apos;s the idea that if we were those who make mistakes from medicine that we have to be a system .
but there are two problems .
in my book , about 20 years of medical sendungsbewusstseins and journalism , i &apos;ve been doing a personal medical study of medical error and wrong , so many of my first article , i &apos;m going to be able to be the toronto star star to my show , &quot; black coat , &quot; black style . &quot;
and what i learned is that mistakes are absolutely unumgänglich .
we work in a system where every day , in which one of 10 medikationen either either is either false or wrong dosiert , which is always and the zahlreicher and the zahlreicher and the zahlreicher and the zahlreicher and the tot .
in this state , about 24,000 canadians in the state of umgänglichen .
in the united states , the institute of medicine is the number of 100,000 .
they &apos;re also strong untertreibungen because we don &apos;t think the problem we should think about it .
and is the crux .
in a krankenhaussystem in the medical department of all , all of the time you have to do two to three years , we can &apos;t keep it .
schlafmangel is ubiquitous .
we can &apos;t get rid of it .
we have a cognitive error , so that we can take a perfect diagnostic site for a patient with a patient can take .
then i take the same patient with brustschmerz , making it verschwitzt and geschwätzig and give you a slightly more alkoholisierten breath and suddenly , and suddenly it &apos;s a slightly leicht breath with contempt .
i don &apos;t take the same shots .
i &apos;m not a robot ; i &apos;m not always going to be the same .
and my patients are no cars ; they &apos;re not going to tell me your symptoms in the same way that they don &apos;t always have the same kind of time .
all of these are very inevitable .
so if you take the system so like that , as i was taught , and all of the fehlerbehafteten gesundheitsexperten aussortiert , then the end of the end is left .
and you know the leier about people who don &apos;t want to talk about their worst cases ?
in my show , &quot; white coat , &quot; i would say , &quot; this is my greatest mistake , &quot; this is my greatest mistake , &quot; and &quot; this is my greatest mistake , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , &quot; and then i &apos;ll show you with the microphone .
and then they expand their pupils , they &apos;re pushed to the head , they &apos;re going to look down and then start to tell their stories .
they want to tell your stories . they want to share their stories .
they want to be able to say , &quot; look , don &apos;t make the same mistakes i &apos;m going to . &quot;
what you need is a environment that you can get in .
what you need is a new medical culture .
and it starts with a doctor .
the newly doctor is a man &apos;s human , knows how to make his humanity , she &apos;s not proud to make mistakes but it &apos;s all made to learn from them , so that it can be passed out of them .
they &apos;re responding with other experiences with others .
they supported when others are talking about their mistakes .
and they show other mistakes , and they &apos;re not to bloßzustellen , but in a single , unterstützenden way that all of them are benefit .
and they &apos;re working in a medical culture that are the ones that people can fill with life and if that &apos;s so , people make mistakes from time .
so that the system evolved to make the system developed , which makes it easier to create the kinds of things that make people make unausweichlich , and also it &apos;s also allowed to make things like health , and it &apos;s also allowed to be able to make things , and it &apos;s also the kind of thing that we have to do , and it &apos;s also the
my name is brian goldman .
i &apos;m the new doctor doctor .
i &apos;m a man . i make mistakes .
i &apos;m bedaure , but i &apos;m trying to learn to learn from this to learn to take it another .
i don &apos;t want to think what they &apos;re going to me , but i can live in life .
let me close with three of my own words : i remember .
i &apos;m going to talk about a tiny , little idea .
it &apos;s about veränderbare normwerte .
and because you can explain this idea in a minute , i &apos;ll tell you about three stories to use the time .
the first story is about charles darwin , one of my heroes .
you know that he was 1835 .
you may think that he &apos;s finken , but that &apos;s not true .
actually he was collected fish .
he described one of them as a very , &quot; usually . &quot;
it was a zackenbarsch .
in the &apos; 80s , he became in big style .
now , he &apos;s on the red list of the big bang .
this story is we &apos;ve heard many times from the galapagos or another , it &apos;s not very special .
and yet we still come to the galapagos .
we still think it &apos;s been originally originally .
the broschüren is still describe it as a race .
what &apos;s happened here ?
the second story is supposed to be another concept , the veränderbare taillenweite , verdeutlichen .
because i &apos;ve experienced it , when i was a lagoon in west-afrika .
i went there because i grew up in europe , and i was going to work in africa .
i thought i could go .
and i got a bad sonnenbrand and was convinced that i really didn &apos;t really know about there .
it was my first sonnenbrand .
as you see , the lagoon of palmen and some mangroven umsäumt .
there were buntbarsche about 20 inches , schwarzkinnmaulbrüter , a unterart of the buntbarsche .
the fischgründe of these buntbarsche were very ertragreich and the fishermen lived almost well and verdienten in ghana .
when i was going to go back to the 27 years later , the fish was in half of its size .
now , the second rate you have five centimeters .
they were genetically engineered .
it still was still fish .
people were still happy .
and the fish also had to be the lucky to be there .
so it has nothing changed , and yet it changed everything .
my third little story tells my mittäterschaft in the introduction of the schleppnetzfischerei in southeast asia .
in the 70s -- more likely to start the beginning of the 1960s -- förderte europe .
fischförderung bedeutete , which already used to set out 100 fish , the industrial fishing had this pretty ugly ship called mutiara 4. .
i went on and we were used to have used in the whole southern sea ice ocean and especially in the javasee .
we had no words for what we started there .
i know now that it was the reason of the ocean .
90 percent of our fangs were really passionate , other animals that are connected to the reason .
the biggest part of the fish , the little dots there on the rubble , the trümmerhaufen , were korallenriff-fische .
basically the reason of the ocean was going on , and then zurückgeworfen .
these pictures are extraordinary , because the transition is very quickly .
within a year , you have a long time , and then begins with the gewerblichen fishing .
the reason is changing . it &apos;s like -- in this case -- a hard reason or soft corals will be mist .
this is a dead turtle .
they were not eaten , you &apos;d get them because they were dead .
once we started a factor .
she wasn &apos;t ertrunken .
then they wanted to kill them because you could eat them .
in fact , this mountain is from trümmern every time , when they &apos;re in areas where they &apos;ve never been in in the way .
it &apos;s not going to be documented .
we change the world , but we don &apos;t remember it .
we adjust our normwerte to new level and we don &apos;t care about what was there .
if you pull it out , this is what happens .
on the y-axis , a few good things : biodiversity , the number of the orca , the green of their country , the green system .
it changes the time it changes . it changes because people are completely their actions .
each generation looks at the pictures that they &apos;re taking place to her life of life as a standard and will all it will .
the difference is going to be a loss of loss .
but they &apos;re not taking the previous losses .
it can give a order of change .
and just the end , they just want to get the erbärmlichen remains .
that &apos;s exactly what our goal is .
we want to get things that are gone , or things that aren &apos;t more as they were .
you might think the problem of trying to figure out , which certainly , when they were living in räuberischen societies , animals and they were only aware of what they had done .
because obviously , a animal that &apos;s very often very often , only before it was ausstirbt .
so you don &apos;t want to do a lot of animals .
you always always always get rare animals .
and that &apos;s why it &apos;s not perceived as a big loss .
and the time we focus on the big animals and the ocean are the big fish .
they &apos;re going to be more because we &apos;re catching them .
and the time there is little fish left and we think that &apos;s the normwert .
the question is , why people accept that .
well , because they don &apos;t know that it was different .
of course , many people , scientists , bestätigen , that it was really different .
you &apos;ll be able to get it because the evidence , as you &apos;re doing in a previous form , aren &apos;t as they &apos;d like to be happy .
there &apos;s the anecdote that the report of a kapitäns , who &apos;s been able to be used in this area , not used to be used , or not gewertet , or not gewertet , because he &apos;s not going to be &quot; scientifically &quot; scientifically . &quot;
so we have the situation that the people don &apos;t know the past , although we live in the real world , because they don &apos;t trust the sources of the past .
this is the enormous big role that can play a marine star .
because by a while we &apos;re basically asking the past again .
we &apos;re going to get the past back , the people who don &apos;t grasp , because the normwerte are changing and very low .
so , can people can see a gps dot and the view of the view that it &apos;s trying to make their normwerte .
what &apos;s not possible to people that that &apos;s not possible because they don &apos;t have access to any access -- the people in the central west is to be in the middle of the west ?
here , i think art and the movie may be the gap to fill and simulation .
this is the simulation of chesapeake bay .
long ago , there were grauwale -- 500 years ago .
and the farbtöne and -schattierungen may remember &quot; avatar . &quot;
if you think about &quot; avatar , &quot; if you think about why people were touched as touch -- except by the pocahontas-geschichte , why were they touched by the bilderwelt ?
because it &apos;s a little bit wachruft , that &apos;s lost in a sense .
so my main one , i &apos;m going to give you to cameron , so that he &apos;s &quot; avatar ii &quot; under water . &quot;
thank you .
in the &apos; 80s , in the communist , in the communist , you had to have a typewriter to have a typewriter in the government .
they also had to be a sheet with beispieltext from this typewriter .
the reason for this is , the government could go back to where a text was .
found a paper with falschem gedankengut , they could detect the opposite of that thought .
and we couldn &apos;t understand how anyone could do something like this , and how much that would be changed the world .
in our own countries , we would never do anything .
but if you &apos;re going to buy a new farblaserdrucker of the leading farblaserdrucker of the leading laserdruckerfabrikanten , and a page , this page , this page , this page , and then the bright yellow flecke on each page , in a pattern that &apos;s clearly on them and put their printer on them and put their printer on them and put their printer on them and put
that &apos;s what happens today .
and it seems to be a nobody .
and this was an example of what we &apos;re doing in the way our own governments to help us , the citizens , the citizen .
and that &apos;s one of the three main hauptquellen of the existing hauptquellen .
let &apos;s look at what really happens in the world : we can split the attacks .
we have three hauptgruppen .
there are online-kriminelle .
for example , here &apos;s the gentleman , mr. dimitry golubow from kiew in ukraine .
and the implication of online-kriminellen are very easy to understand .
these people make money .
they use online-angriffe to make a lot of money , a huge bunch of money .
there are several times of online-millionären , multimillionären , who have their money in the angriffe .
this is wladimir tsastsin from tartu in estonia .
this is alfred hitchcock .
stephen watts .
björn sundin .
these are matthew anderson , tariq al-daour and so on and so on .
these people are online , but they &apos;ve got it to be illegal , but they &apos;ve got it to klauen , and they have illegal , in our bankkonten , as we have our online-banking , or keylogger , that our kredikarteninformationen , which we have to have to have to have a group of the tastatur , whereas we have a infected of a infected .
the us-amerikanische geheimdienst fror of two months ago , the swiss konto sam here , and on this device was 14,9 million dollars , when it was frozen .
mr. jain himself is on the ground foot , the aufenthaltsort is unknown .
and i argue that it &apos;s more likely to be more likely to be victims of a online-verbrechens , as a crime in the world .
and it &apos;s very obvious that this is going to be worse .
in the future , most crimes are abspielen online .
the second largest angreifergruppe we can see today are not by money .
they are by something else -- it &apos;s about something like , a opinion , or a audience .
groups like anonymous are over the last 12 months , and they become one of the hauptspieler of the hauptspieler in the field of online-angriffe .
so these are the three hauptangriffsgruppen : criminals that make it because of the money , as anonymous as anonymous as usual , but the last group are nations , governments who are going to conduct the attacks .
there &apos;s a cases where the von .
it shows what happens when it &apos;s going to attack their own citizens .
diginotar is a vollmachtszertifikat from the netherlands -- and it was that .
in the last fall , it was insolvenz , because diginotar was hacked .
somebody was the system , and had the system .
and last week in a meeting , i asked one of the most of these group of this group , if he was able to do it for possible that because of the people were died .
and his answer was &quot; yes . &quot;
now , how die of dying people in a row ?
diginotar is a zertifizierungsstelle .
they sell pirate .
what do you do with zertifikaten ?
well , a certificate , you need a website with https , with ssl-verschlüsselten , for instance .
now we all use , or many of us , or many of us , gmail , or a konkurrenten , wo , wo , wo , wo , wo , wo , dissidenten , which is more trust , and they know that they &apos;re über and they &apos;re going to be ssl-verbindungen encoded , so that local government can &apos;t be in their conversations .
but if you look at a foreign foreign time in a foreign foreign age .
zertifizierungsbehörde hacken and social zertifikate .
and that &apos;s what happens in the trap of diginotar .
how does it take the arab spring and the things that are happening in egypt ?
now , in egypt , the aufständischen in april 2011 , the headquarters of the egyptian geheimpolizei , and it found a lot of intact .
in this records was a folder called &quot; finfisher . &quot;
and in this folder , notes in germany , who was a bunch of ansässigen in germany , who sold a few programs that they were able to be able to use with a very big picture of the egyptian citizen of the egyptian citizen .
they had this program for the 280.000 euro to the egyptian government .
the firmenhauptquartier is right here .
so we have governments governments governments to hilfsmitteln with hilfsmitteln , so that they can cause against their own citizens .
but western governments also help himself .
in germany , in germany , just a few weeks ago , the so-called sogenannte found was a trojaner , which was used by german regierungsvertretern to bespitzeln their own citizens .
if you &apos;re going to be a kriminalfall verdächtigt , you will be more likely to be ziemlicher your phone .
but today we are far beyond that .
they would tap their internet .
they use tools like the staatstrojaner to bespielen their computer with a trojaner that allows you to monitor their entire communications , their online-diskussionen abzuhören , their passwörter .
so if we think about things like this , and then the obvious answer that would be , &quot; ok , that sounds bad , but it doesn &apos;t work , because i &apos;m a braver citizen .
i don &apos;t have to worry .
i don &apos;t hide anything . &quot;
and this argument makes no sense .
privacy has to be given .
privacy is not to debate .
it &apos;s not a decision between privacy and safety .
it &apos;s a decision between freedom and control .
and while we &apos;re doing today , in 2011 , our governments like governments like , is every right that we &apos;re wired to be on forever .
and trust us , we trust a blind future government , a government that we might have been in 50 years ?
these are the questions that we have to deal with the next 50 years .
it may seem strange , but i &apos;m a big fan of betonblocksteinen .
the first betonblocksteine were synthesized , and entstammten entstammten , from a simple idea : module from cement with festgelegten , which is the job .
betonbausteine became very quickly , very quickly in the world .
they &apos;re pushing us to build things that were bigger than us , building buildings , bridges , a rock after the other .
essentially , the betonbaustein was the betonbaustein for the baustein of our time .
almost hundred years later , in 1947 , came out of lego .
it was called &quot; automatically stein . &quot;
and within less years , they went into each household .
it &apos;s estimated that over 400 billion bricks were produced -- or 75 rocks for each person on the planet .
they don &apos;t have to be an engineer to be able to get a engineer to make beautiful homes , beautiful bridges or beautiful building .
lego made it possible for all of us .
lego has basically created the betonbaustein , the branches of the world , and it made a building for our imagination .
in the meanwhile , the next year was the next record , the next revolution announced the next building .
the transistor was a little plastikeinheit that was from a world of a world , aufeinandergestapelten building blocks in a world where everything was going to be interactive .
like the betonblock , the transistor allows us to build much greater , more manageable , a rock after the other .
but there &apos;s a hauptunterschied : the transistor was only for experts .
personally , i didn &apos;t accept that the flow of our time is experten , and so i decided to change that .
eight years ago , i was at the media lab , and i started exploring this idea of how you could put the power of the engineers in the hand of artists and designers .
several years ago , i started developing littlebits .
let me show you how they work .
littlebits are electronic , who have a specific function .
they &apos;re vorgefertigt , light , sound , motor and sensor .
and the best part is that they connect with magnets together .
so you can &apos;t get them wrong .
the stones are farbcodiert .
green is a copy , blue is electricity , pink is input and orange is wires .
so , all you need to do is to have a blue and a green link , and they can build very quickly very quickly .
they give you a blue blue , and you can make light .
you can put a switch between a wall and so they made a little dimmer .
take the switch out in the switch , the switch , the einzufügen , and they &apos;ve done a little blinker .
and put this buzzer for a extra effect , and they have a lärmmaschine .
i will stop that .
and the simple play is actually littlebits , is actually quite powerful .
instead of programming that you have to code , verdrahten , erlaubt , erlaubt them with simple , intuitive gestures .
so to accelerate the flashing or slow , they just turn on this button and it makes the impuls faster .
the idea behind the idea is that it &apos;s a growing library .
we want to bring any individual interaction in this world in a gebrauchsfertigen rock .
lights , sound , solarelemente , motoren -- all should be available .
we have littlebits littlebits and they &apos;re playing with it .
and it was an unbelievable experience .
the implication is , how do you start the electronics in the everyday sense , and they don &apos;t learn in school .
like , like a nachtlicht , or why the doors of the aufzugs , or how a ipod responds to touch .
we also have littlebits littlebits .
so we had designers with no designers in electronic ways that started playing with littlebits as a material .
here we see , with filz , paper and water , like geordie ...
several weeks ago , we brought to risd , and they gave them some designers that had no technische experience , and they were karton , wood and paper , and they said , &quot; power . &quot;
here &apos;s an example of a project that they made , a bewegungsgesteuerte konfetti-kanone .
but wait , this is really my lieblings-projekt .
it &apos;s a hummer from play-dough , fear in darkness .
for this nicht-ingenieure , littlebits , a another material , and it was just another material .
and we want to make this material for all available .
so , so littlebits open source .
you can go on the website , all of the designvorlagen and make yourself .
we want the world of the creators , the inventor , the mitwirkenden , because this world , in which we live in this interactive world , belongs to us .
so , they go out and start to invent .
thank you .
