you know , one of the great vernügen of traveling , and one of the most important research in the ethnographischen research , with the people who are still struggling to the old days , they still touch the other , they touch the rain of the rain , they &apos;re going to be in the bitter of plants .
just the knowledge that the jaguar-schamanen of the milky way , or the importance of the inuit of the inuit , or the importance of the inuit of the inuit , or the importance of the inuit of the inuit , which is the world &apos;s the world &apos;s the world &apos;s the world , which is , in the world , not as a model of the reality ,
and of course , we share all the same requirement .
we &apos;re all born all . we &apos;re bringing children to the world .
we &apos;ve durchlaufen initiationsrituale .
we need to take us with the unaufhaltsamen separation of the death of death and so that we shouldn &apos;t surprise us all the singing , dancing and art .
but what &apos;s interesting is the unique measure of the liedes , the rhythm of the dance in every culture .
it doesn &apos;t matter if it &apos;s not the penan in the woods of the book , or the krieger in the woods , or the krieger in the anden , or the krieger in the sahara , or a month in the desert , or a month in the desert , or even a yak-hirte on the slopes of the qomolangma , everest , the gottmutter of the world
all these people teach us that there are other existenzmöglichkeiten , others , others to go to the orientation on the planet .
and this is a notion that you think about it , you can just hope to hope .
together together , the myriad of the world of the world of the world , and the unzähligen of the world is living in the world , and the earth &apos;s earth is equally important as the biological lebensnetz that you know as biosphere .
you can imagine this cultural lebensnetz , and you can imagine a ethnosphäre , ethnosphäre can imagine the most sophisticated thoughts and dreams , and the intuitionen , inspiration and intuitionen , who are being applied to the early &apos; imagination .
the ethnosphäre is the great legacy of mankind .
it &apos;s the icon of what we are and what we &apos;re doing as a amazing species in species .
and as the biosphere of biosphere were being realized , this was with the ethnosphäre -- just with more than higher speed .
no biologist would say that 50 percent of the time , that 50 percent of the time , because it just &apos;s just a lot of arten , because it just simply -- that &apos;s the apokalyptischste szenarium on the field of biological diversity , which is almost to be known as a optimistischstes szenarium on the field of cultural diversity .
and the key to the importance of it is the extinct .
when any of you in this room was born , were talked about 6,000 6,000 languages .
now , a language is not only the totality of the vokabulars or a series of grammatikregeln .
a language is expression of human spirit .
it &apos;s a means to the soul of a certain culture , to the tangible world .
every language is like a altbestehender forest of the spirit , a turning point , a thought , a ecosystem spiritueller possibilities .
and from these 6,000 languages , as we sit in monterey , we &apos;re right now , half of the ears of children .
they don &apos;t get more like , and that &apos;s what if nothing gets done , they &apos;re actually dead .
what could be lonely , to be one of the silence of the schweigen , one of the last of your own body , who are talking to your language , not a way to get the wisdom of the ancestors , or the hope of the future ?
and yet , in fact , this terrible gap actually has a somewhere on the earth , and all two weeks , because all two weeks , a elderly man , and takes the last one in the grave .
and i know that some of you say , &quot; isn &apos;t it better ? &quot; if we &apos;re not going to be a better place , if we were all going to talk to a better place , &quot; and i say , &quot; well , let &apos;s say , &quot; well , let &apos;s be kantonesisch .
let &apos;s be kogi . &quot;
and then you would recognize them , how it would be , if you could not speak your own language .
so i want to take you on a journey of a journey through a journey of the ethnosphäre , a short journey through the ethnosphäre , to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try
now there are some of us who forget that i forgot if i say , &quot; different ways of the screen , &quot; really different ways of the radar .
take this kid in the nordwesten of the amazon , the people who anakonda the people that they mythologisch the milchfluss from the east from the outside , im schlangen in the belly of st. snakes .
this is a people who don &apos;t have a kognitiv between the color and green , because the himmelszelt of the forest , from the people .
they have a reasonable language , and a heiratsvorschrift die called the linguistic exogamie , you have to marry someone who &apos;s talking to one other language .
so all of this in the past past , and that meant that eigenartige in these big houses , where there are the großen of the mischehen , and the age of seven languages , but you know , you never hear somebody who &apos;s learning a language .
they just listen to you and start talking .
or , one of the most intriguing tribes that i &apos;ve ever lived with , who was ever lived in the northeast of ecuador , a amazing people who were struggling to be more helpful .
in 1957 , five missionare kontakt and made a schwerwiegenden mistake .
they pump the warfen images from the air , which we would rate as a lifestyle . and forgot that these people were never seen out of the rainforest in their life .
they made these photographs from the forest , trying to see the face , or the character , and they were expecting that to be the most profitable and töteten that were the five missionare of the teufels .
but the waorani töteten , not only do it with the resources .
they &apos;re durchbohrten each other .
54 percent of deaths has been held by durchbohrungen .
we also went back to the geneaologie eight generations and found two of a natural death , and when we had a lot of people to do with a lot of people , and they had to get a lot of people that he had had so old that he died of his ages , and we killed it with the spear .
but at the same time , they had a clear kenntnis of the forest , which was amazing .
your hunters could come from a given of a given of 40 steps , and determine what this was happening .
in the early &apos; 80s , i got a really amazing job when i was going to go to harvard in harvard , when i was interested in the harvard , and the secret societies of duvalier and tonton , and the toxin that was used to make the poison , which was used to make the zombies .
to give this a sense of , i had to give a sense of this remarkable faith , and i don &apos;t have a kult of the vodoun knowledge and voodoo , not a catalyst of the black magic .
in the contrary , it &apos;s about a complex metaphysische worldview .
it &apos;s interesting .
if i would ask you , the great lead of the world &apos;s population , what would you say ?
christianity , islam , buddhism , buddhism , judaismus or whatever .
a continent is always , because the presumption that it was in sub-saharan africa , and of course , there was a religious belief , and of course , there was a very serious idea of the very very powerful ideas that &apos;s während during the tragic diaspora .
but what &apos;s interesting is so interesting to this is this powerful relationship between the living and the dead .
the living is the living gebären .
the spirits can be heraufbeschwört , and to verdrängen answers to the rhythm of the dance to extract the soul of the living , so that the akolyth for a short moment for a moment .
deshab , the voodooisten , they like to say , &quot; your white goes into church and you &apos;re talking about god .
we dance in temple , and they &apos;re going to be too . &quot;
and because you &apos;re obsessed with , you &apos;re going to be a bit of mind . how can you get damage ?
now , you see this amazing graph : voodoo-akolythen in a trancezustand , voodoo-akolythen kohle , the glühende coal of the mind , a startling device of the ability to impact that this is what it &apos;s going to be aushält when he gets into the condition of the extremes .
now , from all the people i met , the kogi kogi of sierra nevada santa in nordkolumbien marta , who live in the world .
the offspring of the old civilization , the karibische küstenebene of colombia , and in a row of the majority of the conquest who was going to take this people in a isoliertes vulkanisches , that &apos;s aufsteigt .
in a blutbefleckten continent , these people were never the only ones that were never performed by the spaniern .
until today , you &apos;ll be a day , you will be inspired by a ritual priesthood , and the education is very exceptional .
the young akolythen , three years of three years from the finsternis of the finsternis , in the fuße of the moon , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , in the fuße of the gletscher , in the &apos; 30s , to the nine months of pregnancy , in the &apos; 30s , the nine months of pregnancy , they were going to spend the nine months
and during that whole time , they &apos;re going to be buried in the values of their society , values that claim that their prayers , and only their prayers , who killed the cosmic -- or we could say the ecological -- balance .
at the end of this amazing , you will find out of the erstaunlichen , and in the middle of the first time , you see a sonnenaufgang , and in the alter of the first time , it &apos;s going to be a sunrise , and in the alter of the first time , it &apos;s going to be a sonnenaufgang , and the priest , and he said
it &apos;s so wonderful . you &apos;ve got it . &quot;
they call the older brothers and say that we are the younger brothers , for the destruction of the world .
now this level of intuition is going to be very important .
and if we think about the bridge and landscape , we either entweder , and the old side of the global power of the global space , which is a rassistischer thought , or , say , these people are more connected to nature than we are .
so , in general , they &apos;re not sentimental , nor are they &apos;re going to be controlled by the nostalgie .
it &apos;s not much place in the malariaverseuchten sümpfen of tibet , or the cold winden of tibet , they have , but at the same time , in the idee of the earth , but not to be aware of a very weit intuition , but it &apos;s going to be a very long way to get it out of , because it &apos;s going to be hineingeatmet in
well , what does that mean ?
it means that a little child who &apos;s a apu-geist of the andes that &apos;s going to be a apu-geist , and you can determine the mountain , and a different relationship with this place , and a very different relationship with the belief that a mountain was that a mountain can be a lot of rocks that can be realized .
if he &apos;s a aufenthaltsort of a spirit or a lot of erz , is irrelevant .
the interesting thing is the metaphor that &apos;s relationship between the individual and nature .
i grew up in the woods of britisch kolumbien , and believed that these forests are there to become gerodet .
and that made me another human being in another human being , and i think , for another human being , the glauben of the kwakiutl , who believe that these forests are geister of hukuk and the kannibalischen , the most nordende of the world , which they would be in their hamatsa-initiation .
now , if you start looking at the idea that this cultures can create different kinds of different realities , you can understand some of their extraordinary discoveries , and that &apos;s one plant here .
it &apos;s a photograph i only was just last april in the middle of the amazon .
this is ayahuasca , from many of you who &apos;ve heard the most beautiful präparat of the repertoire of the repertoire of the schamanen .
what &apos;s really fascinating is that &apos;s not only the pharmakologische potential of this präparats , but it &apos;s really taken out of two different sources , and it &apos;s really taken out of two different sources , and it &apos;s really taken out of two different sources , birgt , birgt , but it &apos;s going to be a blue trüber smoke , but it &apos;s going to be
this plant contains some very strong tryptamine that are very similar to serotonin , dimethyltryptamin-5 and methoxydimethyltryptamin .
once you &apos;ve seen the yanomami , how they take this stuff , this substance that they made from different species , they also make a lot of different ways .
this is a powder of schnupfen , about such a gewehrlauf , gesäumt of barocken paintings and the landing on a sea of electricity .
it won &apos;t be a distortion of reality , but the resolution of reality .
i even have a professor , richard evan , richard shultes , who was eingeleitet , who was eingeleitet , who was discussing the psychedelische of the discovery of the magischen mushrooms in mexico , and i said that you couldn &apos;t feel that tryptamine einordnen , you know , you &apos;re not in the moment , you &apos;re not going to be a halluzination .
but the thing with tryptaminen is that they can &apos;t be oral , because they &apos;re through a im of the human intestine , of course , vorkommendes enzym with name .
you can only connect with some other chemicals , which is going to be eingenommen that the mao denaturieren .
now the intriguing thing is that the betakarboline that are in the liane , mao-inhibitoren of the kind of thing that &apos;s necessary to take the tryptamine .
how can these people from a new species of 80,000 species of 80,000 adstringierender plants , these two ovaries plants are not allowed to find the kind of weise plants , which is that the whole way of creating the whole larger than the sum of its parts ?
we use this great euphemism , try and error , what it turns out .
but you asked the theme to say , &quot; the plant speaks to us . &quot;
so what does that mean ?
this tribe , the cofan , 17 standards , they all have the alle of ayahuasca , who you all of the big distance in the forest that seems to be a kind of a kind of .
and then you ask them , how you open your taxonomie and you say , &quot; i thought you &apos;re a little bit of plants .
i mean , you know ? &quot; and i said , &quot; no . &quot;
so , it turns out that you &apos;re going to take any of the 17 variants in vollmond , and they sing to a different pulse .
now , that doesn &apos;t tell you a ph.d. in harvard , but it &apos;s much more interesting than stamina .
now , the problem- problem is that even the people who have the sympathie of the hard position , the sympathie of the hard time , they look at as a orginiell and farbenfroh , but they somehow kind of beschränken around the past , and that &apos;s the real world , our world , our world , fortschreitet .
so , the fact that you &apos;re going to be in the 20th century , in 300 years , not as a new way of being a era of the time , but in the middle of the biological and cultural biodiversity on earth , or the massive , or the passiv , the problem is not the change .
all cultures have been involved in the dance with new lebenmöglichkeiten .
and the problem is not the technology of technology .
the sioux-indianer don &apos;t have any less to be less than they were using and arrow , when the americans stopped americans , when they were going to be the horse and pferdewagen .
not change and technology bedrohen the integrity of the ethnosphäre . it &apos;s power . the ugly face of rule .
and wherever you &apos;re going to be in the world , you &apos;re going to be able to see the ungeheuerliche of the untergang , and the japanischen of the flussufer is the ungeheuerliche of the horizont , which is the japanischen of the horizont , which is the japanischen of the horizont , which is the japanischen of the horizont , which is the japanischen of the horizont ,
or if we go into the mountains of tibet , where i &apos;m going to see a lot of work , you will see the ugly face of the political level .
you know , the genocide , the genocide , the phyische extinction of people , but the ethnozid , the destruction of the people who are not just convicted , but vielerorts , but vielerorts as a part of a entwicklungsstrategie .
and you can &apos;t understand the suffering , if you &apos;re not going to have the level of the level .
i once on a young fellow kollegen miles from chengdu , and i went to the face of lhasa , i went to the face of lhasa , and i went to the face of the statistics , and i went to the statistics of the statistics , and they were going to be verwandelt , and they were drafted in schutt , and asche million people who were killed
the father of the young manns was identified as a followers of the panchen .
that meant that he was instantly killed at the chinese invasion .
his uncle , with her holiness with her holiness , who went to nepal .
his mother was imprisoned , as punishment , for the crime for the crime .
he was raised in the age of two years to hide under your rockzipfel , because they couldn &apos;t live without him .
the sister who did this brave , was built in a erziehungslager .
one day , she stepped out of a armband maos and those übertretung to for seven years in a heavy program .
suffering can be suffering , but the most erlösende spirit of people &apos;s human mind is something more .
and at the end , we &apos;re really going to be a choice , and we want to live in a monochromatischen world of the monotonie or in a polychromatischen world of diversity ?
margaret mead , the great anthropologist , the great anthropologist , she said that it &apos;s the most amazing thing that we &apos;re going to see is that , in a faden , generischen , we &apos;re not only going to see the whole range of human imagination , but we &apos;re not only going to see one day from a dream , and forgetting , we &apos;ve forgotten that
and it &apos;s humbling to think that our species may have been there for our species .
the neolithische revolution that brought us the agriculture , and we have the moment of the kult of the saatkorns of the saatkorns of the schamanen of the schamanen of the schamanen of the schamanen of the schamanen , and the hierarchy of the prosa of the priesterschaft and überschuss , and found 10,000 years ago .
the modern world , as we know it &apos;s hardly 300 years old .
now , this is the oberflächliche story not telling us all the answers to the challenges we are facing in the next millennia .
if we were asking these private companies to the human condition , they respond to 10,000 different voices .
and in this song , we &apos;ll be able to be the possibility of the way that we are , people who are aware of the importance that people can be able to get to the importance of all , and there &apos;s a space to get a space to get a space , and there are great moments of optimism .
here &apos;s a photograph that i was at the northern end of the permian , when i went to inuits on the narwhal-jagd , and this guy , olaya , told me a wonderful tale of his favorite .
the canadian government isn &apos;t always very well with the inuit , and during the course of the 50iger years , in the course of the zuge of our domination , they were forced to pull in settlements .
the grandfather of the großvater of the old man refused .
the family , the fear of his life , he took all the weapons and all the tools .
now you know , you know , the inuit is not afraid of the cold . they &apos;re using them to her advantage .
the gleitschienen of their sled were originally made from fish that was built in karibu-haut , made in karibu-haut .
the man &apos;s son didn &apos;t even get the arctic night or the wehenden storm .
he schlüpfte out outside , let his pants pants from seehundsfell and defäkierte in his hand , and when the poop started to capture , he shaped them into the form of a messers .
he sprühte speichel on the sides of the fäkalien-messers , and when it was frozen , he erstach a dog .
he enthäutete the dog and carriage a dishes , took a sled , spannte a sled , spannte a different dog , and entschwand a anderen , and entschwand over the fäkalien-messer of the gürtel .
so you can do anything else .
and this is a symbol of a lot of view , a symbol of the inuit and all over the world .
the canadian government gave the inuit in april , the complete control of the field over a field that &apos;s bigger than california and texas .
it &apos;s our new house and is heißt .
it &apos;s a unabhängiges area . they all kontrollieren all the mineralvorkommen .
an amazing example of how a nation , a state that can look for their citizens and reach .
and finally , i think it &apos;s pretty obvious , at least for those of us who are to the distant world &apos;s goals , to recognize that they &apos;re not going to go away .
they are the heimatländer of somebody .
they represent the other part of the human imagination , which in los angeles , and for all of us , the dreams of these children are the dreams of our own children in the geography of hope .
what we &apos;re trying to do with national geographic , is that we believe that politicians never get to do something .
we believe that polemik -- we believe that the polemik isn &apos;t really convincing the world , but we believe that the world can change the world , and we &apos;re probably the best institution in the world , and our website is going to give 35 million pounds of hits every month .
156 nations send our fernsehkanal .
our zeitschriften , we &apos;re going to read a lot of million .
and we &apos;re doing a series of traveling in the field of traveling in the field of the ethnosphäre in the field of the ethnosphäre , which we &apos;re going to be able to think of the other , in the ethnosphäre of such cultural and hopefully , you will see that the world is required to exist on various ways that we can find a lebensmöglichkeit of a really
thank you .
what i &apos;m going to first show you , as quickly as possible , is a new technology that we have microsoft , and it &apos;s a teil of a übernahme , and it &apos;s a surrounding a environment where they can either possibly local or extract materials from the vast data of data .
we see lots of the main characteristics of digital images that you can get to nahtlos and fortwährend , schwenken , on a way to reinvent it .
and it &apos;s no matter how many information we look at how big these collections are or how big the images are .
most of you are digital photos of a camera , but this one is a scan of the kongressbibliothek , and it &apos;s in a field of 300 megapixeln .
it doesn &apos;t matter , because the only thing that &apos;s the performance of the performance of the time , is the number of your screen on every moment , it also has a very flexible architecture .
this is a whole book , an example of nichtbild-daten .
this is bleak house by dickens . every column is a chapter .
to prove that it really is really a text and not to take a picture , we can actually show something like that , really , to show that this one real representation of the texts and no picture .
maybe this is a kind of a kind of way to read a e-buch .
i wouldn &apos;t recommend it .
this is a realistischerer case . this is a copy of the guardian .
each big picture is the beginning of a abschnitts .
and that gives you the pleasure and the good experience of a magazine , and reading a newspaper of a magazine or a newspaper , which is a kind of medium with multiple .
we also have something about the corner of these particular , the guardian of the guardian .
we &apos;ve designed a false ad with very high processing , which is much higher than a regular ad , and we have additional content .
if you want to see the functions of this car , you can see them here .
or other models , or even technological drinking .
and this is actually taking these ideas , this limits for the verfügbaren of the screen .
we hope that no pop-ups and others means more means -- that should not be necessary .
of course , that &apos;s the mapping one of the really powerful applications for a technology like this .
and i don &apos;t want to spend a lot of time , except that we &apos;re also contributing to this area .
but these are all streets in the tracks of the higgs boson .
übereinandergelagert up on the top of the nasa picture .
let &apos;s give you something else .
now , that &apos;s even a live in the internet . you can nachprüfen it .
this is a project with the name of the name that really connect us to each other .
the one is seadragon , and the other is a very good research about computervision , who von from noah snavely , who was a universitätsstudenten of the university of washington , from steve seitz , from steve seitz to the uw of the uw .
and rick szeliski was done by microsoft . a very good collaboration .
so this is live in the internet . it &apos;s powered by seadragon .
you can see that if we can create this kind of views of ansichten , where we can penetrate pictures through images and make these experience of the mehrfachen .
but the spatial orientation of imagery is in the fact that matters .
the computervision-algorithmen , these pictures have made these pictures together with the real space that was alle in the canadian lakes , who were all nähe in the canadian rockies , and you see here elements of stabilisierten slides , or panoramischer , and those things were all over the world &apos;s history .
i don &apos;t know if i have time to show others other people .
there are the ones that are much more sophisticated .
i would like to show you a der of the originalen of noah , and that &apos;s from a early prototype of photosynth , which i &apos;ve been working on in summer , which i think it &apos;s really the punchline of this technology , and this is not so obvious when you look at the environments that we look at the site .
we had to worry about the lawyers , etc .
this is a rekonstruktion of the cathedral , who are linked to the computer in the computer , which is just a ausschließlich of flickr , and they &apos;re just notre in flickr , and they &apos;ll just get pictures of men in the t-shirts and they get pictures of men and the universitätsgelände , and every one of these orange , that &apos;s discovered as a picture of the
so these are all flickr-bilder , and they all are all the way to this in relation .
and we can navigate that very simple way .
i know , i never believed that i &apos;ll be able to work at microsoft .
i &apos;m very grateful for the reception here .
and i guess you can see that this is a lot of different kinds of cameras : everything is to take away from the handy-kamera of the world &apos;s handy-kamera , and it &apos;s a pretty large number of you who were all in this environment .
and if i can get , i &apos;ll find some of the weird .
many of you are from a handful of the world , etc .
somewhere here , there are a series of photographs -- here they are .
this is actually a poster of notre dame , who recorded it was really recorded .
we can also move from the poster to a physical view of this environment .
the point here is that we can do things with the social environment , and it will be now data from all the gesammelt of all the gesammelt -- from the whole collective of all the collective memory of how , visually , like , visually , and everything is interconnected .
these photographs are interconnected and it &apos;s connected to each other , and it &apos;s a bigger than the sum of the parts .
you get a model that comes from the whole soil .
so , look at this as the sequel of the work of stephen lawlers at the virtual earth .
and this is something that &apos;s using the complexity of complexity , with the people of using it , and using the user of the user that &apos;s always gets bigger .
your own photos are going to be with metadata , who has a different person .
if someone has done the hard , and you can see all of these heiligen , and i can &apos;t take them to the ausgangspunkt of all this data , and i can use them to dive into these room , in these metaverse , in these metaverse , in these metaverse , the photographs of other people , and so , using a kind of übergreifender modaler experience with
and of course , the immense of all of these are the immense reichen of the earth , every interesting part of the earth that are not only by überflüge or satellitenbilder , but by the collective memory .
thank you .
i do it right ? your software is that your software is allowing us to be able to use a certain point of view , all the images that are used by someone in the world , are being used by the principle ?
yeah . you don &apos;t make anything else .
if you want to make them hyperlinks between the images .
and they do this because of the inhalts in the images .
and that &apos;s really exciting when you think about the abundance of the semantischen information that have a lot of these pictures .
how if you &apos;re a websuche for pictures , where they &apos;re sentences and the text of the website , which is a lot of information that &apos;s what it is .
but how if that &apos;s what the picture you put on all your images ?
then the scope of the semantischen querverbindung , and the abundance that makes it out of it , really , really , really , it &apos;s a classic netzwerkeffekt .
blaise , that &apos;s really incredible . congratulations .
thank you very much .
i &apos;ll tell you some things from my book , which i hope you &apos;ve heard about other things , and i &apos;m going to try to make a few connections , if you &apos;re not noticed .
i want to start with what i call &quot; hyperbolic dogma . &quot;
the official dogma of what ?
the official glaubenssatz of all western industrialized societies .
the official dogma is working on the way that our goal is the maximize of the public of our own citizens , is that this is a particularly of the freedom of freedom of the individual .
the reason is that freedom is good , valuable , make a unverzichtbare premise for human purposes .
if people have freedom , then each of us is to do the things that are maximize our national and no one for us to decide .
the way to maximize freedom is to maximize choice .
the more choices of people have , the more freedom have , and the more freedom you have , the more we have .
this is , i think so deep in our water , verankert that it would come to the sense of purpose .
and it &apos;s also embedded in our lives .
i &apos;ll give you some examples of what we need to allow us to us .
this is my supermarket . no big .
i just want to say just a little bit about salatdressing .
there &apos;s five dressings in my supermarket , if you can &apos;t buy the 10 different extra extra extra , and 12 balsamico-essig that you could buy a large number of lettuce in the brain , that no one &apos;s 175 in the store is right for you .
so that &apos;s how the supermarket is .
and then you go to the verbraucher-elektronik business , and then you go to a stereo -- speaker , cd-player , ein , radio , and in this one electronics , there &apos;s so many stereo .
we can 6.5 millions of different unterschiedliche anlagen from the components that are offered in this business .
they have to admit that this is a great choice .
in other areas -- the world of communication .
there was a time when i was a boy , because i was able to have all the phone anbieter , and he wanted to get the long time .
they &apos;ve got your phone . they didn &apos;t bought it .
a consequence of the whose was never been broken .
these days are over .
now we have a couple of a endless set of people , especially in the world of mobile phones .
these are the mobile phones of the future .
my favorite is the middle of the middle -- mp3-player- , nasen-haar-trimmer , nasen-haar-trimmer brûlée .
and you should have seen that until now , you can &apos;t see in your business , you can be safe , you &apos;ll be soon .
and what it does is it makes people to run into the business and ask these question .
you know what the answer is to this question ?
the answer is no . &quot;
it &apos;s not possible to buy a cell phone , not too much .
in other aspects of life that are very much more than the buy of objects , the same explosion of choice .
health -- it &apos;s not longer in the united states that they go to the doctor and the doctor &apos;s going to do what to do .
instead , they go to doctor and the doctor , you can do a better or we could do b .
a a lot of these benefits and risks .
b has this benefits and risks . what do you want to do ?
and they say , &quot; doctor , what should i do ? &quot;
the doctor says , a great deal of the benefits and risks and b has the benefits .
what do you want to do ?
and when you say , &quot; if you were , what would you do ? &quot;
the doctor says , &quot; but i &apos;m not you . &quot;
the result is -- we call it &quot; patients , &quot; and this sounds like a good thing , but in reality , the doktor of the burden of the world &apos;s the world &apos;s the same thing , and so , in the doctor , and so , in the best constitution is a decision -- namentlich , namentlich .
there &apos;s a tremendous marketing marketing for verschreibungspflichtige drugs for people like you and me , which when you think about it , not to make meaning , because we don &apos;t buy it .
why would they take us if we can &apos;t buy ?
the answer is : they expect to go from the closest to the next morning , and to ask the change of the prescription .
something like our identity is a question of the choices , how this slide is supposed to show .
we &apos;re not erben identity , we invent them .
and we &apos;re going to reinvent ourselves as much as we want .
that means that every day , if you wake up at the morning , you decide to decide what you want to be .
in terms of marriage and family , there was a time that almost everybody had a time , and that &apos;s how everybody had been a eine and they could have as fast as they could have as fast as they could .
the only true choice was &quot; who &quot; who was , not when they did not .
today is all just to have .
i teach wonderful intelligent students , and i give you 20 percent less than i did .
and that &apos;s not because they &apos;re less smart , and not because they &apos;re less carefully .
it &apos;s because they &apos;re different with other things , you ask yourself , &quot; should i marry ? should i marry ?
should i marry later ? should i do children , or just a career ? &quot;
these are all kinds of questions .
and they &apos;re going to answer these questions , if that means that it means all the tasks that i &apos;m going to make you to do with you and not make a good note in my class .
and in fact , they should do that . these are important questions .
work -- we &apos;re blessed , like carl , with the benefits of every single day of every day on the planet -- to the randolph hotel .
there &apos;s a corner of the way , by the way , i &apos;m going to tell you about the wirelesslan .
i &apos;m not going to tell you , because i want to use it .
so what it means , this incredible freedom of choice we have in terms of making decisions and again and again , and again , we should not work or not work .
we can play our children to play football , and we have our mobile phone , and our body on the one , and our blackberry is to others , and our laptop is probably on our own inheritance .
and also if you all of all of them are , every minute we &apos;re asking our kid in the middle of a fußballspiels , we should ask ourselves , &quot; should i think this call ? &quot; should i think this call ? &quot;
should i write this email ? should i write this letter ? &quot;
and also , if the answer to the question is , &quot; no , it &apos;s certainly going to be very different from your child &apos;s child &apos;s experience , very different than it was .
everywhere we see , large things and small things , material things and lifestyle , life is a question of choice .
and the world in the world we were looking for .
so i want to say , there was some choices , but not all of it was a matter of choice .
and the world now is now look like this .
and the question is , are the good news or bad news ?
the answer is &quot; yes . &quot;
we all know what good is , so i &apos;m going to be what &apos;s bad .
all these choices have two effects , two of the negative effects on humans .
a effect of a effekt way , is that he &apos;s going to be a living instead .
so many options from you can vote to choose it , it &apos;s very hard to decide .
i &apos;m going to give you another example of the one of the beispiel for a study of investment in volunteers .
a couple of me has access to me on investitions-akten , gigantischen fondgesellschaft of about a million of a million and a 2,000 .
and what she was found was a 10 of the 10 investmentfonds that was anbot the arbeitgeber of the employer , took about two percent .
they &apos;re offering 50 investmentfonds -- 10 percent less employees , as if you only would only be five of them , why ?
because 50 investmentfonds are the auswahl who are so hard to decide what you should choose to vote on it .
and then tomorrow , and tomorrow , tomorrow , tomorrow , and tomorrow , of course , never .
you know , that &apos;s not only that the people need to eat the people in the retirement , because they don &apos;t have enough money to the car , because they also have that , it &apos;s so hard to miss the great investitionsangebote of your employers .
not only about the aid , you get to 5,000 u.s. dollars per year , and the happy was happy to raise their contribution .
paralysis is a suite of many choices .
and i think it &apos;s like the world that looks like this .
they want to make the decision to make really cool if it &apos;s for all eternity , right ?
they don &apos;t want to vote the wrong side of the side of the side , or even the wrong thing .
so that &apos;s one effect . the other effect is that even if we hit the paralysis and make a decision , we end up with the outcome of choice when we had the possibility to decide what we had to decide for less possibility .
and there are multiple reasons for this .
one of them is , in fact , one of them is , in the big choice , and it &apos;s not a perfect thing to do , and it &apos;s not a perfect choice that you could have been able to do the decision , and this is what this is a negativ of the zufriedenheit , which is , you know , the bereuen of the happiness ,
the more possibilities there are , the simple thing is to do not regret that &apos;s disappointing for the choice .
secondly , what economists call the economists call .
dan gilbert has a great point of this morning by telling him how very the way that we &apos;re doing things that we &apos;re doing about what we &apos;re doing .
well , if there &apos;s a lot of alternative to concerns , it &apos;s just a lot of the qualities of alternative qualities that they make them , they make less content with the alternatives that they chose .
here &apos;s an example . for those of you who are not new yorkers , i apologize .
but here , what you would have to think .
here &apos;s a couple of on the hamptons .
very expensive .
beautiful beach . great day . you &apos;ve got it all for themselves .
what could be better ? &quot; &quot; damn &quot; the man thinks , &quot; it &apos;s august . &quot;
everyone in my manhattener neighborhood is gone .
i could have been park in front of my house . &quot;
and he &apos;s until 2 weeks , he &apos;s going to miss the possibility to have a day , a great parking lot .
oppertunitätskosten senken , the happiness that we receive through our selection , even if we &apos;ve been fantastic .
and the more possibilities is the choice , the more hiv attributes of these selection are going to be in the oppertunitätskosten .
here &apos;s another example .
well , this cartoon of this cartoon is going to happen .
he &apos;s doing a statement about this now and maybe too much about it .
but a more important point is , always , you always decide to decide to do other things , they decide not to do other things .
and these other things like many attraktive qualities , and it will make what they do to do less .
third : eskalation expectations .
this was struck me when i wanted my jeans .
i &apos;m wearing jeans , almost all the time .
and there was a time in the way that there was just a kind of kind of a kind of kind of a kind of kind of a kind of style , and they bought them , they were incredibly unkomfortabel , and they were enough enough to have enough , they started to have the fine .
so , for a lot of years to buy a lot of years of the old age of the old , and i said , &quot; i &apos;d like to have a few jeans , here &apos;s my size . &quot;
and the salesmen said , &quot; do you want to schlanke , light anliegende or weite ?
want to do it , or reißverschluss ? rock or your head ?
want to do it , you want to get holes ?
you want to be cut down down , kegelig , blah blah blah blah , &quot; and so on .
my jaws was down and i said i said , &quot; i &apos;d like to have the way that used to be the only way to the only way . &quot;
he had no idea what was , so i spent an hour of all this damn jeans , and i spent the business of the business , and i say the truth -- with the truth -- with the best way i ever had .
i &apos;d better . all these selection had made it better .
but i felt bad .
why ? i emailed a whole book to try to explain myself .
the reason for this , that i felt that i felt , with all these particular options , my expectations for a good pair of jeans .
i had very low expectations . i had no sawdust to erwartungen when they only have a kind of way .
when they came to 100 species , one of you should have got to have got perfectly perfectly , you should have got perfect , you should have got to have got killed , one of you should have got to have got killed , they should have got perfect , you should have got to have got them perfectly , one of you should have got to have got
and what i was doing was good , but it wasn &apos;t perfect .
and so i &apos;ve been doing what i had to get to what i expected , and what i was was was disappointing in comparison to what i expected .
the adding of possibilities in the lives of people who are going to be the expectation of the people who are going to be the way that they will be the possibility of how good these options will be .
and this leads to a lot less happiness with the results , even though the results are good .
none of the world &apos;s the world &apos;s the world &apos;s most of the marketings , because if you would , they knew all of it .
the truth is more like this .
the reason is , that used to be better than anything else was to do was to make people possible to make a great surprise .
today , in the world where we live in the world -- we &apos;re wealthy , in the world , we &apos;re afraid of perfection -- the best for you ever hope to be good as well as you expect .
they never get angenehm because your expectations , my expectations , my expectations .
the secret to the glücklichkeit -- that &apos;s what they &apos;re all come -- the secret to glücklichkeit are low expectations .
i want to say -- a short moment -- i &apos;m a very short moment -- i &apos;m married , and she &apos;s really very wonderfully .
i wouldn &apos;t make better do it better . i don &apos;t have niedergelassen .
but niederlassen isn &apos;t always a bad thing .
finally , a suite of the kaufens of a bad thing , if you &apos;re just a kind of bad thing to buy , if you &apos;re dissatisfied , and they ask them , and they ask questions , who &apos;s clear , the answer is accountable . what would you have ?
if hundreds of different kinds of jeans are available , and they buy one of the disappointing , and they ask why who is responsible ?
it &apos;s also clear that the answer is : you &apos;re .
they could have done better .
with 100 different types of jeans in the schaufenster , there &apos;s no excuse for error .
and so if people make decisions , and also when the results are good , they feel comfortable , they &apos;re comfortable with it .
clinical trials in the world in the world of the industrial generation .
i think a signifikanter -- not the only one , but a signifikanter beiträger of the depression , and also , is that people are erfahren because they have the enttäuschend , because if they &apos;re very high , and then you have to explain that experience , think about it .
and so the bilanzergebnis that it &apos;s going to be more generally than generally , is , learning , and we feel bad .
so let me remind you .
this is the official dogma , which is a one that we all think of all right , completely wrong . it &apos;s not true .
there &apos;s no question that &apos;s a question that &apos;s better than any choice , but it doesn &apos;t follow that more selection is better than something else .
there &apos;s a magical amount of a lot . i don &apos;t know what it is .
i &apos;m pretty sure that we missed this point on the other way our welfare is improving our national well-being .
now , as a matter of a matter of question -- i &apos;m almost ready -- as a a question that &apos;s allowed to think about the idea of all these things in the industrialized societies , is the material .
there are many spots in the world , and we heard about many of you who are not the big choice .
your problem is that they have too little .
so the things i &apos;m talking about is a very curious problem of modern , rich societies .
and what &apos;s so frustrating and a number of times is , steve levitt , telling you about how these expensive and hard to not help us help , it &apos;s a waste of money .
what i tell you is that these expensive , complicated decisions -- it &apos;s not easy to help them .
they &apos;re even going to hurt .
they worry about that we &apos;re standing there .
if something of the people in the human society is helping us to have the societies in people who would have shifted to have the people who would be just not only the lives of people , but our lives also would be better .
economists call this a pareto-verbesserungs application .
einkommensumverteilung is worried that it &apos;s going to be better -- not just the poor -- because all these big selection are us plagt .
finally , you read this cartoon , and then a charity person says , &quot; ah ! what &apos;s the fish ?
you know , you know nothing in this goldfischglas . &quot;
verarmten fantasy , a kurzsichtige view of the world -- and that is the way i read it first .
but the more i thought about it , the more i got to the idea of the fish .
because the truth is that if you &apos;re the goldfischglas , so that it &apos;s all possible , they have no freedom . you have paralysis .
if you break the goldfischglas , so that it &apos;s all possible to do it .
they &apos;re increasing the paralysis and they &apos;re lucky .
everybody needs a goldfischglas .
this is almost with the perfect certainty -- possibly for fish , definitely for us .
but the abhanden is a recipe for a metaphorischen goldfischglas , and i suspect , i suspect .
thank you very much .
you know , i &apos;ve talked about some of these projects already already talking about the human genome and what that could mean , and beyond the discovery of gene .
in fact , we start by a new point : we &apos;re going to try and try to get from the digital code in a new period of biology , and we &apos;re building new life .
we always have to ask the more important questions .
what &apos;s life ? it &apos;s something i think many biologists tried to understand and that &apos;s what &apos;s happening on different levels .
we &apos;ve tried different approaches to simplify it until the minimum components .
we &apos;ve seen virtually 20 20 years . when we sequenced the humangenom , the vollzog of the shift from the distance to the digital world of biology .
now we &apos;re trying to ask whether we can regenerate life , or whether we can make new life out of this digital universe ?
this is the map of a small organism , mycoplasma geitalium , who can reach the smallest genome in the lab , and we &apos;ve tried to reach the smaller genome .
we &apos;ve done it on a lot of genes that are about 500 genes that are here .
but if we look at this metabolic map , which is very simple , in the very simple , is that , and if we all look at all this genes that we &apos;re looking at all of the genes , it &apos;s very unlikely to be a living cell .
so we decided that it &apos;s the only way to do is actually actually , to actually , this chromosome is actually what allows us to do the individual components of the individual and so some of these fundamental questions .
and so we started with the question , we can just ask a chromosome ?
enables it to be able to make the chemistry of these really big molecules , what hasn &apos;t been done before ?
and if we can do that , we can start to start this chromosome ?
a chromosome is just a piece of inertes chemical material .
our steps on the observer of life were exponentially .
our ability to write a lot of genetic code , but nevertheless , and our final point would be put on a exponential curve .
we started started 15 years ago .
it took a few years with a bioethischen review , before we made the first experiments .
how did it really difficult to get a very difficult .
there are tens of thousands of machines around the world , and it &apos;s a degenerativer of 50 to 50 , 30 or 50 to 50 , but it &apos;s a degenerativer process , so you &apos;ll have a piece of a piece of mistake .
so we had to develop a new method that we could put these little pieces and the mistakes .
this was our first try to start with , starting with the digital information , the genome of the genome for the genome .
it &apos;s a little virus of bacteria .
we made small pieces , and we made a fehlerkorrektur and a dna molecule from about 5,000 letters .
the exciting phase came to this piece of inerte , and we took this piece of inerte chemical chemical , and the bacteria started to read the genetic code and made the viral particles .
the viral particles were then got from the cells and got back to the zellen .
recently , i spoke to the oil industry and they said that they &apos;re very similar to this model .
they were laughing more than you are here .
so we think that &apos;s a situation that &apos;s a situation in the software can build your hardware in a biological system .
but we wanted to go to a lot of more on , and we wanted to build a whole bunch of bakterielles chromosome , and it &apos;s got more than 580.000 letters , and we thought we could build it in the size of the virus that we could do in cassette the size of the virus , which is the size of the songs of the kassetten of the
design is the key , and if you want to start with digital information in computer , you have to be able to start these digital information .
when we sequenced the genome in 1995 , the fehlerrate was a fehler in a thousand kilometers per 10,000 .
we found the 30 error , and we &apos;ve never used the original sequence of the original sequence .
part of the design is to make the 50 letters , and they have to overlap with other 50-buchstaben , to make smaller sub-einheiten to make smaller sub-einheiten to build the zusammenpassen .
we have unique elements here .
you may have heard that we &apos;ve got to have waterzeichen .
think about this : we have a 4-buchstaben code : a one , c , g and ts .
triplets of this letter -- these letters kodieren about 20 amino acids ; and there &apos;s a single purpose for each of these amino acids .
so we can use the genetic code to write our words , sentences , thoughts .
and we only have signed signed .
some people were not necessarily that it was no poetry .
we &apos;ve been constructed that the pieces of the pieces that we could take them to fill them with enzymes . there are enzymes that have these repair and back .
and we started building pieces , starting with the fünf- of the fünf- , fügten , fügten , to make these aneinander to make these aneinander to make these aneinander to 72.000 this again .
in every step , we have these pieces in the surplus , so we could make them sequencing , because we tried to create a very robust process , what you &apos;re going to see in a minute .
we &apos;ve tried to get to the point of the automation .
so , that looks like a basketball-playoff .
if we get to this right , and over 100,000 , with 100,000 basenpaaren -- then , these aren &apos;t just going to grow up in the very coli , and it &apos;s all the possibility of modern molecular biology . and so we &apos;re so excited to other things .
we knew from a mechanism of homologe called homologe , which is using biology to fix dna , which can be able to take these things like this .
here &apos;s an example of it . there &apos;s a organism called deinococcus radiodurans , three million rads of radiation .
you see in the top of the top of the top of the chromosome .
12 hours later , everything has been so different as it was .
we have thousands of organisms that can do that .
these organisms can be completely dried , you can actually live in the vacuum .
i &apos;m absolutely sure that life exists in space , and move forward to search for search conditions .
in fact , nasa has shown that there &apos;s a lot of it there .
here &apos;s a gefügeaufnahme of the molecule that we made these processes -- actually , we &apos;ve only used the hefe-mechanismen using the right design of the items , we have them eingepasst them .
this is not a elektronenmikroskopaufnahme of a reguläre mikroskopaufnahme .
it &apos;s so a huge molecule that we can actually see it with the lichtmikroskop .
that &apos;s footage over a few of six seconds .
that &apos;s the publication we &apos;ve finished recently .
these are about 580.000 letters . it &apos;s the greatest molecule with definierter structure that ever had created by people .
it has a molekulargewicht of 300 million .
if we would take it with a schriftgröße of 10 and without more traditional , it would be 142 pages , just to use this genetic code .
now how do we start a chromosome ? how do we do it ?
obviously , it &apos;s a very simple thing . it &apos;s a lot more complicated with bacteria .
it &apos;s also easier to do it in eukaryonten like we &apos;re doing it , you take the only way out of the head , and there &apos;s a different space , and that &apos;s exactly what you &apos;ve all heard about the regrets .
in archaebakterien , the chromosome in the cell , but recently , we &apos;ve shown that you can get a full transplant of a cell from a cell to another cell and that can actually activate them .
we reinigten the chromosome of a mikrobenspezies , and we &apos;ve got a bunch of other people like humans , and we gave them some evidence that we were able to take this chromosome , and it was very amazing to do it , and they &apos;re going to be very amazing than we put it into a cell -- and they &apos;ll be able to estimate our very ausgereiften
the new chromosome went into the cell .
in fact , we thought that &apos;s the end , but we &apos;ve tried to get the process to get a little bit more .
that &apos;s the hauptmechanismus of evolution here .
we &apos;re all going to find all kinds of species that have taken a second chromosome in the middle of a second , every time , thousands of thousands of mathematical presents in just a species .
so people who think evolution is imagine as a gene has been a lot of the way that we &apos;ve missed a lot of biology .
there are enzymes that are called the restriktionsenzyme , which is actually called the dna .
the chromosome in the cell has been not , the chromosome we &apos;ve already had .
it was undertaken in the cell , and i realized the other chromosome as a way of fremdes , and so we had just a cell with a new chromosome .
it &apos;s verfärbte because of the genes we had gotten .
and after a very short period of time , it had all characteristics of species and konvertierte completely in a new species based on the cell , and we &apos;ve given in the cell .
all of the proteins changed the membranes -- when we read the genetic code , it was exactly what we &apos;ve made .
it may sound like how products are sound , but we can design the software-dna verschieben , things are pretty dramatic .
now i &apos;ve got the argumentiert that this is not the genesis -- that &apos;s phosphorus-based , is based on 3.5 billion years of evolution in 3.5 billion years of evolution .
and i &apos;ve been that we &apos;re going to be able to create a new form of the cambrian explosion in the cambrian explosion of new artenbildung based on this digital design .
why should we do that ?
i think it &apos;s pretty obvious to what we need .
we are about nine billion people in the next 40 years .
to ask it in my connection , i was born in nigeria .
today three people are on this planet for every year in year , in 40 years , it will be four years .
we have trouble with food , with fresh water and water water , medicine , medicine , for disease billion people .
it &apos;s going to offer a challenge that &apos;s going to offer nine .
we need about five billion tons of coal , 30-plus billion dollars . that &apos;s a hundred million dollars .
if we think about biological processes or any process to replace that , it will be a huge challenge .
then , of course , there &apos;s all the co2 of this material that &apos;s going on in the atmosphere .
now we have made of our discoveries from all over the world , a database with about 20 million genes , and i want to believe that these are the designkomponenten of the future .
the elektronikindustrie had a dozen components and see the diversity of the universe .
we &apos;re going to come up in the first line in the way to the limits of biological realities and to those of our imagination .
we have technologies today today , today , of these quick synthesemethoden to do what we call genetics .
we have a great robot to build the millions of chromosomes to make millions of chromosomes .
if you imagine these 20 million genes to create the processes of making oktan or drugs , we can change a little more team more sophisticated than the last 20 years .
and it &apos;s only nurmale selection . we can search for lebensfähigkeit selektieren , production of chemicals , and so forth .
this is a photograph of real design-software that we &apos;re working on , with the one that you &apos;re actually sit and new species on the computer screen at the computer , the computer at the computer , the computer at the computer , the computer at the computer , the computer screen to the computer design of the computer design , and we &apos;re doing a new species on
you know , we don &apos;t know how it will look like this . we know exactly how their genetic code will look like .
we &apos;re focusing on the fourth generation generation .
they &apos;ve seen recently , even more recently , what &apos;s just seen a bad experiment .
we have the treibstoffe of the zweiten- and third generation , the relatively higher and the whole higher is going to be a lot of higher , like oktan , or different species of butanol .
but , as we think of the only way of biology on the ground without the weitere of the cost of the cost of the cost of the cost of the cost of the cost of availability , if we see co2 as a brain and so we work on cells that go to the way that way to go to the same way that &apos;s going to go to
and we think we will be the first generation of the fourth generation , and that &apos;s about 18 months .
sunlight and co2 is a method -- a method -- -- a method -- -- a method -- -- a method -- -- a method -- -- a method -- -- a method -- -- a method -- -- a method -- -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method .
but in our discovery of our discovery of our discovery , we have all species of different ways .
that &apos;s a organism that we &apos;ve described .
he lives in the mid-water , about ein-einhalb miles deep , almost kochenden .
it converts co2 in methane to use of hydrogen as a source .
we study if we can use co2 co2 , which could be simply too produktionsplätzen , konvertieren the co2 into fuel to make this process .
within a short period of time , we think we could be able to solve the fundamental questions of life .
you know , we really have -- moderate targets like the ersatz of the entire petrochemischen industry . right ? if you couldn &apos;t do that at ted , where else ? one more energy of energy ?
but as we work on the right now that we &apos;re doing is the same kind of building blocks for development .
they &apos;ve seen this year with flu , we &apos;re always a year on the back , and they &apos;re a dollar to get a dollar to get the right vaccine .
i think that &apos;s going to be an idea by making vaccines vaccines in the vorhinein .
this is how the future might be able to be able to be able to be able to get the evolutionsbaum of the evolutionsbaum , archaen bacteria , archaen , archaen , and perhaps .
we are lichtjahre people from the way to improve people , and our goal is that we have a chance to survive for the potentially to do . thank you very much .
at the last ted conference , i gave a introduction to the lhc .
and i promised to come back to explaining how the machine works .
so it &apos;s so far , and for all those who were not there , the lhc is the greatest scientific experiment -- the largest scientific experiment -- 27 miles in diameter .
and his job is to create the conditions that less than a milliardstel second after the beginning of the universe -- and that &apos;s 600 million times a second .
it &apos;s just atemberaubend .
this is the machine below the geneva .
we take pictures of these mini-urknalle in detectors .
this is my work . he &apos;s called a atlas -- 44 feet in the wide wide , 22 feet in diameter .
here &apos;s a spectacular picture of the atlas in the construction industry so they see the scale .
at 10th last year , the machine was going to first time .
and this picture was taken by atlas .
it &apos;s making a huge amount of the control in the space .
it &apos;s a picture of the first strahlenpartikels that the entire route to zurücklegte the lhc , then , with a part of the lhc , to make a rain from the detektor , to make a rain from the detector .
in other words , when we saw this picture at 10th , we knew that the machine works , which is a great triumph .
i don &apos;t know if this is the biggest jubel of the world , or this , when someone was visiting the google side and the aisle .
it means that we have a cultural impact to the scientific impact .
a week later , there was a problem with this room with these , which had to do with these math -- these golden wires that &apos;s here to do this one , these golden , that &apos;s a great deal of this room here here .
these amino wires is leiten , when the machine goes on the side .
now , the engineers are going to look at you and say , &quot; no , you don &apos;t do . that &apos;s little wires . &quot;
you can afford that because if you &apos;re very far away , you will be called supraleitern .
so at minus level level , kälter , as the space between stars , can make these wires the tension .
in one of the connections , between neuntausend magnets , there was a manufakturdefekt .
and so , they have been erhitzen and 13-tausend ampere , and plötzlich ampere begegneten .
this was the result .
now , that &apos;s all the case , if you imagine that the magnet is going to weigh over 20 tons , and to get about 30 centimeters .
so we &apos;re also about 50 of the magnet , and we &apos;re about 50 of the magnet .
and they had to take them to what we did .
we konditionierten them , they reparierten them .
they &apos;re all over their way back to your way .
for march , the lhc will be the lhc .
we &apos;ll get to the space , and we &apos;ll get the first data in june or july , and we &apos;re putting our journey to find out what the tiles are the building blocks of the universe .
now , of course , in a way , in a way , in a way , the debate , in a way that &apos;s the debate of science and ingenieurskunst , and it &apos;s easy to get it .
i think the fact that it &apos;s so hard to be that we &apos;re going to reach beyond our limitations , and it &apos;s the value of things like the lhc .
i &apos;m going to leave my roommate words , &quot; humphrey davy , who was michael , who said , &quot; nothing is so dangerous to the development of the human spirit , and said , &quot; nothing is so dangerous to the development of human spirit , that it &apos;s not a charity of nature , that our triumphe are vollzählig , and that it &apos;s not a new
thank you .
i &apos;m a writer .
books is my job , but it &apos;s more than that .
it &apos;s also my great , lebenslange love and fascination .
and i don &apos;t expect that change .
but , in fact , there &apos;s a little bit of weird steps in my life and my career that &apos;s made me to rethink my work to this work .
this was a little event that i wrote a book , i was writing a book called „ eat , pray , pray , love , love , who decided to be a buch , and i decided to get the previous books in the world , and a big mega-ereignis , international bestseller-ding .
the result is that i am not going to come , i &apos;m not going to be treated as if i was going to be the doom .
seriously -- the doom !
for example , they get a whole besorgt , and say , &quot; fear you don &apos;t have to be never going to be a success ?
they don &apos;t worry about that they &apos;re not afraid of your whole life and never create a book , and never asked a book that &apos;s going to be interested in the world ? never ?
okay , that &apos;s what makes it really .
it would be , though , though , if i wouldn &apos;t remember that i wouldn &apos;t remember 20 years ago when i first told you that i was going to be the same kind of seductive response to the same .
people said , &quot; „ , you don &apos;t have fear to have success ?
do you have no fear that you will give the humiliation of a absage .
and they &apos;re not afraid that you can &apos;t get your life on your life , and it &apos;s never going to be a bit of a schrotthaufen , and you &apos;re going to die on a schrotthaufen träume , and you can get your mouth with the bitter of the protected ?
so , you know , you know .
the answer -- the short answer to all these questions is : „ .
yeah , i &apos;ve got scared of all these things .
and i always had always .
and i &apos;ve been a lot more more about a lot more things that nobody would be .
like algae -- and other things things .
but , if it &apos;s about writing about it , i think about it , why ?
is that sensible ?
is it logically that it should be expected to be afraid of the work to do the work to do it ?
and what &apos;s exactly about the creative research , that they &apos;re able to make us all the insecure of the building , in the meaningful way -- in a way that it wouldn &apos;t do ?
my father , for example , chemist , and i can &apos;t remember the situation in its 40 years than i was wondering if he was wondering , he was asked to be afraid .
with your chemiker-blockade , john -- how do you do it ?
it just didn &apos;t come before , you know ?
but to be fair -- the group of chemists have been given the ruf of the centuries , people have gotten the call of alkoholsüchtigen people .
we seem to be writers , but it &apos;s not only the kind of impulses , but not only the writers , but the creative of all genres , seem to be the kreativen of the ruf , seem to be very highly unstable .
all you have to do is , the bitter todeszahlen of really great amounts of great minds are just looking out of the 20th century , who died young .
and even the ones that didn &apos;t actually make any suizid of schienen , seemed to be really neglected .
norman mailer said he said his death in his last interview , „ , i &apos;ve got a bit of my books .
a remarkable statement that you can do about your brain .
but we don &apos;t even get a little bit of that , because we &apos;ve heard somebody like this , because we &apos;ve been hearing this kind of long time , and we have the idea of that , and i somehow , and he somehow , of course , and that art was , and that art -- at the end -- on the end of the end .
the question i want to think about today is this idea for you to get to your life ?
do you think of that ? because with only one centimeter -- i feel that i &apos;m not thinking about this .
i find them in that .
and i think they &apos;re dangerous . and i don &apos;t want to get a little bit of what she &apos;s going to be going to be .
i think it &apos;s better if we wanted to live our great creative creative .
and i know that it &apos;s for me -- in my situation -- in my situation -- very dangerous to start this dark path of the vermutung of the vermutung of the vermutung of the vermutung of the vermutung of the vermutung of the vermutung of the vermutung of the vermutung of the vermutung .
this is -- you see : i &apos;m pretty young . i &apos;m just about 40 years old .
i may have another 40 40 in me .
and it &apos;s probably probably that everything i &apos;m going to write about now is what i &apos;ve been going to do about the world &apos;s greatest success of my last book , right ?
i say it &apos;s geradeheraus , because we &apos;re all of the friends here , it &apos;s probably likely to be that my greatest achievement is to lie .
oh jesus , what a thought !
these are the kind of thought that can take somebody to 9 nine o &apos;clock in the morning , to drink , gin , and that &apos;s not .
i would rather do that work i love .
so the question is : how ?
after some time , i seems to me , i think i can write to write a kind of schützendem psychological .
and somehow i have to find a way to get a way to get a way to write a safe to me and my very natural distance , and my very natural beklemmung about how the response will be .
and i &apos;ve been looking for the past year for the past year , and i &apos;ve been looking at the past , and i &apos;ve tried to find other kinds of ideas , and i &apos;ve been trying to see how to help see how to deal with creative risks with the emotional risks that are associated with creativity .
so this search led me to the old greece and the old guy .
please follow me , because the circle will get to rebuild .
but in the old , and rome people don &apos;t believe that creativity is that creativity from humans , okay ?
they thought that creativity was a kind of göttlicher diener-geist who was from a distant , unbekannten , unbekannten , aus , unbekannten , unknown , unknown .
the greeks called these findings , the dominant diener-geister of creativity .
by socrates , he believed he believed he believed he had a dämon , he would have been mitteilte out of the ferne .
the roman had the same idea , called this kind of körperlosem ghost , a „ genius .
that &apos;s great . the romans didn &apos;t really thought that a genius was a particularly complicated individual .
they thought that a genius was that kind of magical creatures that was in the wänden of the believed that it was living in the walls of a künstlerateliers -- about the hauself of a künstlerateliers -- the hauself , and the artist in work , and the result of the work was going to make the work of work .
that &apos;s brilliant -- there is the distance that i spoke to -- the psychological construction of the consequences of your work .
and everybody knew that it worked like this , right ?
the artist of the altertums was about certain things , like , to give a lot of , right ?
if your work was brilliantly , you didn &apos;t want to look at all the time for you . everybody knew that you had to have this körperlose genius that you helped .
if your work is floppte -- not entirely your fault , or ?
everybody knew your genie was a little bit .
so the people in the west really think about creativity .
and then the renaissance and everything changed . and this big idea was , and this big idea was , and there &apos;s no room for the top of the universe -- and there &apos;s no room for the gods , and there &apos;s no room for the mystische creatures that was going to take away from the divine .
it &apos;s the beginning of the rational humanism and people started thinking that creativity entirely completely dominated by its own individual .
for the first time , you hear people , and i think of this artist , and this artist &apos;s an genius -- instead of what he has a genius .
i have to tell you , i think that was a big mistake .
you know ? i think he thinks he thinks he thinks he thinks the pelvis and the essenz of all the becken and the source of all the allen and the source of all the göttlichen , kreativen , unbekanntem , unendlichen , unendlichen , to make a little bit of responsibility to make a fragilen , human psyche .
it &apos;s like somebody to take the sun .
that &apos;s where it &apos;s and the whole egos and it creates all these unerreichbaren expectations on success .
i think that erfolgs-druck , our artists has been given our artists for the last 500 years .
and if that &apos;s true , and i think it &apos;s true -- is the question : is the question : is the question : is the question : is this question : &quot; is the question : is this question : &quot; is the question : is this question : &quot; is the question : is this question : &quot; is the question : is this question : &quot;
can we change it ?
maybe to a point of understanding how to the relationship between people and the mystery of creative .
maybe not .
maybe we can &apos;t rationalen the gedankengut of 500 years ago , not just auslöschen in a 18-minütigen presentation .
and there are people in this audience , which really berechtigte science would be wondering about the idea of -- feen -- feen , who apply people to nachfolgen and apply to their projects .
i &apos;m not going to take all of you to you , you can &apos;t take all of you on this journey .
but the question i want to do is i want to do this : why not ?
why not think about this ?
because it &apos;s doing a lot of sense of all the way , which i heard about , when it was that the absolutely crazy machende launenhaftigkeit of creative process .
a process that &apos;s -- like anyone who ever tried to do something -- so in other words -- actually , everybody here -- not always vernünftig .
in fact , it can sometimes feel geradezu .
i had recently been stone , i was struck with the most extraordinary of american dichterin , who was dichterin , but she told her to her life , but she told me that she was built in the fields , she said she would feel , and you can listen to the landscape of the landscape .
she said it would be like a donnernder train train from air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air , the air ,
the one on the land on the land .
they felt if it came , because it would take the earth under their feet .
she knew that she could only do that in one of a moment in a moment , and that was -- in her words -- „ @ like the devil .
they ran out like the devil of the house , and it was only about the house that they had to get enough to a sheet of paper and a pencil , so they could get it through them , and they could get through it , and on the leaf .
in other paint , they didn &apos;t go fast enough . she ran out , and ran the house , but she ran out the house , and she said it would go over and she said -- how she said -- „ after another poets .
and then there were these moments -- the part i never forget -- she said that there was moments of it .
so she goes to the house and the poem , and the poem is coming through it and they &apos;re putting it through a pencil when it was like , she said , &quot; she was so as if you could get it out of your other hand , and it &apos;s going to get it up .
they were recruited the poem the poem on its tail and he pulled it back into your body , and she was headed on the sheet of paper .
and at these opportunities , the poem was going to be a poem and intact on the paper -- but backward from the past word .
when i was listening to the listening , i thought it &apos;s creepy -- that &apos;s exactly how my creative process is going to make .
that &apos;s not like my creative process -- i &apos;m not the channel !
i &apos;m a maultier . to work , i have to get every day at the same time , and i really schwitzen , and really unangenehm .
but i even have a maultierart in my maultierart , sometimes this thing .
and i suspect that many of you have done .
i had work , or ideas that can be from a source of me , which i really can &apos;t identify .
what &apos;s this thing for a thing ?
and how do we engage with it in relationship with our minds , but ourselves in the opposite of intellectual health ?
for me , the best example of the most living example , how you can do this , and i &apos;d been to interview him a few years ago .
we talked about this topic , and you know what ? the most of the time was his time , tom was tom &apos;s the embodiment of the gepeinigten of the gepeinigten , trying to figure out these unkontrollierbaren kreativen , who was in him , and with them .
but then he grew up and down , he told me that he was going to be a day in los angeles , and it changed everything for him .
he was talking to high speed on a huge speed of a melody , and it &apos;s a little fragment of a melody , which is , as it &apos;s often , for him , and he &apos;s prachtvoll . it &apos;s prachtvoll , but he can &apos;t get it .
he doesn &apos;t have a piece of paper , he doesn &apos;t have a pencil , he doesn &apos;t have a kassettenrekorder .
so he begins to start with these old beklemmung in him , like , like , i &apos;m going to lose this thing , and will become this song to be at the song .
i &apos;m not good enough , i don &apos;t get it .
but instead of too panic , he just stopped .
he set up all over the whole and did something new .
he just looked in the sky and said , &quot; „ , you can &apos;t see that i &apos;m driving car ?
„ , i see so much like i could just get a song ?
if you really want to get to a moment , come to a moment , when i can take care of you .
if not , if you don &apos;t think of somebody else today .
go and quäle cohen cohen .
his whole arbeitsprozess arbeitsprozess has changed .
not the work . the was often been so dark as the way .
but the hard beklemmung , who was umgibt , he was aufgehoben , he was aufgehoben , he was able to get it out of the genius where he was going to be a anger , and he realized that he had to be like , he didn &apos;t have to be a verinnerlichtes , quälendes thing .
it could be a eigentümliche , wundersame , bizarre collaboration , a kind of conversation between tom and fremdartigen , which was not quite tom .
and i &apos;ve heard this story , and i &apos;ve got a bit of the way i worked and i &apos;ve been saved .
this idea was saved me in the middle of „ , pray , pray , love , love , love , and i fell in one of these self-care in the neighborhood of the zweifels in the room , and i fell in love with something that &apos;s going to work on , and you &apos;re thinking that it &apos;s going to be a disaster , that &apos;s what &apos;s
not only bad , but the worst of all times .
i started thinking , i should just do this project .
but then i remembered it , like tom in the free sky , and i tried it .
so i raised my view of the manuscript and my comment in the direction of the room .
i spoke to loud : „ feet , and i know , if this book isn &apos;t brilliant , that &apos;s not entirely my fault , right ?
because you see that i &apos;m all i have , i &apos;m sure , i &apos;m sure , i &apos;m sure . i didn &apos;t have more than that .
so if you want to have better , you &apos;ve got to get a little bit of here and your percentage of the capital .
okay . but if you don &apos;t do that -- you know what , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , then ,
i &apos;m going to write , because it &apos;s my job .
and i want to give you a lot of time , i want to give you today for my part of the jobs .
because ... -- at the end , it &apos;s like , in the end of the end , it &apos;s like , in the deserts , people in the deserts of heiligen and music , the hours , the hours were getting to the dawn of the sea .
these are always great , because the dancers were professional , and they were fantastic .
but again , and again , very rare , something special . one of the most exciting was actually actually überweltlich .
and i know you know what i mean , because i know that they &apos;ve all seen in their lives .
it was meant to be the time , and the dancers through a kind of pforte , and he did not write anything else than it ever did before -- but everything else did .
and suddenly he didn &apos;t have more than it &apos;s longer .
he was raised by the inside and down by the bottom and everything , and everything was erhellte through a göttliches fire .
so , when something happened , people knew what was that . she called it at his name .
they put the hands together and started singing , „ allah , allah , allah , god , god , god .
that &apos;s god , you know ?
interesting historische : when the mohren südspanien fußnote , they brought this practice , they brought this practice with the laufe of the centuries , and the aussprache changed over the course of the centuries , allah “ , olé “ , which you still have to hear and hear .
if a war in spain , something magical , something called „ , olé , olé , allah , großartig , großartig , großartig , bravo , there &apos;s a flüchtiger look at god .
and that &apos;s great , because we need that .
but , the tricky part of the next morning , when the dancers hits themselves , and it realizes that there is 11 o &apos;clock on a tuesday -- and he doesn &apos;t have a fünkchen of god in himself .
he &apos;s a alternder sterblicher with schmerzenden knien , and maybe he never will get to get this statement .
and maybe never going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be a wieder , and if he &apos;s going to call somebody &apos;s name , but what he &apos;s going to do with the rest of his life ?
that &apos;s hard .
this is one of the most powerful korrekturen of a creative life .
but maybe not as much as if you don &apos;t believe in the beginning , if you &apos;re not believed that the most surprising parts of you were .
if you might only believe that you &apos;re a different way -- from a unvorstellbaren resource for a erlesene period of time , who gets to somebody else , when they &apos;re finished .
if we start thinking about this , it changes everything .
so i started thinking about the past months , as i was working on the past months , while i was working on the book , which is going to be soon , as dangerous , the beängstigende , stark nachfolger .
what i &apos;m going to say to myself , if i &apos;m going to be mad , it &apos;s not afraid .
not entmutigt .
just do your job .
so , for your contribution , whatever it is .
if your job is dance , dance .
if the dumb of the product is , what &apos;s called the page , decides to a short moment , for a moment , to show you a hauch of your effort , then „ olé !
and if not , dance , dance .
and „ olé ! “ for you to go .
i think i &apos;ve got this , and i feel like this .
„ olé : “ for you , just for you to be the mere worst love and the eigensinn , for the eigensinn .
thank you .
thank you .
olé !
last year , i showed these two slides , to illustrate that the heat eiskappe , that the size of the bottom of the bottom of the bottom of the lower age is to get 40 percent .
but this is not very strong enough to the seriousness of this particular problem , because it doesn &apos;t show the thickness of ice .
in a certain sense , the arctic eiskappe is the beating of our global heart disease .
they &apos;re growing in winter and the schrumpft in summer .
the next slide i &apos;m showing you is a zeitrafferaufnahme of what &apos;s happened in the last 25 years .
the dauereis is a red .
as you can see , it &apos;s growing up on the dunkelblau , this is the annual ice in winter ; and it &apos;s in summer .
the so-called dauereis , five years old , or older , almost like blood , which is from the body here .
in 25 years , it will be here by here .
this is a problem because the warming of the frozen ocean is to auftaut the arctic ocean , which is where it &apos;s huge amounts of carbon carbon , which when he &apos;s auftaut , from microbes to methane .
compared to the entire amount of the brain tissue in the atmosphere , could double this kind of thing , if we cross this critical point .
today , today , today , sprudelt in some of the air , in a few decades , in alaska of itself from the water .
professor katey walter in alaska is a more connected to another flachen pit in another .
wow !
you &apos;re fine . the question is , how is it ergehen us .
and a reason is that this vast majority of the north atlantic from the north .
this is a jährlicher tauwasserfluss .
but the volume are much bigger than ever before .
this is the kangerlussuaq river in north africa .
if you want to know how the sea level from landeisschmelze , you get to the sea .
these rivers are going to take this rivers .
at the other end of the planet , antarctica , the biggest eismasse on the planet .
last month , researchers researchers that the entire continent has a negative eisbilanz .
and the westantarktis that &apos;s over a few unterwasserinseln , is particularly heavily in melt .
this is 20 foot fuß , as the greenland .
in the himalayas , the drittgrössten eismasse , you see up the new lakes that were gletscher a few years ago .
40 percent of all people in the world get halfway out of their trinkwassers .
in the andes , this glacier is the trinkwasserquelle of the city .
the wassermengen have the focus .
but if you nod , it &apos;s going to be the most potent wegfallen .
in california , a 40 percent reduction in the sierra of the sierra &apos;s sierra sequenced .
this is the speicherbecken .
and the predictions of how you read them , are serious .
these austrocknung in the world leads to a dramatic increase in fire .
and the disasters around the world have been in a really ausserordentlichen and unprecedented and unprecedented .
four hundred years in the last 30 years like the vorhergegangenen 75. .
this is a totally unhaltbares entwicklungsmuster .
if you look at this in historical context , you can see what it &apos;s anrichtet .
in the last five years , we &apos;ve spent 70 million tons of co2 every 24 hours -- 25 million tons every day every day .
look at the area of the eastern pacific , from american south , and beiderseits of the indian , and beiderseits of the indian subkontinents , where there &apos;s a very compact decline in the oceans .
the biggest factor of global warming , besides besides , which is 20 percent , is the burning of fossil fuels .
oil is a problem , and coal is the world &apos;s biggest problem .
the united states are one of the two largest verschmutzer , together with china .
and the proposal was to build a lot of other kohlefabriken .
but we start to see a change .
here are the ones that were taken in the last few years , with some green alternative alternative , which were proposed .
trotzdessen is a political debate in our country .
and the kohleindustrien and ölindustrien have spent a viertelmilliarde dollars a viertelmilliarde last year to promote clean coal , which is a contradiction in itself .
this picture remembered me reminded me .
in order to go on christmas at the home , at the home , a billion tons of kohleschlamm .
they &apos;ve seen it in the news .
this is in our whole country of the arable land of the americas of america .
this happened to be a christmas .
one of the founders of the kohleindustrie of the kohleindustrie of the kohleindustrie of the christmas .
frosty &apos;s kohlenmann is a vergnügter , fröhlicher .
there &apos;s a hülle in the skin and abundance in america , and it helps our economies .
frosty , who is going to be a day every day .
he &apos;s affordable and liebenswert , and workers stay in a lohn and bread .
this is the source of most of the most coal in west virginia .
the most powerful bergarbeiter is the head of massey coal .
let me say one of the obvious . al gore , nancy pelosi , harry , harry , you don &apos;t know what you &apos;re talking about .
so the alliance for the world &apos;s greatest campaigns in life .
this is a one , a part of your .
we see climate change as a serious danger for our business .
so we have a obersten zeil , a very beträchtliche geldsumme to spend a beträchtliche to a werbeaktion to the way to get the truth over the way .
the fact is , coal is not dirty .
we think it &apos;s clean -- and smells still well , still well well well .
so , do they worry about climate change .
let &apos;s leave you that .
saueber coal , you &apos;ve heard a lot of it .
so let &apos;s make a tour of this modern-day , clean kohlefabrik .
fantastic ! this machine is quite loud .
but it &apos;s the sound of clean kohletechnologie .
and yet , the burning of coal , one of the most powerful , the most important , the bemerkenswert saubere , which you see here , everything you see here .
look at it right now that &apos;s today , saubere kohletechnologie .
finally , the positive outcomes are going to be the positive alternative with our economic challenge , and our challenge of national security .
america is in a crisis , the economy , the national security , the climate crisis .
the red thread , who all connecting that all of us , our dependence from kohlenstoff-basierenden fuels , and ausländisches oil .
but now there &apos;s a brave solution to get us out of this misslichen .
america with 100 percent of 100 percent , within the next 10 years , within the next 10 years , within 10 years .
a plan , america to work to make us safer and help to stop the global warming .
finally , a solution , the big enough is to solve our problems .
versorge america , find out more .
this is the last one .
it &apos;s about a neuversorgung of america .
one of the fastest ways , our dependence of old , dirty fuels , to reduce our world , to reduce our world .
the future is here . wind , sun and a new non-governmental crime .
new investments to create good jobs .
versorge america , it &apos;s time to accept reality .
there &apos;s a old african saying , &quot; if you want to be fast , go alone .
if you want to come to go , go . &quot;
we need to get far away , and it &apos;s going to quickly be fast .
thank you .
i want to start to ask you to ask you at the time of your childhood , when they played with bauklötzen .
while they were doing the hands of how you get the hands and zugreift , the klötze aufnimmt , and they actually learned to think about and problems and change and change .
the spatial way , is closely closely with how we understand a lot of our environment .
so , as a filmmaker , inspired by the way that we &apos;re doing with my interaction of our interaction , and my colleague jeevan kalanithi , i started to wonder , which is what if we could use computers , which would be a digitale fingerspitze , which is what if we could use computers , and what if we could do with both hands , and you could
so this question was so crucial that we decided to create the understanding of the answer to the answer .
in short , a siftable is a computer computer in size of a kekses .
you can move on the hand , you can see each other , you can see your movements and you have a screen and a funkempfänger .
so much more importantly , are you physically , why you can just get them out of the opening of the hands of the hands and move .
and the siftables are an example of a new generation of hilfsmitteln &apos;s digital data .
and if these tools are going to be able to develop and create a conscious sense of their movements , each other , each other , and then the intricacies of our umgangs , we can start with the creation of new new and entertaining .
i start with a few simple examples .
this siftable is for the videowiedergabe konfiguriert , and if i put it into a direction , the video on the other side , when i put it into the other direction , it &apos;s coming .
and these interactive portraits take each other .
so if i put them together , they were going to be interested in their interest .
if they &apos;re surrounded by voneinader , you &apos;ll notice that and you can get a little nervous .
and they &apos;re also making their movements and their movements .
a interesting suite of the interactions that we started to recognize was that we could do that we would make everyday gestures on data , like the colors of how to do this with liquids .
in this case , we have three siftables of siftables , and i can use them to get them to get color in the middle where they &apos;ll be blended .
if we can overdo it , we can get a little bit of a little bit .
there &apos;s also also some great ways in education as languages , in mathematics , mathematics , where we are giving the people who are going to be the chance of the schnellen of the fast reef and the results of the results .
here i am -- this is a fibonacci thing i &apos;ve been with a simple gleichungsprogramm .
this is a game with words , which is a kind of mixture of scrabble and boggle .
basically , you get every round of every round of siftable letters and you &apos;re trying to make words , are going to be able to make it over a dictionary .
then , after about 30 seconds , and you get a new and new ways of try to try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try a new and new possibility .
thank you .
these are some kids that came on a trip to the media lab , i could move them to try and try and make it a video .
they really loved it .
a more interesting fact is in this kind of application that you don &apos;t have to give people a lot of instructions .
all you have to say , &quot; you know , &quot; you know , &quot; you know , you know what to do .
here are some people who test it .
that &apos;s our first beta-tester beta-tester on right .
it turns out that he wanted to just stack up the siftables .
so for him , they were only bauklötze .
this is a interactive trickfilmanwendung .
we wanted to develop a lernmittel for sprachlerner .
that &apos;s felix .
he can get new characters in the scene by having the siftable from the table , which is this character .
here he &apos;s the sun .
the sun rises on the sun is going on on the sun .
now , now he &apos;s a tractor in the scene .
the orange traktor .
good job ! yes !
by taking the siftables schüttelt , and they can put them together , he can send the characters , and he can make the characters .
... his own story .
hi ! hi !
it &apos;s a story with open source and he can decide how they evolved .
flying fliegende .
the last example , for the last example , i &apos;ve been going to show you today , is a musik-sequencer for live-auftritte , which we developed recently recently , and in the siftables , as führungsstimme , like führungsstimme , bass and drums .
each four of these has four different variations ; you can select select what you want .
and you can see these sound in the sequence , which you can create again in a structure .
and you put them up by a ton-siftable ton-siftable on a sequenz-siftable .
there are effects that you can change live on the live , like reverberation and filters .
you can connect him with a certain sound and then tends to get it up .
and then more sophisticated effects like pace and volume that you click on the whole sequence .
so let &apos;s look at .
we start to start the führungsstimme in the führungsstimme in two sequenz-siftable , and this in a series of a set of a set of a set of the voice , and a little bit more .
now i &apos;m adding a bass .
now i &apos;m going to do something more about a bit more exciting .
and now i now take the filter with the drums that i can control the effect of the world .
i can speed the whole sequence by making the speed of a or another .
and now i left the filter to the bass , for something more .
i can get the sequence of the sequence during you .
and i don &apos;t have to plan you to be able to plan it , but can be completely improvise ; you can feed them .
and finally , i can ausblenden the whole sequence by making the lautstärke-siftable of the left .
thank you .
so , as you can see , my excitement is to develop new mensch-computer-schnittstellen , which are better to develop better than our brains and bodies .
and today i had time to give you a part of this new design-welt and some of the possibility of what we &apos;re working in our lab .
the thought that i want to leave you with the way to give you the way to the verge of werzeugen , is that we are going to be interacting with digital media , which is bringing information into our world that are entspricht our demands .
thank you very much , thank you very much .
i &apos;m going to look at the conversation with all of you !
yeah , good afternoon .
i &apos;m very pleased to announce .
so , so what should be supposed to be ?
i &apos;ve got to get a little bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of the modern molecular biology .
i study molecular and i &apos;ve been doing now for a couple of years now , and i started to start with the biohacking , and i just wanted to know , and it &apos;s also even even even even even even even even even even what i &apos;ve learned in the study of western theory .
so that was my primary moral motivation .
so it was a curiosity , and i wanted to get closer to the matter , so .
i think that molecular biology now , so general , biotechnology , biotechnology , whatever you do , and so on , synthetic biology and so forth , and so on .
extremely important is now , now , now , now , very important , and much more importantly , more importantly , will become more important .
there &apos;s so many things like this whole gentechnisch veränderten veränderten on the äckern .
now there &apos;s craig venter now in the u.s.a , who tried to make a versucht , so gas from algae .
there &apos;s also a lot of things that are totally in the everyday life , which is not aware of the most important , but for example , the most people who allow us to wash the vierzig level of laundry laundry , and also the gentechnisch enzyme .
and the list can continue to continue .
and so from that interest of this technology , i &apos;m going to continue to continue there .
so what does the math math ?
most people know the most people who know that &apos;s from the softwarebereich .
computers , and then it will always happen in the media , which is the hackers break somewhere and so forth .
that &apos;s kind of a very sad , because that &apos;s not very sad , because that &apos;s not what they actually did , and what &apos;s actually going to be behind it .
and that &apos;s the software-hacker , in the &apos; 70s , achtzigerjahren , with computerbasteln , and it &apos;s also the internet .
and it &apos;s about a sustainable , creative , the originelle way to solve a problem .
and the problem , that &apos;s not only a technical problem , it can also be a problem , and it can also be a zugangsproblem , so it can be a zugangsproblem , so you can take a beliebige , and how can you do it differently or how can you do better .
and it &apos;s been a eben with software , but there &apos;s also also a whole bunch of bastlerszene that are also doing a whole bunch of bastlerszene that are doing with all sorts of things all kinds of stuff .
and now , it &apos;s also going to be in the direction of biology , and i want to come up with this metaphor , which is a informationswissenschaft , because it &apos;s a informationswissenschaft code , because it &apos;s a abstrakter code , because it &apos;s not very similar to the same , because it &apos;s real matter , and not only cyber .
but it &apos;s also a code , and you can also programming programming , and you can also get it , and i found it , and i found that incredibly fascinating , and i just wanted to be a lot deeper with it .
this actually has really zweitausend eight , these networks , these networks .
there &apos;s a hackteria dot , which is originally from switzerland , which is with a kooperation of basiertes , and with a cooperation in india , but the other people or active people around the world has over the world .
these are a more artistic artistic space , so there &apos;s a lot of artists and philosophers , and in collaboration with scientists and the purpose of these technologies , and the creative thing to do and to process the creative and the creative , there &apos;s museumsausstellungen and yes , everything .
but it &apos;s always really about finding a lockeren access to this so much of it .
and then there &apos;s a do-it-yourself-bio dot , d.i.y.bio .
this is a network that &apos;s a network , which is actually a kind of forum where you &apos;re growing and online .
these are a little bit of technical , and also a little bit of businessmäßiger , there are also so angewandte questions .
and from these networks that made the whole popular book , has evolved to a scene that i wanted to take a quick porträtieren .
here &apos;s a picture on top of the left , which is a hackerspace , so basically a kind of school , so a private school , in a way , in which everybody can do it .
children , old , all kinds of people to go to the way to move out , they have a lab and look at what you can do when they &apos;re doing .
there &apos;s lower left down here is a group in indonesia , house-of-natural-fibers , which is , but it &apos;s pretty long .
but if you &apos;ve been longer than those other two networks .
the reason also in such a artistic aspect of biological materials , and , yeah , also elektronikbasteleien , and combine it up to very abgefahre .
a group of x-ray i &apos;ve been doing a while ago that i &apos;ve been doing a while ago that &apos;s a studentengruppe , which would like to learn what they want to learn to learn more and that have been to explain to the uni , and they &apos;re trying to try and try to explain what &apos;s d.n.a .
and i &apos;ve been up in the other picture in the other picture in the medical museum in the medical museum in combination with a show .
and that &apos;s , that &apos;s the most common , but the only thing that &apos;s the only thing that actually makes you all the same , is this fascination of technology .
and what you can do with this , and then , again , it &apos;s also a very interesting thing to be able to ask , and , so , what you know what you want to do , you know what you do , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know ?
so , o.k , to get biology , you need to be kind of stuff .
you need to be biological materials , and you need to be a labor , and that &apos;s a lab .
so what you normally normally get under a lab that &apos;s sort of abgefahrene , that &apos;s sort of abgefahrene , extremely expensive , extremely expensive , just to fachpersonal , ausgebildete , with a ph.d. and so forth .
and our approach was to say , o.k , that you don &apos;t have to do that .
that &apos;s not necessary because every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every every group has grown up , the most laborgeräte , that &apos;s really like that .
and the magic of this premise with this premise with this premise , for example , brian degger in england , a minimallabor zusammenzustellen , and then you &apos;ve taken a dampfdruckkochtopf , and it &apos;s so suppenbrühe , and then it &apos;s funktioniert .
so everyone has a soup of vergammelt that he had had long enough , even though it &apos;s even time .
i tried this in my lab and a little bit of a little bit , a little bit , and then i made a little bit of d.n.a analysis , and i &apos;m going to make a little d.n.a analysis , so that &apos;s so / , so that &apos;s as a result .
now that &apos;s not a joke , but it &apos;s not a joke .
so here &apos;s the lab in the picture , so that &apos;s so a zugestellte garage , so that &apos;s so essential in paris , which is , in paris , which is , and it &apos;s pretty successful to do it , and pretty interesting things , and also , i &apos;m also going to have a project .
and this is biocurious , who also mentioned erwähnte , this kind of volkshochschule , that sort of a volkshochschule for molecular biology .
and so , you know , it &apos;s relatively heterogen , so that &apos;s a relatively heterogen , so that &apos;s what the home are doing at the site , to a big larger organizations that goes into more formal , which is already affecting more formal in institutionalisierter .
but always always always the idea that it &apos;s just going to be just and be accessible .
the first project we &apos;ve been doing as a international group , when we were able to be able to be aware of our self , and we &apos;re now here , and we &apos;re online , and we &apos;re still starting to get the people who always always always always always and stuff .
and then came from the do-it-yourself-bio website , and said , &quot; well , we &apos;ve got to be able to meet , we have to meet , and then , in fact , in a way , and then two events in london , zweitausend ten , and shortly after the u.s.a , san francisco .
and then , there &apos;s also the case , yes , ja , who we want to know what we want to do ?
and what are our values and what are our our sense , our our platform ?
and there &apos;s a code-of-conduct ausgearbeitet .
so that was quite intuitive , so everybody has just his desires , and that , and that &apos;s what it hits , and then it &apos;s expressed .
there came to my mind , a very good code .
and we then have the idea of it , but that &apos;s because i think , well , it &apos;s relatively good to make good qualities , people are quite well known .
and we then even tried to try to get that into the academic world , but there &apos;s not that way .
so i think we &apos;ve actually been out of the biohackerszene in terms of a step further than the academic world .
yeah , what do we do so do ?
a project i made with the hackteria-netzwerk of switzerland , was that we wanted to make a so-called optical trap or optical pinzette .
that &apos;s when you take a beam , you can see a beam in space , you can move little particles in the air , and then in the air , and then in the air , so that &apos;s where it &apos;s like a traktorbeamstrahl in principle .
and that &apos;s really what &apos;s really going on , and we &apos;ve got to get im , and we then , and we then , o.k , and then we &apos;re going to take a webcam , the aufgeschraubt , the lens , the lens , you have a microscope , which is the vergrößert of the vergrößert .
that &apos;s what you see down there .
and then we have a d.v.d brenner , and we tried the laser laser , and then trying to focus on this camera .
and that &apos;s not a long , but we &apos;ve still learned a lot of it .
so another project that comes from the french group of paris , which is , that &apos;s pretty cool .
and it &apos;s so a bit like that , so a hirnwellenmessgerät , so e.e.g , so he &apos;s carrying his neurobiologie busy , his nickname is sam neurohack .
he &apos;s got this this guy that &apos;s been placed on , and in cooperation with the museum of the museum .
and then the visitors in space , in the room , that &apos;s going to be setzen in this chair .
then their brainwaves were measured their brainwaves , and depending on what they thought , they &apos;re thinking , is , you &apos;re different lights in the room .
was a pretty ziemlich project .
another thing out of the united states , which is also with this vaterschaftstestgeschichte , which is the p.c.r , which is the polymerase-kettenreaktion , complicated word .
so it &apos;s about kopieren genes to vermehren , d.n.a , d.n.a , fragmente , so you can make them visible .
so now , if i do this now , the profiler on the crime , and then go to collect , and then they can collect these methode , and then they can do this sort of thing , and then they can say , o.k , this hair , this one &apos;s haar , so .
and the machines that make something like that , which are pretty expensive to buy the wheel , the cheapest , the cheapest euro .
and that &apos;s not in the hobbybereich , but it &apos;s a really cool technology that &apos;s also very much , that &apos;s also very much .
so that &apos;s just a application of many , you can do it with it .
and they have a lot of two slides and said , &quot; well , o.k , which is going to make a simpler and cheap , so , and then , as well , free hardware , and now they &apos;re now the kind of marktreife , and now the billigste of the cheapest group of these are the anbieter of these devices .
i think , sort of , sort of like this , you know , sort of a nonprofit or something .
but anyway , it &apos;s still not cheap , but it &apos;s definitely in a frame where it &apos;s clear to be very far .
so it &apos;s a very gelungener hack .
a project i started building was a gene-gun .
gene-gun is , as a kind of luftdruckpistole that &apos;s about the schießt of that , two centimeters or so .
you put on d.n.a and the goldpartikel in these luftdruckpistole , and then i then put them on the screen and then they &apos;re going to the glow .
so the device that you see there is not working .
but this is my favorite , but it &apos;s pretty irritating , so on this , so on a branch , so on this , so on this thing , and that &apos;s what &apos;s going on , and it was the druck , and it was the thing that &apos;s broken .
and then i took a sahnespender and that &apos;s what it was doing .
a sahnespender , if you take the full full power , the enough , so i think , so i think , vierzig , and i think it &apos;s about 10 times a little bit about it .
and so you can then get the particles , and then you can go into the onion .
and the commercial device costs about a fünfzehntausend euro or something like this .
so it &apos;s not the same efficiency , but it &apos;s basically not feasible .
so that &apos;s the kernanliegen of the moment , the kernanliegen of technology , using technology to increase , and the information , and the information that we can engage that more people can engage up .
because , as the beginning , it &apos;s a very important technology , and most people have relatively little bit of the people who are really going to make it a chance to form .
because if you just read about it , from sekundärliteratur , that &apos;s not the same thing , as if you &apos;ve seen it once or seen it .
and i think technology is always more important in our modern societies .
and if you can also make a more modern citizen , and you can also want to make decisions in society and can be able to know the access to knowledge and technology .
and you have to do it , and you can understand it and understand it .
and then the firmiert , underneath the schlagworten open and dirty science .
so that you can actually make a citizen in the position of that , just to make these scientific technologies .
and that &apos;s the kernanliegen of the biohackern .
these are people who have been offiziell on the website , d.i.y.bio-dot-org website , d.i.y.bio-dot-org website .
that &apos;s a relatively remarkable number of people worldwide .
and what &apos;s interesting is that they &apos;re also in southeast asia .
that &apos;s me , that &apos;s where there are fewer people , as they &apos;re actually .
so i know some of some of those who don &apos;t have .
and that &apos;s now just the biohacker , the individual people .
also partly with these hackerspaces , so these places together .
and that &apos;s the beginning .
like said , zweitausendacht has got it .
and hackerspaces , so the computerhackerspaces , because the c-base in berlin was the first , neunzehnhundertfünfundneunzig .
and that &apos;s a very natural network of very good , yes , infrastrukturzentren , who are vertreten all over the world .
and we hope that we &apos;re also going to be able to get ourselves as well as well as well , and then they also are similar to also , and then they &apos;re similar to be similar to the same thing that it can also be more about to do more .
and i would invite everybody to try and give it a bit .
it &apos;s not so simple , but it &apos;s not impossible if you have enough curiosity and enough energy , you get there .
thank you for listening .
that &apos;s what it was .
yeah , hi .
how do we do people ?
this is a question that &apos;s very moved to me , but also in the area in the forschungsbereich , and in the area of all things in the area .
there &apos;s how to tap into the people in interactive media , so they can use these interactive media and so they create a very befriedigendes experience .
because i think the interactive media is that the interactive media companies are in us , cognitive models , so that in our biological memory , very long , very long time ago , and we &apos;ve been able to get the only time through the relevant media .
and that &apos;s very amazing because you really believe that these hochtechnologie that you &apos;re looking at that , which is that you &apos;re actually saying that the future is so that the future is that the future is at our archaischen root .
so what are now actually archaische models ?
i &apos;ve got four stichworte , and i want to try to explain to quickly .
so , to archaischen cognitive surplus , and that &apos;s the models we have in the pre-industrial times .
so , in this archaischen , high-speed modellen , that we have a patchwork of natural relationship .
that sounds like that , very much .
i &apos;m going to go back to a bit of the same and try to prove you to prove that it &apos;s also a natural relationship to virtuality .
the second aspect is that we &apos;ve been able to have been able to be able to talk about this archaischen models of this archaischen models , even though we &apos;re using a language language .
and the third area , which explains itself from itself .
we all know that the interactive media are per , which is the verneinung of linearity , and what we say , what we &apos;re saying is we &apos;re going to say that we &apos;re going to feel normal today .
the fourth point is that the story is a place for us .
so , as it is with the virtuality with virtuality , which is actually the most amazing thing in the world .
i want to prove you to prove this .
how many hundred doors has the house where they live ?
we will not answer them immediately , but it &apos;s going to happen , but it &apos;s going to happen to the moment .
they go through the spirit through this house , in demn , and look at how many of whom are there .
and that &apos;s what they do .
they virtualisieren the reality , and it &apos;s a lot of computers .
fantastic , right ?
and there we are spending that we &apos;re spending on the medien-campus for example , the virtual reality in our v.r.-labor , we can actually do it all the time .
and these assets that virtual reality , the reality that have been needed to have the people who have been needed to have the people who had needed to be needed to have the people who had been needed to have the people in the pre-industrial times because they didn &apos;t have anything .
they didn &apos;t have books .
or they didn &apos;t have a fotolitografie .
they didn &apos;t have a mass .
the only thing that had had her head .
and in that head , the memory .
in this mind , knowledge was abgerufen , and we started using this virtual images , the imagination , were also known .
and so , it &apos;s also so much as we can &apos;t deal with us that we can deal with it .
the interesting thing is , if i can take a little trip .
yeah , that &apos;s going .
the interesting thing is that at this period of time , at the same time , the same time .
if you &apos;re going to think a bit of a bit of it .
what are the media today ?
then you &apos;ll notice that it &apos;s a change .
but i &apos;ll come to speak to speak .
wesentliches , the werkzeug of the informationsvermittlung are stories since stories .
schamanen , priests , so-called wissenswächter , so-called wissenswächter , were extra , for example , to maintain knowledge .
and also today , we &apos;re still going to be very , very strong .
the author of the book , jonathan animal , jonathan gottschall , zufolge , we still verbingen the year of the rezeption hours of stories .
that means for a child that &apos;s going to reach the one of the most amazing of the time , most of the time has spent the most amazing of the stories .
now we think our love , our love is to feel that we have a child on the lap of our parents .
no , no , no , long .
that goes back to a lot of moving back to the clash of the pre-industrial times .
but in the area of the world &apos;s area , the first of the interactive media is that we &apos;re in our biology , in our biological memory , the ability to think of the ability to think .
i &apos;ve brought you an example of the nordamerikanischen tribe of the nootka-indianer .
and the life lived in the küstenregion of british columbia .
and as you can see , it &apos;s a very inselreiches area , and you had to get to navigate from island to try to get food to get food .
and they made this with so-called lead-landkarten .
you may know , you may have , if you &apos;re interested in a bit of the australian of the australian .
these have similar principles .
they don &apos;t have a lead-landkarten , but the ones that have used the so-called gennanten or also traumpfade .
and what the interesting thing is that the navigation and the topography of regions of regions to be applied .
where the language was rang from untergeordnetem rang .
that means you &apos;re talking about sound and about rhythm .
and these sounds and this particular level , the geology , the topographie , which is also enables that you could get this songs and it could be able to move it up and to move to the left , and also move back to the right .
why don &apos;t we do not get to get more to the top of a point ?
anyway , not to navigate .
what &apos;s happening there ?
is that the so maschinenzeitalter .
we &apos;ve moved on in the so-called vogt-zeitalter .
and it &apos;s happening is the maschinenzeitalter and it &apos;s the book , and it &apos;s the fotolitografie .
and that &apos;s what happens that is that we have the responsibility for our memories , and the reputation of our individual behavior has increased the external media .
on the book , and on the picture .
so we have a piece of gottes to virtualisieren a bit more verlernt .
now , it &apos;s all of us , and it &apos;s been a lot of land for us , and has nothing to do with reality .
bruce brown , a famous designforscher on the brighton-university , so that , that &apos;s the book , so it &apos;s a fernsehen , so it &apos;s not the tv , and so on , and so on , so what we call the massenmedien today that these various memories have been versteinert and our ability to have our ability to have a capacity to virtualisieren .
let &apos;s make a little zwischenbilanz .
from the vogt-zeitalter to the machine .
what has to think of our thinking on our thinking and on our thinking ?
then the verblassenden of the pre-industrial is the pre-industrial einflüsse .
and they &apos;re going to be more and more and more überschrieben more and more überschrieben by the einflüsse of the maschinenzeitalters .
that &apos;s what we have , instead of having a lot of erinnern , we have standardized , far more common with the masses of memories that we can depend on our personal memories .
we don &apos;t produce more .
we have a abstract language to a language language .
we don &apos;t think of the things that are not in images , but we kodifizieren them to tell you our language .
we used to think about that things happen .
and we &apos;ve accepted the linearity as law as law , and there are only exceptions , like for example .
what &apos;s remained is , is the storytelling .
still , we are very , very much very , very strong .
the question is , what &apos;s going on ?
we had the vogt -zeitalter , we had the maschinenzeitalter , and we &apos;ve got the so-called cyber-zeitalter .
that sounds very spacig , and it sounds very , very well , i know , i know .
but these concepts of the cyber-zeitalters that bring us to find these options back to us back and forth that we &apos;re going to find our capabilities back .
there &apos;s about virtuality , it &apos;s about non-linearität , it &apos;s about storytelling .
i want to explain this a little bit .
there are technical concepts like how to compose the augmented reality , which is called the extended reality .
so if you look at google , and then , as a concept , which is , what we &apos;re going to combine is the virtual world with the real world , which means our affinität to the virtualisierung , which is , to feel like something that &apos;s going to be more natural .
another example is the virtual reality .
so , that &apos;s so mad that , of course , that &apos;s what i think , in the context of my talk , we &apos;re not going to physically move into the existenten , virtual worlds , the dominant of the holodecks .
and other example , another example are the ambienten , smart systems .
these are rooms that are intelligent intelligent .
all of that , it takes the ability to accept our basic ability to accept it as a real habitat .
i &apos;ve been in graduate school , and i hope that video works , a very , very beautiful project , this is the bachelorarbeit of michael burk , ann-kathrin krenz , joris klause , joris klause , joris klause , joris klause .
and the two letzteren are today here today .
maybe you can pause up , so you can talk to the break with the project .
and this project i brought in as an example of how to get back to this archaischen , cognitive models .
this is a game , i have to say , i have to say .
what the storytelling of course , of course , of course , and it &apos;s a computer .
and if i say , if i say , you have a very , very likely to be very likely to see people that people who are vor people , or people who play with some of the people with a lot of konsole in your hand .
anyway , they &apos;re doing that in the inside .
this is a game for outside .
and that &apos;s what it &apos;s meant to be , i think i &apos;ve ever seen the outdoors , so i &apos;ve been working the real world again .
and this game does this game , the virtual world , so the data , we create the datenraum , which we create with the real world .
i apologize that i have to be so much as so hard .
you can &apos;t explain much better , there &apos;s more more much more than a lot more more .
and it &apos;s about that i &apos;m going to take a city by looking at what the places was positive or negative .
and so i &apos;m going to take a very different sight , which is a very different impression , which i see negative and positive zones of a city and a whole way to this kind of very real city .
and that &apos;s what we can like to look at this .
ah , what you can see here , sorry , is a little explanation of what you see .
of course , these virtual world in the walls of our cities , is clear .
and with a kind of kind of data we can do this virtual worlds .
so i &apos;d like to do that , i &apos;d like to get to my talk , and that &apos;s the other thing that we &apos;ve been acquired from the eigenschaften and the skills that we &apos;re going to be applied to the so-called cyber , and that we &apos;re in the process of complex -zeitalters , and that we &apos;re actually going to be able to get this kind
thank you .
yeah , i &apos;m very excited to be able to get to you .
i &apos;ve been asked for if this bag is a sprechender bag , and my instead of talking about my instead .
that &apos;s not going to do it .
i &apos;m also going to be able to get a bit of the same thing , which is in there .
but i just do it just a little bit of fun .
yeah , children are inherently curious , or should be curious , designers .
i &apos;m a creator of house , so i also think of the theme of curiosity , and how changes the curiosity of our thinking , and why we &apos;re going to lose curiosity and we have to give them curiosity and so forth .
this is a whole series of things that you &apos;re doing next to the actual care as an individual .
if professors get to be curious , they will often get into such a good forschungssemester .
and that &apos;s what i had over the last year .
a forschungssemester , to the topic of natural history , interface design .
now you &apos;ll ask , why are the whole way to be so natural , archaischen urformen , archaischen urformen , and so forth .
and there &apos;s only one of these little pieces , because the things are always going to be always more , and you get more natural , and you have to look at what &apos;s really , for us , of course , what &apos;s really benutzungsfreundlich or intuitively .
and before the background i &apos;ve been doing in this area of the field of natural , so the next generation in the relationship of human computer , so how our sense of the human computer , or how to change the way our computer was changing from the digital .
so i &apos;ve been busy busy , when of course , of course , or intuitively .
maybe you might have to be a look at a look .
why do it happen at all ?
so if we look at the progress of our society , here , we &apos;re going to move on , and then we move now from the third of the fourth or gesellschaftsform .
so from the modern in the computergesellschaft .
every society is shaped by a primärmedium .
at the beginning of the language .
that means that you &apos;ve found that you &apos;ve been talking to a shared language , you could have been able to communicate with the same cave , or in other areas , or villages , and it &apos;s sort of like nen stammesgesellschaft .
the primärmedium was the language , but the language , something very natural , very much of life .
and to learn , you know , you know , so , no sophistication can be talking about nature , but we learn it to learn it and of course .
that was then subsequently became a abgelöst of the ancient society and the first form of abstraction .
this was a riesen-aufschrei , because of course , of course , of course , of course , of course , the living language of scripture that means what the heck of the fluid and alive , i &apos;m going to start and i get it into stone and so i can do it .
the ones that i &apos;m going to be like i meißel and when i meißel , of course , it &apos;s a very different coverage , as if it &apos;s a alive .
but sukzessive , then , this script was eben as a primärmedium .
then the next generation came out of the next generation , where we &apos;re still alive today .
that &apos;s just the pressure and print geprägte script with gutenberg and others .
at the time , it was a affront , which is , klerus , klerus and other words , you know , you &apos;re actually wahnsinnig when the people begin to read , and that &apos;s what &apos;s completely fatal .
and now we come into the next generation and the exciting , so a generationswechsel is only all over the years , and we &apos;re really in this moment in this phänomenalen period that we &apos;re going to be .
the confused of us , of course , we &apos;re going to see a page of the new media , socil social media , facebook and so forth .
with the total transparency , what the new thinking is , what &apos;s the new thinking about what &apos;s going on in the old thinking , don &apos;t tell that in the lasagne , not even , and no beef , i want to just throw it up and want to get it up .
and these two worlds are just going to be a different , new and old thinking .
the exciting thing is , if you take the ballast , these computergesellschaft , these computergesellschaft , entlehnt , entlehnt , entlehnt , prinzipien , and archaischer and archaischer paradigm from the stammesgesellschaft .
but now , now , there &apos;s no more on local level , but on global level .
we understood that the weather is globally .
that the theme is a global idea .
not if i think locally here , and the neighbor is less , less than the whole thing , it doesn &apos;t work .
that is , from the local village , actually , a global village has become a very similar village , of course , , of course , very intuitive , but also the total transparency .
so as you knew how to the back in the village , who has the age of who , and when that &apos;s happening today about these expansion of our self through these various endgeräte of our own devices .
it &apos;s that we know globally and faster and more and more better .
as it was in the village , it was happening on the village .
so , i &apos;m going to take a look at this , which is what i &apos;m going to look at is what &apos;s happened for us , which is what we have , but what we have is also , what &apos;s the difference in us ?
because often , people come , you can &apos;t do it , you can &apos;t make it benutzungsfreundlich for everybody .
so you have to engage with it , which means that , and not just it &apos;s just it , it &apos;s different , but it &apos;s going to be better .
and when i do , and when i can do something intuitively , and how can i take a creator of the way to take a way to do things like that , so that they &apos;re very intuitive because they &apos;re very intuitive , because they &apos;re just going to use fun .
you &apos;re busy , and you already start to start with the idea of the fly , with the theme of perception and the wahrnehmungspsychologie .
and that &apos;s what you &apos;re talking about , and you know , and it &apos;s going to be able to get and says , okay , now i &apos;ll look at the inside inside .
and how does it look like ?
so how do we work when we get there ?
and what does it mean because of course , and how to work our channels of perception and how does the cognitive procedure ?
because steve jobs said to be told for dig deeper to to to it .
so you really have to look at the details , if i want to make something more benutzungsfreundlich or intuitively , what &apos;s called the core .
and you know , you know , you know , you know , we have a lot of our seven senses , which is , we &apos;ve only got five , but actually , there &apos;s seven anerkannte , there &apos;s a little bit of the next future , and as a expansion of our self .
and to look how process we do information , how do we take information ?
alone , what &apos;s information ?
information is any difference that makes a difference .
many of the use of the word , but not what it means , what it means .
but i have to understand in the core , in the creatures , when information will be information , when information comes from data and so forth , i know how i can do things like , and of course , of course , of course , of course .
and of course , as we &apos;re also using how to take a sense of perception .
so we see that , if i can do that , i can see things like i can take you , like i don &apos;t know what &apos;s salt and peppered , or i can make them intuitively , or i can make them up , i can get things like things .
so much more natural , which is in a gourd , but i see straight straight , where salt and peppered .
and if i say someone , give me salt or pepper , it &apos;s going to be the right to think of the right , where it &apos;s what &apos;s inside .
and at the left hand , and hopefully me that no sugar is in a sugar , salt .
but also our perception self , how do they get us .
for example , this perception in context .
the right circle looks more than the small , though , although they &apos;re not very similar to the case , but they &apos;re just a huge amount of big , and yet our perception , which is what we &apos;re doing in context .
anybody know what this is ?
come .
pattern recognition should work .
there &apos;s been more likely to my glasses .
so it &apos;s &apos; n &apos; circle .
a second circle begins to make some extent or too .
and if i add a halboval , and then we don &apos;t see a more entity , which is , we don &apos;t see a unit , circle , circle , and we see a unit , we see no three units , a circle , a circle , another one .
something called gestaltgesetz , or eben , that &apos;s affecting us in perception .
so important for the creator that have the most important thing that was very first to the first semester .
gestaltgesetz , the closeness of the continuity and so forth .
and often , in the third way .
but that &apos;s a really important part of the time , if you can make things happen , you can also make things very intuitive .
the next phenomenon , which is very interesting to the things .
sounds very much , but what &apos;s really interesting to do is what you &apos;re busy with it .
so we have the eyes and now think of the front door , we see from the back .
that &apos;s wrong .
you can see it from the back to the back .
because they &apos;re projiezieren a presumption of the beginning that you see something which they do , beispielweise circle .
we just think we only see our vision before we see it , until we see it back to the back into our seheapparat , to say , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay ,
so , i got the same thing , you know , you &apos;ve got what you want you to see .
that &apos;s then there &apos;s that coming back then .
and then , then , it &apos;s going to come back , because the back in the front door , and i &apos;m going to say , now , now , you know , if you look at what you see , what you &apos;re seeing .
and then it &apos;s coming back to the back and then it &apos;s actually seen it .
so a whole bunch of things , like certain things and what things happen to do things happen .
i don &apos;t know who you know this picture .
there &apos;s exactly what i &apos;ve described .
now , now , everybody &apos;s trying to recognize that one of these patterns .
i don &apos;t know who you see .
does somebody see something specific ?
a dalmatiner , right .
if i saw that , that there &apos;s a dalmatiner in there , you know , you know .
they &apos;ll never forget , because i &apos;m going to show you where the dalmatiner is .
now you see the dalmatiner .
and then , now , now you see it .
that &apos;s what i &apos;ve actually said , now , i &apos;ve actually got them now in the exclusive , that they don &apos;t see any pattern of dadrin , but i &apos;ve got them to see them in a very short period of time , over this dog image .
and this is this projection of the brain , rückkopplung .
now i know it and now i &apos;m going to go after i see the dalmatiner .
i see the dalmatiner .
so , very exciting processes that then in this , yes , you know , gray is not , but there &apos;s only a lot of that rosanen mass .
anybody know what three seconds are ?
for long , yeah .
that &apos;s our present .
so , it &apos;s also interesting to know than designers .
if i know something about three seconds , until i come from the present , i can just get a very well wartezeiten in the middle of the present , which i can do it by the way i ever get to do it with three seconds .
that &apos;s got to start to start to think of the present than present .
then it &apos;s the past , and so i can be very elegant with very elegant , for example , when i know this phenomenon .
what &apos;s the dauert of millisekunden ?
yeah , milliseconds .
also a very interesting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the period of what you love .
that means that if you know that , you &apos;ll see you who you see how long it looks like long , because i &apos;m not going to have a gewähr for what &apos;s happening .
and sechzehn milliseconds , also a very interesting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the most of the most powerful that we have .
that &apos;s called this first impression that &apos;s going on a mass grave , how we perceive things .
and as we see things , we also see what we &apos;re looking at and how we also can also make it against our environment , so we can think that &apos;s what we can do .
of course , the creator of the gestalter is not only about the topic of perceptions and neural verarbeitungen , but , of course , with the theme of the mensch-objekt-beziehung .
so how a human being a human being a lot of things .
there &apos;s a einmal , the practical features , so formale , or formalästhetische .
there are anzeichen-funktionen , where i know exactly where i actually got to grab .
but there are also symbolic features , why don &apos;t somebody have a little täschchen , where we have a little täschchen , where we have a little bit of what &apos;s going on , so amazingly , as a horrende user out of money , even though it &apos;s not so useful ?
there are more we &apos;re more on the symbolischen , on the bedeutungsebene , which we &apos;re also doing as natural course .
back to my actual theme of what we &apos;re doing , and the topic of course , of course , is usability .
usability means always , like i can reach a certain destination , or how can a user can be very effective , and then a destination is effective , and zufriedenstellend a destination .
so it &apos;s what &apos;s going to say that it &apos;s going to happen to the norm .
how can i do something about a bit of benutzungsfreundlich ?
can i be able to use it right or i need a n or i need i am , i need a really entsprechende for me .
and fewer usable or benutzungsfreundlich is it .
that i just do it just different and make a beautiful , doesn &apos;t mean it &apos;s better .
you have to understand .
and if you look at the software , which is , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , why , you know , why neunundneunzig of our current software , or not in a lot of bereichen , the i-pad in many areas , and it &apos;s also a lot more intuitive than a classic cell .
so , intuitive benutzbarkeit , it &apos;s not only a elementarer wirtschaftsfaktor , nen elementarer , when i do to make technological technological devices of the people .
why ?
because in the rule we &apos;re using this new kind of nutzbarkeit , so the natural user of the nutzbarkeit , for example , five times faster at the average of our destination .
you have to imagine that you have to imagine if you &apos;re going to make something a little bit of the classic softrware , five hours , and with this new type of natural software just one hour .
that doesn &apos;t mean that you &apos;re probably going to be able to go to four hours , but you can get your employers or your employers , you know , as he &apos;s going to be given them with the four hours of hours .
but i want to say , for course , it &apos;s a corresponding leistungssteigerung , also , to make some things .
if we then take ourselves into the area of software , this is the first command of the same piece of wood , which was very abstract , which was very similar to take months to deal with these systems .
and then the next thing that &apos;s coming with , the next thing , or mental model , like the software , which is , you have a idea of something that metaphor is to make the metaphor of a desktop to make the computer .
so not more zeros and zeros or kryptische , but just a metaphor .
that made this whole lot of work , but it &apos;s also a lot more better .
the next generation of the graphischen benutzungsoberflächen is actually a lot more with behavior .
so i &apos;m going to be a very much more sophisticated , very much more common than that .
that &apos;s a paradigm paradigm .
that &apos;s that , i always think that it &apos;s always been the aussehen for success , just the usability .
and then if i put a step back in this particular brain disorder , where i &apos;m going to take a voice , per , per , per , per , and not more to drive things , and then i &apos;m still going to get rid of the things , and yet still even further .
but that leads me to the point , which is going to be , when things are going to be intuitive ?
if you &apos;re going to be a intuitive and then i have to get my little friend here and look at the little friend of strapazieren and look at what &apos;s going to be from the perspective of view , when now is really a bit of ?
and that &apos;s a human being always intuitively , when i have to think about it .
so he doesn &apos;t want to think , but it just just just do .
the less i sort of , about , the more intuitive is it .
and what does that mean for designers ?
that means that if we look at existing handlungsmodelle , we can transmit that we can transmit that we can transfer the metaphor , for example , i can do that as a creator .
that means , i can just take a sort of a sort of intuitive , human handlungsmodell , and make the software to make the software .
now , of course , the question is , what &apos;s the most beautiful handlungsschema of us , and now i &apos;ve already ask it .
this is the so-called osit-modell .
this is using everybody from us and osit is a acronym and down for drift , selektieren , informieren , transagieren .
that &apos;s what any of you are doing all the time , but it &apos;s doing it , and it &apos;s sort of like , or partly , including anything .
the model is already ausprägt in the womb , so it works in young and old , and it &apos;s going to be used by all the time without that , without that that &apos;s most of the most often , that &apos;s that that &apos;s where that model is there .
osit osit is about 50 to siebzigtausend , about 50 to us , so you &apos;ve found that it &apos;s going to be found that it &apos;s less often häufig than day .
now i can now take this mental handlungsmodell , selektieren , selektieren , selektieren , informieren , transagieren übertragen on a interaktionssystem .
and through this kind of delegation , unlike the metaphor of the desktops , but not a metaphor of a physical object , but a metaphor of a handlungsmusters , a handlungsprinzips .
and this is on a higher gral of the benutzungsfreundlichkeit , as the transmission of a classic metaphor , which is the desktops .
and if i &apos;m going to take this , for example , i &apos;m going to take a orientieren , for example , in the case of a auswahl , selektieren , in the case , it &apos;s a auswahl , i can look at the details of me , and i can send it to the details , and i can send it to somebody or whatever you can
then i can transfer the whole .
i try to try to get this out of a beispiels .
and so , everybody has eaten a pie .
and now , i &apos;m going to take a look at the object , can rauszoomen , reinzoomen .
i &apos;ll get the whole benefit , now , can filter , and say , just all of the things you &apos;re doing with a chocolate .
and once again , a interface , which is a lot of natural natural natural gas .
because i can get the things like the individual can come into the way , and they come to me , is much more natural than when you can do anything like the hierarchisch epidemic , or other , to make these things make things available .
and so , imagination is , more than , and with this sentence , i &apos;d like to close and to give you a lot of , and you have to think of the evidence to come to new solutions , and i &apos;m very welcome to you for their attention and please .
so i want to give you a whole particular aspect of curiosity .
the first one , if you &apos;re going to be a child , as a baby , you know , as a baby , you know , what you &apos;re doing , and depending on whether your parents have been allowed to play more or less , more or less , and the more curiosity , of course , is going to be , of course , it will be
and the curiosity isn &apos;t learning .
so that &apos;s all of those are all these are here , and curious are , in fact , people who have a property that you can &apos;t learn .
now , it &apos;s now about this whole , praktisch umweltdiskussion , weltuntergang , vierzig , vierzig , in quality .
and there &apos;s a central point .
and the depends on phosphorus .
give pee a chance .
every day , they give them + they give up the größenordnung of two gram of phosphorus and every day , they have to get two of them .
otherwise , you can &apos;t have teeth .
you can &apos;t store energy .
you can &apos;t have bones .
we could only be a amorphe of amorphe mollusken by the weltmeere .
if we did not have phosphorus and then .
and amazingly , we &apos;re so much about doing something that &apos;s what it was really , but not as it &apos;s so much .
because all of the talk about energy , but no one talking about the phosphor-problem .
the phosphor-problem is a lot more critical .
we depend on two countries .
we &apos;ve only got a lot of phosphorus and now through the phosphor-bergbau of the world &apos;s worldwide in the world , much more uranium than all the atomanlagen .
in the last 20 years , fünfzehntausend tons of brain is verteilt in our fields in germany .
and that &apos;s what we take all .
it &apos;s leukemia in children .
and we think we would protect the environment , if we &apos;re a little bit less harmful .
so , for example , schütz the environment , even less car .
schütz the environment , make less waste .
schütz the environment , verbrauche energy .
but that &apos;s not protection .
that &apos;s how if i would say , schütz your child , it only three times more than five .
that &apos;s just a bit less destruction .
if we think about the so of the wiege to the bahre , our whole earth , or later , a friedhof .
that &apos;s why the wiege of the wiege to think .
and the most important thing is , us to look at the ground than the first .
in ground , over the ground is about a sechzig percent of the arable .
so , we &apos;re building corn , and losing the age of 11 , and 30 kilograms per hectare , or the energy consumption .
that means we lose a lot more , about a more time , more than new .
we can visualize the müllproblem müllproblem .
and everything is , and it &apos;s all of the content is .
for example , in offenbach , for example , are the hausmüll 20 percent of the müllmenge .
and because we &apos;re older , they &apos;ll be the more greater .
that &apos;s sort of all of the vorwindelphase .
yes ?
a baby needs about 7,000 .
we could reduce that to 10 percent , but what does that do ?
that &apos;s going to be in china in china .
that &apos;s completely trivial .
so the question is , how do we go with this mission ?
here &apos;s a proof of evidence that men are not pigs .
let me tell you .
because the phosphorus is going to be the pigs in the pigs , which is emitted about the unconscious of the unconscious .
people in the urine .
yeah .
so , so they can &apos;t be pigs .
because that &apos;s because it &apos;s floating , right ?
traditionally we think we &apos;re in the umweltdiskussion , we &apos;re too many of the world .
and if you get the people that people get to exist when you say , that &apos;s better , you &apos;re not going to be there , you &apos;re not going to be raffgierig and feindselig .
and so someone says somebody like al gore , one of our great hero , there &apos;s nothing more wichtigeres than the human population .
in israel , you &apos;re saying when you &apos;re a menschenleben , you &apos;re rettest the earth .
here &apos;s what you &apos;re saying , the more you are umbringst , the better .
yeah .
the first question is , are we really too many ?
if you look at the ants that the weight of the ants on the earth , then the ants would weigh the ants more than we humans .
i could also turn up to the termites , but in the united states , nobody likes to be seen in the united states , in such a long way , even though they &apos;re vegetarian .
that is that the ants represent a lot more than we .
and because they &apos;re physically doing a lot harder to the hard work as we &apos;re doing , and they only live three to six months , they were in your weight , in the energy consumption of people .
that &apos;s what we &apos;re not too many , we are too stupid , right ?
and where you see how far we are going to be , what we &apos;re going to do is we really wanted to achieve and see how we &apos;re at the earth , and how we see that , for example , you can see that for example , for example , to be a program , until 20 , you want to be klimaneutral , right ?
you can only be klimaneutral if they don &apos;t exist , right ?
the only chance .
have you seen a klimaneutralen tree ?
yes ?
one single ? one ?
that means , our whole intelligence means that we want to be more than trees , ya ?
yes ?
no tree is kohlenstoffneutral .
fortunately , yes ?
there &apos;s no überbevölkerungsproblem on trees .
there &apos;s still a lot of billions of more than we have .
you &apos;ve already heard of some of the trees from trees ?
that means all of our intelligence is that we want to be more like trees .
and where you see , even in a little bit like demeter , the strikteste bio- , doesn &apos;t allow our own stoffwechselprodukte go back .
so every year we lost three million tons of phosphorus that really are in the ground .
and so we &apos;re too many .
just about it .
so we &apos;re going to feel guilty on the earth that we &apos;re saying , there &apos;s no bio-landbau , no bio-landbau , no nature-et-progrès , and how they allow all the hot that allow us to go back to our own exkremente .
isn &apos;t that sad ?
so we &apos;re too many .
it &apos;s certain sense of being able to be less harmful , which is angeht .
but where are we useful ?
we &apos;re trying to minimize our environmental footprint , but it &apos;s about a great footprint , which is useful .
we want to be good for society , we want to be good for the economy , but if it &apos;s about the environment is to be the highest , right ?
nullemissionen , yes ?
you can only have nullemissionen , if they &apos;re not there .
even if you &apos;re going to shoot , they would have emissions .
so you can &apos;t solve this .
we can different it differently .
we can control our nutrition .
we &apos;re doing in brazil in brazil , where we &apos;re going to go to the nutrients .
right now we can be able to respond to this kind of way in agriculture .
we &apos;re doing this in china , where we &apos;re going to take the leap away .
in china , a nachttopf today is , like , yes , yes ?
and in our western world , we were always being dumb to our nährstoffe , our nutrition .
that means that the entire western territorial draws out of the city , that the city has always been , but never had a little bit of a little video .
and so , the cities had to grow more than the cities , because the farmers were going to go to cities and cities , and the cities had to go away .
all the western rich , is always over and over and then they &apos;re not even able to have the infrastructure and then they &apos;re implodiert .
yes ?
in china , it was different .
you &apos;ve been able to have a bruchlos civilization for a 20-year time because you always have been able to go to the nutrients .
even today , if you &apos;re invited to the dinner , you &apos;re going to be in china , you &apos;re going to be able to stay long until they &apos;re going to the toilets .
because it &apos;s riddled , to go and expand the nutrients .
you &apos;ve got them to eat them for dinner , not to nährstoffdiebstahl .
that &apos;s what you can see in the internet , how you can &#93; control the nutrients .
so , that &apos;s really neat , so if you do that , so , landwirtschaft , in a hectare of land , in a hectare of land , so that a bauer of eintausendfünfhundert , and the facility are waiting for the hühner and enten and enten and enten and vegetables .
and the great thing is that the verbrechensrate in the favelas is going to the favelas to the favelas to the favelas .
so we don &apos;t need to control the people , very poor .
we can support them , good .
and that &apos;s natural high-tech-landwirtschaft , but the sanitation is wearing itself .
the byproduct is clean water .
and they are so designed , through the design that can just be a farmer .
that means that the verbrechensraten go back .
and none of these facilities , we &apos;ve now got over hundertfünzig , and we &apos;ve got to have been gebaut over the last 20 years , none of these facilities has ever been sabotiert .
they could easily easily einfach a liter of altöl reinwerfen , and then the door would be ruined over over .
not instead of instead .
that means we don &apos;t need to control the people , to be very bad .
we can support them , good .
that means we need to get phosphorus .
and by the way , if you want to do what you want to do , you write in germany , in germany , in germany , in germany , in germany , in germany , in germany , in germany , in germany , in germany .
unfortunately , the non-muslim , but maybe you can actually help the frankfurtern .
because the frankfurter facility could be the best of the phosphorus .
and it needs to go back .
we see that , that phosphorus is really critical .
and we see it &apos;s true .
we &apos;ve deployed over three years now .
the dutch government has explains them , they will be the first country in the world , which is what phosphorus is zurückgewinnt .
but we need the overall .
you understand , there are two countries that control the control , the control , almost 70 percent of the world &apos;s worldwide .
there &apos;s a bunch of opec a bunch of waisenknaben .
these are sechsundzwanzig countries that control 40 percent of the ölvorräte .
and the oil will be able to replace others through others .
but the phosphorus is not going to replace the phosphorus .
that &apos;s not about making the existing equivalent to make a little less miserable , but it &apos;s about doing something right .
and so , in front of all , you know , in front of the first thing that &apos;s right .
that is , it &apos;s about efficiency , not to efficiency .
in holland , you understand that , of course , you &apos;re easier because in holland , the land is built on flowers .
yes ?
imagine if your wife &apos;s her woman is sad if you &apos;re having them , and they &apos;re coming with 50 .
völlig inefficient .
but it &apos;s very much , and even , yeah ?
or take a lippenstift .
a woman in germany , about six three pounds of their lives .
and it &apos;s .
that &apos;s not exactly accurate , because we don &apos;t know how much more weggeküsst is going to happen .
but a lippenstift , even at this illumination , i can tell you , but it &apos;s very inefficient , but even , it &apos;s very effective , right ?
all of the things in life is not efficient .
that &apos;s not about resource , but efficiency .
to ask , what &apos;s the right ?
not , the klärschlamm , a little bit better , and it &apos;s a little bit better to lose and to lose it , and then first , first , first , to ask , first , how do you make the best things ?
so , think of mozart .
yes ?
if i go to dinner and say , yes , there &apos;s a pill with offenbach-geschmack and a glass of water .
wonderful , &apos; ?
that &apos;s efficient .
all of what in life is not efficient .
if you fall in somebody fall in somebody like to fall in love with somebody ?
yes ?
that is , everything in life is not to save the vermeiden , to avoid not worrying .
the whole umweltdiskussion .
we say the people , you know , you don &apos;t have a green in the south .
no , that &apos;s the right thing right now , ya ?
in any place where you &apos;re wegwirft , you know , you &apos;re going to get lebensmöglichkeiten .
but the wrong things .
if you wegwirft the wrong things , you have a müllproblem .
we think of how we think of the north .
there &apos;s any footprint .
if you walk , yeah , zerstört , zerstört , zerstört the soil .
because the ground will die of the ground , and the wind blows and the water is going to take the soil away .
but if you &apos;re in italy , everybody means that the water is going to be the water .
so , it &apos;s about making a great footprint that &apos;s going to be a specific .
not schuldmanagement .
we &apos;re saying in germany .
yes ?
but if i ask them , how do you feel like your wife ?
what do you say ?
sustainable .
i say , &quot; i say , herzliches beileid , yes ?
that &apos;s the cool thing .
so not saving , avoid , avoid .
every waste is nährstoff .
and it &apos;s a sense of what you see in italy , how people live in the high bow , and they train the coladose from the car , to get it .
because you know , that &apos;s a lustvoller process .
it &apos;s a ne form of revierverhalten , yes ?
you can show me .
but with the right design , please .
we &apos;ve developed a eiscremeverpackung , for example , that &apos;s the liquid liquid .
you can wegschmeißen them , where they go and stand .
in two hours , they &apos;ll go anywhere .
and they &apos;re samen seeds of rare plants that so you can contribute it through the biodiversity .
that means we &apos;re useful , not less harmful .
so it &apos;s so two quick .
not all of course , naturally , of course .
a tv or a washing machine that use them , they use them .
just the things that are verschleißen , like bremsbeläge , like autoreifen , who must be so that they have to go into biological systems .
the things that only are used to be used in the technical systems .
but today we &apos;re talking about the biological systems .
yes ?
for example , the sneaker , yes ?
so , direct advertising , not for the company , but not for the company , but for that , you &apos;re now going to help this , to make this business .
because we don &apos;t do things that we do is not free .
yes ?
so if i take them to eat to eat and say , that &apos;s free from hähnchen , then you can &apos;t help them .
no , we &apos;re finding what &apos;s inside .
positive .
so not like detox .
not toxic .
but it &apos;s all right , is useful .
these are the first shoes that you can take the kavalierstart of the fußgängerampel , and the rubber in the gummi can go to the biological level , yes ?
everything is kompostierbar of it .
and if it &apos;s able to get us , it allows us to make sure for adidas , for nike , for nike and mauritz and the whole textile .
and that &apos;s half of all the abwasserprobleme world who caused by the textile .
that &apos;s why they &apos;re helping you to go with , ask you to people .
hey , puma , do you guys really ?
because that &apos;s what have the vorstandsvorsitzenden already has twice the vorstandsvorsitzenden .
and i &apos;m not so sure if they really dabeibleiben .
so , you know , you &apos;re going to help me a little bit .
but it &apos;s going .
yeah .
that &apos;s what &apos;s been shown by what &apos;s just been shown .
that &apos;s going .
we can do the things that now , if you &apos;re verschleißen , if they &apos;re kaputtgehen , you can look in biological arrow .
technical kreisläufe is just as much .
there &apos;s something that &apos;s a direktes rücknamesystem .
this is the first ecological backpack , actually , who &apos;s made for this , in the circulation .
so , so in any store you can do things like things .
if you come to that , yes ?
remember , you still remember ?
when the waste is waste .
all over the place are nahezu , virtually virtually .
in the countries where people come to money .
there &apos;s a wind on the deponien , but also , in the landscape , yes ?
if we change the plastic , so that it can change in biological systems , if we can change the change , inside , you can go back to a baby , and then you can send them in israel or in tunisia .
yes ?
if you take these these paths , they take these windel , they &apos;re sterilisieren , and the powder to turn it into the trees .
so that &apos;s the baby for the whole life , already from beginning .
so we don &apos;t need to be klimaneutral , we can be klimapositiv .
it &apos;s sort of a beneficial poop .
yeah , like , sort of .
yes ?
we can do that .
we can still touch anything else .
i &apos;ve got a institute .
now , there are a lot of people working on there , and they can all engage .
there &apos;s extra a bunch of things to make cradle-to-cradle-verein , where everybody can be .
so not saving anymore , verzichten , avoid , not to reduce , not a schuldmanagement , but intelligent waste .
do you do it ?
thank you .
the work of the interpreten .
music as a language .
in my mind , i wrote as a interpretin , i &apos;m like a interpretin , so i &apos;m going to understand english .
interpreten are the übersetzer of the geschriebenen music in klingende music .
that you don &apos;t just sit in a letter , but the text of the text of the text is in a different language , but also understand the deeper sense of words and wortzusammenhang , so it &apos;s a more useful translation , everybody who do it with fremdsprachen .
in the german , in the german , more knowledge , more knowledge , it &apos;s going to be more knowledge , if you then ask it to free , or even to write poetry .
but it &apos;s a lot of laien , which we do with our musiksprache .
as a interpretin of a musikstückes , i just first started the geschriebenen .
you think that the composer in the notes just has anything that he was there .
in reality , the notes are very vague and ungenau .
these notes are about as accurate as a verbal , like a verbal , albeit very gentle , beschreibung of a landscape .
because in this verbalen landschaftsbeschreibung , the fragrance of flowers is not to smell the degree of the grüns only to the erahnen of the windes , not to feel like it &apos;s not .
that means that the word is to have this ungenauen angaben in a different , which is hörbare , konkrete , konkrete musiksprache .
today i want to tell you what i want to do is , so interpretiere , even again , even in a verbal language .
so basically a translation translation of translation .
so i &apos;m going to get it to do it , because if i got to the other way to the english , it would be like to me , it would be for me to translation with translation to translation translation .
so the music works for me so much how the spoken language .
the notierten notes have the function of the letters of a script .
so it &apos;s not enough to learn only notes and the parties to press the right to the piano or the right place on a violinsaite .
that &apos;s what the letter you &apos;ve learned to paint .
the point of the letter , you know , if you can get the language .
so , you have to take the lernprozess of music at the time , at least as long as the spoken language .
there &apos;s also a belief that there is also a abstufungen , whether you can learn it for the hausgebrauch , except , passively , or you can also speak to the musikalischen .
the work of the interpreten begins to look like the theaterregisseurs .
after you play a piece of a piece , because you &apos;re excited about it , you &apos;re forscht , you &apos;re forscht to the composition of the composition of the composition .
you &apos;re collecting information about the piece of information .
you read in the letters , tagebüchern , or if it &apos;s words , thoughts from the composers of the composers .
you studied the work that he was talking about and i got .
you &apos;re comparing it .
the beweggründe , writing it .
how did he do ?
how were his clothes , like the society and politics ?
that &apos;s all interested in me .
you think in this period of time by you , for example , you can see contemporary images or literature .
but with time , you &apos;ve also had a rich knowledge to the composers of the composers you &apos;re playing with , and it falls to a always easier to feel like it .
the composer is always going to be more to the friend that you live together .
and his concerns , the piece of writing , more and more and more and more of my personal concerns .
now , the notes all others , but only a genaue of the scale of the planet , but only a framework , i &apos;m going to take this scaffold to make sense and meaning .
i &apos;ll say with my own words , which may be written between this framework .
i play erklärend , which could have these sound .
now for me , and for the composers of time , and what you might be able to do today .
every note , every one that gets to make a sense of because i feel because it &apos;s because of my now gelebten .
it must be in me and now be stimmig , i can &apos;t convince my audiences that my concerns is .
it &apos;s always a very happy concert , when i have the experience that i have the experience that i have so long in advance , like new .
as you can see a happy day , and over the course of the time , though , with the same level of life , stand up , to go to work , so i also have the same piece of the new yorker .
i &apos;m a day , the seasons , the seasons , the seasons , my pulse , and my pulse is slower slower , in a konzertsaal , it takes longer than the sound again .
i take the breathing of the audience , and it &apos;s going to be true or unconsciously .
all that influenced me and all that affected my experience with the composition .
it &apos;s also a wonderful way , when i &apos;m on a duo-partner on the stage , and we have the same wavelength .
then the same thing is happening in a good , angeregten conversation .
you bring a new idea in a new idea , and then they &apos;ll get this beantwortet with a response .
it &apos;s exciting , because then things happen , that &apos;s what we don &apos;t have geprobt and what you can &apos;t do .
it makes great fun to make music , and you &apos;ve experienced as the audience , and then the audience is to have the music to be alive .
so , every concert is another concert .
i never will play any more playing as in this moment .
i can &apos;t play that today as 20 years .
i &apos;m going to have more coca more coca lebenserfahrung than today , and so on my palette of the musikklänge , more more than a lot more more than a lot of emotions and emotions than today .
sure , i &apos;m going to have some farbtöpfe , but for some new dazubekommen .
so , a nice example of an example of what we have .
it was on a klavierkursus for musikstudenten , professor lehrer , professor jürgen , professor jürgen , a known beethoven-spezialist , konzertpianist , konzertpianist , konzertpianist , konzertpianist , professor in stuttgart .
unfortunately , i was a lot of young , so he was already emeritiert when i started studying .
but i was very lucky to make it very , very early , with 13 years , and so i &apos;ve been to my classes on his classes .
i was back at the time when i was looking at one of his classes and played the last four of the four .
he asked me what the introduction of this consortium for me was to me .
that &apos;s so a bit of a sudden .
and in my jugendlichkeit i said , expectation .
there he was schmunzelte and said , so ?
that needs to be the altersunterschied .
because for me , it means you memory .
he was already about a lot of the story .
well , with 17 , you &apos;ve got a träume , but not a major memories .
i play the piece of years back and over it , it &apos;s always been gewandelt , although no one note .
every time it &apos;s exciting , because always i read something new .
an example of a very different area . i had a monet monet x-mal .
it &apos;s always the same garden , but too different , bei light .
he &apos;s translated the seerosen verschiedentlich translated , as he saw it , as she did it in this moment .
his personal impressionen of the seerosen .
the x-malige interpretation of a piece of music is .
now i &apos;m going to be older than the chopin of zweiunddreißig when he wrote the piece .
he only lived only for a second years .
and it &apos;s important to me , over again , again , if i can take my way to give them .
to keep the komponisten , right with the composers .
because the grades are the only connection to him .
especially when he died .
well , how do you start talking to the language of music ?
i said , you know , you need for about it for it for the spoken language .
often , the musikunterricht is so that you just learn to read the notes .
you learn to read the first thing until you just give a word a word .
you learn to find the sound of the notes on the instrument .
if all of all the fingers and right , and i just get to right as how it stands in the notes , get the sound of the music .
if the thing happens , the students gets the students to go on .
over interpretation , hardly kaum .
well , there &apos;s a good guy , the front presto , which is a real piece .
lento , slowly .
according to loud and leisezeichen , f , et .
that &apos;s what most of you are here .
but even if you &apos;re going to be umsetzt , it &apos;s still just a bit more technical .
and yet it &apos;s not a interpretation .
i wonder .
i wonder that you often forget something quite a little bit more intuitive .
namely , to make music on the instrument , the musical musical and feel that they should be anywhere .
so that &apos;s singing .
a child who doesn &apos;t learned the singing , because it didn &apos;t have the parents &apos; parents , it will not be done .
that &apos;s like the sprechenlernen .
it &apos;s necessary to have his own experiences and then the idea of the music to make a more possibility , so you can make a instrument .
people who never have been made , have never felt how to feel the eigenen of your body , as it is to form a sound .
one of the one that &apos;s going to make your own breath .
the musikinstrument is the extension of our body .
so our vocal chords to sing , our hands and feet .
so the hammerköpfe of my fingers are my fingers .
the tune out of the gesungenen and the rhythm from the dance .
the dauernde berieselung today is not förderlich .
you don &apos;t need to make more music , if you &apos;re going to get a boring .
not needed to be able to make a liedchen or to sing .
every your own music is going to be plattgemacht when you get out of the outside of music .
sure , there are some among them , which is , but what do you do when i can &apos;t sing ?
i think , i can &apos;t sing , you can &apos;t sing , because they believe you can &apos;t sing ?
or b , because they don &apos;t have learned to sing ?
in both , it &apos;s not too late to start to start to start to start to start to figure out how you can &apos;t figure out , or learning how to take these little muscles that &apos;s going to be used , right .
that &apos;s what you can train .
or c , because you &apos;ve got it bescheinigt you &apos;re untauglich .
i wonder how fachlich listeners was this diagnosis ?
they &apos;ve already made a zweit- or drittmeinung , how you &apos;re telling you it ?
or d , they don &apos;t like music and want to do it with that .
but what i &apos;d like , because music is a nice , kommunikative thing .
but maybe you can also even get them even more .
so , you know , you can see all the cases needs to be a aussichtsloser candidate .
but don &apos;t tell you , i don &apos;t understand anything of classical music .
i can &apos;t say whether it &apos;s good or bad .
i &apos;m going to reply , but surely you can tell if they like to do it or not .
because i don &apos;t think it says somebody , i don &apos;t know if it &apos;s appropriate , because i can &apos;t cook .
so you don &apos;t take the dinner to eat the dinner , except because they can &apos;t cook .
so they don &apos;t have to be able to do not be verzichten music because they don &apos;t play a instrument .
listen to you and say , if you don &apos;t appreciate it or not .
whether the music is to gepfeffert them or too sweet .
say , what they &apos;re feeling .
and with the time , they also get the same coin , and want to add a little more spices of the drinhaben or taste , even feine differences .
why do i challenge now , that &apos;s why it &apos;s also active ?
because the music is a language and a language is to communicate .
a piece of art that you never see , has no strength .
the food that &apos;s been gekocht by a chef or a chef , needs to be eaten and not just looked at them , or 29 .
so you listen to you when a music is played .
it &apos;s not just a nice geräuschtapete .
if in a neighborhood where the adults are going to be active or at least active music , a child , then it &apos;s easy to ask for a musiklehrer , which color has color ?
can you do you now play in blue ?
and the kid plays after a gedenkpause , instead of a red herring now a blue flower .
and this sounds different than before .
that was the first of the first beginning of a own musical expression .
so the first step is a very interpretation .
and what happens if you &apos;re playing a piece of a piece of a piece of a hundred , which was a hundred years ago , or even a few years ago ?
now , the instruments have the instruments .
there was a moment for the time , even though no piano .
it was just not invented .
i think the bach was going to be , if he had had the klanglichen possibilities of modern klaviere .
i can see the klangvorstellungen that was gehabt the bach , the bach , which is what a barockes wing can &apos;t sound .
and also from beethoven , you know that he was more hearing than he was .
today is a modern orchestra in the position of play , all of the orchestra of the back of the back of the back of the time .
so the composers are on us , the composers of interpreten that are angewiesen the pieces .
so they &apos;re going to be a deceptive thing to do that they &apos;re just going to have in the spirit .
and also , what they think today is going to think today .
or what i &apos;m going to do today , because what you might think .
thank you .
you know what &apos;s envy ?
were they worried about ?
and how felt that ?
beschissen .
i got a friend who drives a passerati .
if i come to my little v , piesel piesel , and i &apos;ll see this feeling , and i &apos;ll come up with this feeling .
i &apos;m going to take something through the head .
i say , ulf , what do you need to be so good for good car ?
that &apos;s the first year in the first year of half .
and at all , you &apos;re much less than i .
why i have to do so , like , &quot; n auto ?
and then immediately , immediately , i &apos;m going to give you a little bit , that &apos;s a lot .
it &apos;s against justice .
and as i say the word justice is this : this is a unangenehme .
our organism has invented a great way to get these kinds of feelings like envy to go to disappear .
you can also try to try and try to try and try to worten , or ähnlichem .
i want to tell you about this mechanism today , and something a bit of what you &apos;re familiar with .
the mechanism comes from the lie .
but if you don &apos;t think of the lie , as you may have heard , if people say , no one has to make the purpose of a wall .
and then rocks auftürmt , so he gives you the sight of the sight .
and you see a lie in a lie , you see that the liars doesn &apos;t believe what he says .
it &apos;s going to be überdies easily that he &apos;s going to be very different in meaning .
he &apos;s just not only it and not himself .
no , the lie that i &apos;m talking about , which is to do that they &apos;re self-sufficient .
they need that one , to get a lebenslüge to get a selbsttäuschung .
you can get less easily , yes , nachprüfen , or to bring them out .
they need time .
from this period , you &apos;re talking about the anecdote you might know .
the spanish painter , picasso picasso has a woman .
this lady , this lady , the portrait would not look at the portrait of that .
picasso , wait for it .
it &apos;s always going to be always .
and if you &apos;re laughing at this , and if you laugh , you recognize how important this lie is , and how much time you need to experience something very well for us .
because artists have a gestörtes relationship to lie .
the artist gives you something with you , and particularly this lady , what you don &apos;t see if they just look at the mirrors .
the artist gives you to you in a portrait , which you &apos;re just going to be familiar with , when you &apos;re looking at this piece over time .
then , this awkward , it could be no similar to you , and it &apos;s always going to be always .
here you have this mechanism , with the lie to the lie , as a great invention of our lebensverhältnisse .
and not only in art , also in the volksmärchen , in the mythology , in stories , it again .
you may know this idea of dame that every morning in the mirror , and he said , who &apos;s the most beautiful in the country ?
one day , one day , this mirrors , yeah , there &apos;s a schönere .
behind the seven mountains and so forth .
and you also know how much hostility of this true bee , also , the mirrors , from this true movement .
but we just want to do with us that you can &apos;t say a woman that it &apos;s a schönere somewhere somewhere else .
here &apos;s what we need to understand what we &apos;re seeing under politically correctness , whatever .
we need this one of these messages that we need to be the delusion of the delusion , without we can &apos;t .
we don &apos;t just have the art of art , in the volksmärchendichtung , but also in science .
and there &apos;s this story of the woman &apos;s lady of worchester .
she heard about this book of charles darwin , who was the origin of the species and the descent of humans .
that human human being should be abstammen , and , yes , there was a common ancestor among humans and monkeys .
and then she ran her husband , she ran her husband and said , &quot; it &apos;s not true what charles da .
the human being should have heard of the monkey abstammen or a common ancestor .
no , no , no , that &apos;s not .
and if it &apos;s true , we have to prevent people that people are going to get out of it .
why is that we need to prevent people that people are going to get out of something when it &apos;s true ?
because we can &apos;t live without these lebenslüge .
because we &apos;re using this feeling , this feeling of being great , and a single one of the highest creatures , not from such a organism , from such a organism , which is , to be a rock and otherwise things that &apos;s for us to get us to us .
so we can &apos;t even get these things .
we need to prevent people that people are doing things of things , especially if you &apos;re true .
so you see how slowly this mechanism is going to look like this mechanism , and how the traces that he does it , which is going to be a great picture of ourselves , i want to give you another story .
a particularly brave story , as i mean .
my wife has told me .
she came from one day from school , she &apos;s a teacher , and she was telling them from a student .
a autistischer student .
they like to love him because he &apos;s a slope to the sincerity .
and she asked him what are the hobbies ?
and there he says , well , i &apos;m at the fire .
and because i &apos;m at the age of the age , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
yeah , you feel like it &apos;s a heiter , there &apos;s something wrong .
i said , when i was talking about my wife , always when a human being used in a moral justify because we should try to replace it through the wörtchen of the wörtchen .
and then you do that , and then you experience the sentence .
though i &apos;m at the age of the fire , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
you feel , that &apos;s the truth behind the piano .
so a little bub , who doesn &apos;t care for feuerlöschen .
the interest of the fürs .
but there are no visitors that we can see where we can see where you learn how to do fire .
there &apos;s only the second thing that &apos;s going to be called the fire .
there he is signed up .
and überdies , you &apos;re not telling his teacher , you &apos;re not saying , you know , you &apos;d like to go somewhere and wonder if the fire was going to hochlodert .
no , it &apos;s just better if we &apos;re showing that we &apos;re going to show that we &apos;re going to be able to overcome the risks that others just make the fire .
here &apos;s this little mechanism .
this is this verweis that &apos;s in the innersten of the bub , that he &apos;s actually known with the fire , but that it can &apos;t say loud .
here you have this zensor between the input and the conscious , the immediately , the immediately sofort , without you know , and the things you know , so they can actually make a lot better way to you and sound .
so that &apos;s how you just get these words that we &apos;re also using in the language of the 20th century .
so we really know that something else is .
but we know if we &apos;re all the general , the social surprise are very delicate .
we can &apos;t just do that .
it &apos;s impossible to do things like that in society that &apos;s supposed to be too presenting .
so i want to show you what we &apos;ve found in my institute .
so after the logic that &apos;s the logic of the logic , these are these selbsttäuschung , the willingness to be a different reality than we &apos;ve actually seen in the gulf of the world that they &apos;re very much to distribute .
for example , i want to give you two , maybe three examples .
the first example , what many of you are familiar with what many of you are familiar with , and some of you are not going to go to all .
i mean my soul .
what is the soul ?
the soul is so sad , about how about it .
it &apos;s something that &apos;s not about your stopp , nature is nature .
and if you have people who have a lot of people who have a sense of festen , or you can also say that they &apos;re a geistiger soul , and then you think that it &apos;s so much like the soul , and then you know , the soul , you know , is , from the ground , it &apos;s just a geistiger , etwas , verwesbares ,
and from this soul , you think that they &apos;re somehow sort of in this wolkigen nature , in this luftigen nature , anima , it &apos;s called the lateinischen , the lufthauch .
and if that lufthauch , then , if this lufthauch , about the people , he &apos;s filled with spirit with spirit with nature that can only live only , just with the soul .
and then he can davonlaufen .
that &apos;s so the idea of how the soul works .
so she &apos;s supposed to be a bit of the outside .
so we &apos;re supposed to be a bit more than something that &apos;s going to be for our lives .
and if you have these liked , you know , you understand the logic that we &apos;re going to experience this happiness , through a lie , through a lie .
because now you can apply a dreisatz .
dreisatz , you know , you know from school .
now this is a dreisatz that &apos;s going to be a logic .
that &apos;s the way that the hardest part is in my talk .
here &apos;s a little logic , but also the willingness to lie .
so , that &apos;s so lying that they can just apply this logic .
in this dreisatz , three sentences come .
the first sentence is , klaus , there &apos;s no soul .
so the second sentence is , if klaus &apos;s right , he doesn &apos;t have a soul .
now there &apos;s a third sentence .
i got this in here .
a third sentence , immediately , immediately , in people who have a strong sensation of a soul .
the say who &apos;s no soul , who &apos;s dead and can &apos;t claim anything .
and you do it . you know .
this is this logic in this , yeah , in this täuschenden speech , to expression .
you see it immediately .
the first two sentences that are logically correctly .
i can also say anything .
the logic doesn &apos;t make sense of reality .
i can say , the kanzlerin is a man .
and if i &apos;m right , then the kanzlerin is a man .
if i don &apos;t rightly right , then the kanzlerin isn &apos;t a man .
the logic doesn &apos;t want to be saying what &apos;s going on .
i can claim anything .
but it &apos;s crucial if i &apos;ve got right , it &apos;s going to be true .
so if you say , there &apos;s no soul .
secondly , if he &apos;s right , he &apos;s not a soul .
these things are logical accurate .
and now our minds are now to make our minds immediately , you can do something .
it &apos;s a third sentence , who doesn &apos;t do anything with the first two sentences and so , as the opposite of the first sentence already proven , and he was doing it .
because we have to prove that if there &apos;s the soul or not .
but with this logic that just use two sentences , and a third dazuhängt , who looks like he could do something to do with it so that we can save our lebenslüge save .
so we &apos;re doing so much as if it was actually impossible without a soul .
and we are very happy about it .
we can get these things on different ways .
in the present , we have a very modern example , which keeps the tageszeitungen .
and you have to take another philosophisches theme , a dauerbrenner of philosophy , present .
that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing that we go back in the vierzehnte century .
there was a scholars that was called johannes buridanus , and after the buridansche of the buridansche named named .
the buridansche esel is a research program , which is a set of nature .
hasn &apos;t this soul .
this is a naturding .
and if you put the exact exact same in the middle between two gleichgroßen heuhafen , then he verhungert .
because he doesn &apos;t know what to do he first .
so he &apos;s right in the middle .
so the naturdinge is vorgestellt .
gleichgroße forces with gegensätzlichem vorzeigenzeichen with each other .
there &apos;s nothing at all .
so if you put another example , so if you immediately make a haystack bigger , and it doesn &apos;t need to be a reason , and they don &apos;t even have anything to do it .
automatically does automatically make it to the real thoughts .
so if you have this idea that you &apos;re going to be driven by nature , by the larger amount of money , which is , you have the idea that you have to be a very fast , that it &apos;s like a free will be like a free will .
and if we &apos;re in frankfurt in frankfurt , and then i remember the max-planck-institut for brain .
there &apos;s a scholars that &apos;s called wolf , and you sometimes say , &quot; sometimes , wolf singer , there &apos;s no willensfreiheit .
now we can move the second sentence , and can say , if there &apos;s a moment , he doesn &apos;t have a willensfreiheit .
these sentences are absolutely logical and accurate .
and what we can read now is to read every day in the newspaper , which find you in this third sentence .
so , it looks like this , who &apos;s not a willensfreiheit , can &apos;t be able to get to his actions and the claims to the responsibility , and he &apos;s therefore unzurechnungsfähig .
again , you &apos;ve got it again .
in fact , you have to prove you to prove that if you have something like that .
but the logic of deception allows us to do that , as if the first sentence was wrong , when you have to assume the opposite without evidence .
and now you can just do anything if you want to do anything , if you want to do anything wrong , if you want to test anything , and particularly if you want to make people happy to make this statement .
so , you &apos;ll practice this for example , if you &apos;re a human mind , you can say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
and please don &apos;t use the german word for vorhersager , which is called the prophet .
they don &apos;t call it , that would be a little bit more politically inkorrekt .
say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
and immediately , you &apos;ll be able to know of it , for example , you know , you know , that can &apos;t prove you .
and already , you have a problem .
because they &apos;re busy , they &apos;re not prove that they can &apos;t prove that there &apos;s no vorhersager , is the man .
he &apos;s very happy about it because he &apos;s going to have it .
because he led them to a fährte , he doesn &apos;t even get a lot of .
because it &apos;s not really interested in this human .
he &apos;s only interested in being a reminder of the need to have to prove that there &apos;s vorhersager .
so in the kind of shift of the shift , you experience the brilliance of the lie .
and if you have a way to do this , that &apos;s a way to feel that dreisatz , you do , because they &apos;re going to do other happy if they don &apos;t remember their selbstlüge .
thank you for your attention .
yeah , good afternoon .
i &apos;ve been asked to me , i asked you if i can mention them .
she &apos;s one of the veranstalterinnen of this great event , and i asked me if i &apos;m a lecture and my idea .
i have to say , you know , you &apos;ve got it , it was just hard to talk about my idea .
and i may be able to imagine my favorite cartoon that i &apos;m trying to try to imagine .
but it &apos;s the sum of natural history , lots of ideas .
i &apos;m probably probably , the two little little girl are there , i &apos;m probably probably talking about the generation that i &apos;ve been talking about , because i &apos;ve been able to study the schlechte of the bad öko of studieren , and i thought , &quot; well , i think it &apos;s a lot .
and i then went back to berlin for the middle of the mid verschlagen , because i wanted to do renewable energies , and that &apos;s not in karlsruhe .
there was the kernforschungsanlage kernforschungsanlage .
the most hießen was all kfa , also the jülich .
the hot today today .
because a good engineer has either built great cars or atomkraftanlagen .
but it &apos;s a doofes like the n solarpendel , from the way that somehow a hundred watts of the square meter come from the square meter .
and in berlin , there was a verrücktes ingenieurkollektiv .
i &apos;m the grateful grateful that he &apos;s got to rehabilitiert the word again , because after the mauerfall , you couldn &apos;t use the word for the word because everything was bad at all .
but it was not that in the 1950s &apos; 40s .
there was so that it was so selbstverwaltete that there was selbstverwaltete alternativbetriebe , and one of them was sitting in kreuzberg in kreuzberg , where you were vermutete .
the scene of the terrorismusses , but it was meant to be made and solar and solar and the solar system made up of the mid .
and i , much of what was said , which is very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very much , many beautiful expressions of the same way that i &apos;ve also had .
i worked in the &apos; 80s , which was basisdemokratisch .
we were 20 people .
if i said , the vetoprinzip was a completely zermürbt , and i &apos;ve got a completely zermürbt , and i &apos;ve got a lot of a little bit of a schwachsinnige , and i really had a schwachsinnige of my father &apos;s father , because all colleagues of my father &apos;s father &apos;s always got to the money to the window was the money at the window .
it &apos;s busy preoccupied with musicians .
and that was really , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very bitter , and then you can also put a picture of that , which i &apos;ve been asked to do a picture of the durchhalten , a thousand d-mark , grundlohn , einheitslohn , who &apos;s going to be the good to be the great .
and i then put it up until the sechsundneunzig , and then we &apos;ve got to mitbegründer with friends , i &apos;ve got to solon mitbegründer , who was welcomed with the spin-off of the world &apos;s largest zellenhersteller of the world .
and we have a riesenerfolgsgeschichte , but we have the problem of course , and we have a little group of a growing , and we then have a little group of the problem , and we then have a little group , and we &apos;re going to start to start and see the next topic of the future and our faith , and that &apos;s why people say ,
and i brought you a project i want to imagine you now .
and the title of the speech was , as you &apos;re going to a hundred percent renewable .
and we just started asking a relatively more sophisticated story , where you could have a memory of a memory today today .
on this island , this is the island graciosa on the azoren .
yeah , that &apos;s the data .
there are a thousand people .
now today , today , today , today , today , today &apos;s erneuerbaren .
and the question is , why don &apos;t they have more ?
that &apos;s not just technological .
if you &apos;re more windkraft each other , it starts to fail .
so i &apos;m going to tell you the politicians when they put our online anlage .
then , then , why ?
we &apos;ve already got 20 percent in germany .
but can &apos;t be a problem .
but not , we have seven percent seven and our net is the european level .
if we had 20 percent , we &apos;d have the same problems that people have on this island .
the question was just , which was zweitausend2006 , which was zweitausend2006 , the first one , and they just started through the island , but just through .
how big , because in fact , that &apos;s actually a battery that you can be so close to 20 , 30 , vierzig , fünfzig , maybe even more renewable renewable , maybe even percent renewable .
and i , i go to a slide .
the conventional system sees all the world .
by the way , a year will be a hundred power of electrical electrical electrical electrical electrical electrical power in the world .
that &apos;s the performance of the performance of a hundred power because that &apos;s particularly fast anywhere .
the energiehunger of the world , who &apos;s going to be accompanied by diesel , because you don &apos;t need a little button .
that &apos;s going fast .
you &apos;re so rare .
and then it looks like this .
in the run , three of the dieseln , two , two .
yeah , this is a way that &apos;s going on down there is the burden .
we also get very quick data .
and the windkraftanlage or the windkraftanlage or whatever it is , or whatever it is , is a back-up system , which is just a system of what &apos;s only in small amounts of water .
our destination was just to say , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay
the post-crisis becomes back-up and the wind , sun &apos;s the burden that you can do the larger percentage .
and if you want to go over 20 , 30 percent of energy , so energy per year , not the achievement in the moment , then you must be able to move the blood vessels .
that &apos;s what you need to do is to make sure that the renewables can take the whole network .
you can only of course , you can only of course , if you &apos;re going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be fixed .
that hasn &apos;t been done in the world .
that &apos;s the little style , so you can also have your rasierer in your car seat to a little wechselrichter .
people always ask me what was going to do you do in the room ?
that &apos;s what &apos;s going on .
but if you want to want to go from these wechselrichtern , and that &apos;s going to build a net , then it &apos;s very complicated .
and our destination was , we wanted to go to the head of course , until the last 12 , and then there &apos;s another one another , the last 10 , 20 percent of the last 10 , is very expensive , and that &apos;s not going to work out , that &apos;s going to work out of batteries .
that &apos;s going to be a a special , which then , hydrogen , methane , methane , power , or sch , you know , it will be the same .
they must go to a saisonalspeicher and winter-sommer and not only tag-nacht .
we just wanted to know what &apos;s with a normal battery , stinknormalen battery battery .
how far can you do it ?
and then a whole lot of simulations .
and they have wind and sun and the burden of the outcome , and they came to the outcome , a very interesting outcome that you &apos;re going to be a middle eastern strompreis , which is a middle eastern strompreis , about 50 cents a mile , about vierundvierzig cents .
that was the very first computations of the ages of six years ago .
and then we said , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay
is great , we have a business model .
we are cheaper as the diesel-system , when the average likelihood of five percent per year .
and then we started to negotiate with the insulanern .
what do they have to do ?
with investors , i &apos;ve looked at investors , i &apos;ve looked for new gesellschafter .
we were just five people to create a chance to rebuild society .
and here &apos;s the rendering .
the brown &apos;s kind of the conventional system , the green system is our system .
that our system also has a preisanstieg , because we &apos;re going to do 20 percent of the air , and also a preissteigerung of other things that are not durchschlagen .
and the power-utility that the elektrizitätsversorgungsunternehmen on the island , has meant that we find very great .
we also want to support , but we don &apos;t believe you can &apos;t solve the technical problem .
and so we decided to build a hall in berlin to build the electrical layer of the island in the scale of the island of the island .
that &apos;s what we &apos;ve seen , then , they &apos;ve looked at the first of the world .
here &apos;s her .
the coming from asia , in the case of japan .
and witzigerweise is it in the &apos; 80s , in bbc , heute , today , entwickelt , and then it was developed by the japanese .
you can see , it &apos;s a very , very large battery .
it &apos;s got a megawatts of performance and can bring six hours to this performance , and that &apos;s the battery that we have sozusagen .
and then they started .
we also have a one of these diesel-aggregate in the same size , as he &apos;s there , in the hall , in the hall , in the hall , in the hall , in the hall , there &apos;s the big battery , here &apos;s the great battery , here &apos;s all the umrichter , which is the whole umrichter of the web .
over here , we &apos;re talking about the whole übertragungsleitungsystem , the kilometer-physik of wire , to try to abzubilden the schwingungsverhalten in the net .
and you can see this whole thing you can see .
we can also auch zweihundert kilowatt on the net .
here we see this again , we see the diesel , here , here , the whole , single aggregate .
and what we &apos;ve done was , since the halle was done until today , everything that &apos;s going on , which is what &apos;s going on in the individual system , to develop software , we &apos;ve made .
so we &apos;re not batteriehersteller , but we define ourselves as a company that &apos;s just between the subject and the theme of the web and everything .
you have to communicate with battery , you have to communicate , you can also communicate to the net , and that &apos;s very complicated .
the beauty is that you &apos;re essentially in this island today , today , everything that we &apos;re essentially in the problemen can get to the problems that we will get to our percentage of renewables .
so all of these discussion , like the moment in the moment , like the right , like the gehen , we have to go to the island , for example , we have müdsen percent of the brain , so we müdsen the wind and the sun .
natürlicht then offers smart-grid .
so smart-grid , a riesenthema everywhere .
we can start to integrate the island that can start to integrate , elektromobilität , you can &apos;t get the burden .
that means if you &apos;re at 100 renewable , you can &apos;t make it without storage .
you can run through it , you can see the ausbau of the bed , you know , you can also do it , but you can &apos;t do the percentage of erhören , but you can never get completely completely to memory .
and that &apos;s the n , the message , the message .
so , too many people , and look at this , because you can see what problems you get .
if we turn the diesel , you &apos;ve got no more of that kind of mass , which causes a certain amount of different than a certain amount of different .
and our europäisches verbundnetz is basically composed of a louder mass of large kraftwerken of large kraftwerken , where always the wave of all the time around the world .
we see in this net , and we see the 50 hertz , and if it &apos;s neunundvierzig neun , we &apos;ll start a couple of ventilchen aufzumachen , and then we &apos;ll get a few ventilchen , then we &apos;ll get up again and then again , then we get up again .
that &apos;s the system .
and of course , that &apos;s incredible .
if you look at the somewhere , it &apos;s going to take it for .
the spinning reserve has at least 10 seconds to keep the net .
and in time , they can respond to another .
if you don &apos;t have that anymore , these rotierende crowd , you have to replace the leistungselektronik and elektrochemie .
and we can also have this great battery two of the great millisekunden .
there &apos;s a way you see , which is what enormous geschwindigkeitsmöglichkeiten there is there .
and the message is , we need to be able to do this rotating masses , if we are going to be our goals , 20 percent , 20 percent , 20 percent , 20 percent , and so forth , if we want to reach the at all , when we want to reach the at all , when we want to reach the at all , when we
and then we have to go to our must-run in the net .
must-run is just that &apos;s just going to go to keep the frequency to keep the frequency .
yeah , it &apos;s a riesendebatte of the moment , zubau from the kohlekraftwerken , because we don &apos;t have anything , or gasturbinen , because that &apos;s not going to go .
and we &apos;re just trying to make a point that you can take the capacity to take the must-run , which can also bring them to the net .
now , there &apos;s a lot of studies now , now , now , a lot of studies .
and to that purpose , people will come and look at our versuchsstand on the surface of our inselteststand .
and , yeah , the discussion is always about the question , how far can you move a bit of the far future .
and many discussions that i had in the last six years were , as the discussion i had in the last 30 years , had to go back to the subject .
not , is absolutely schwachsinn , kinderspielkram , kinderspielkram , we &apos;ve never met anything , and never .
we have today , today , today , today , today &apos;s photovoltaik .
that &apos;s vorbildlich .
and i just go from it , we &apos;re going to have the same capacity to speichern the same capacity of elektrochemischen speichern on the planet .
it &apos;s just going to be coming .
there &apos;s a whole lot of widerständen and streitereien .
the nice thing is that i &apos;ve been doing now in the last two years , that the scientists are asking on my side .
we &apos;ve got over 10 million of 10 million förderprojekte , also to make the german net of the net &apos;s net .
that &apos;s going to be in the next april .
so from that , you also know that there &apos;s a change there , and it &apos;s only about this abwehrhaltung , to the idea of a hundred percent renewable renewable .
and if you have a hundred percent renewable , it &apos;s like a autarkes system .
so far more in discussions , that insulaner , these insulaner , who have a little net , which have a little net , which has nothing to do with our healthcare system .
the question is , if you &apos;re completely fully completely regardless of any of the fossil , or uranen energierträgern , who are going to be rausgebohrt , and they &apos;re going to be hingebracht , they &apos;re a island .
then they only use it , which is what happens to the sun and wind is where they live .
and this is a bit of our vision of a vernüftigen oil , and i &apos;m also thankful that they &apos;re told , sonnenenergie .
and that &apos;s what we do , and they also come to the talk , but the lecture of premium kola , that you can be a collective of the balance and use solar power to get a little together .
and i want to do you , i want you to encourage you to be a little bit mad , and also a vision of a vision .
and you really have to stay really quite zäh , but i think it &apos;s going to happen .
thank you .
as steve steps , david of los angeles , one day by los angeles , he heard a wonderful music .
she came from a man , a african-american , sympathisch , rau , obdachlos , who was playing on a violin , who had just two strings .
many of you are familiar with the story , because it was a book that was a book that was a book that was a book that was wiederum , with the robert junior , and jamie foxx , who was kontrabassisten , and the kontrabassisten kontrabassisten , who was welcomed in its paranoide früh .
nathaniel left juilliard , suffered a nervenzusammenbruch and 30 years later he lived on the streets of skid row in the center of los angeles .
i recommend what i would do with all of you , steves , or the film , lest you just not only see the film , so they can &apos;t see the wonderful thing that was going to be able to make the difference between those two men , but as they were able to get the instrument , the mithalf , the mithalf path , to get out of
i met mr. ayers in 2008 , two years ago , two years ago , in the walt disney hall .
he had just had a demo of beethoven and fourth symphony and i got behind the stage behind me .
he spoke to a very heiteren and geselligen sound on the yo-yo of yo-yo and hillary , and hillary , and i said , &quot; and it was the dodgers , and that &apos;s all the tückischen passage of the first line of the last sentence , and it &apos;s all over the last sentence of vierter symphony .
we came to speak to the subject , and a few days later i got a email that was going to be a e-mail that was going to be a interessierte for me .
i have to mention that nathaniel is a medical treatment , because he was already with elektroschocks and with thorazin and brothers , a trauma that &apos;s been built his whole life .
and so , as a consequence of this is , it &apos;s especially vulnerable to these ages , and the tagelang , and he &apos;s tagelang at the streets of skid row , and it &apos;s always exposed to this horror and the folterqualen of his own mind .
and in exactly the same time , in exactly a reizstadium , when we started with our first audition in the early disney words , he had lost this insane flackern in his eyes and totally lost .
he spoke about invisible and smoke and smoke and how to get somebody in the sleep .
i was frightened , not meinetwegen , but i was afraid that i could come back to a character , and i could give him his relationship to the violin , when i started talking about race and arpeggios and other exciting forms of didaktischen geigenpädagogik .
so i just started playing .
i played the first sentence of beethoven .
and while i played , i noticed that in nathaniels eyes , i was going to be a very change in a change .
it was when he was under the impact of a invisible pattern , a chemical response to my game .
nathaniels manischer zorn zorn in understanding in understanding a quiet curiosity , and i &apos;ve got a very quiet curiosity .
and as a miracle , he took his violin and started to play some clips of violinkonzerten and asked me to play them , and then i asked them to play them , mendelssohn , tschaikowski , sibelius .
we started talking about music , at the same time , from bach , and all of the other bs , bruckner , from bartók to esa-pekka .
and i realized that he &apos;s not only a enzyklopädisches knowledge of music , but it also with her a very tight personal relationship .
he was talking about her passion and a understanding that i could only know about my colleague in the philharmonie of los angeles .
by the way , he was playing music , and i was obsessed with this paranoiden , confused man who had just moved through the streets of los angeles , a liebenswerter , ausgezeichneter , ausgezeichneter .
music is medicine . music is changing us .
for the nathaniel means of music , music is emotional .
because the music allows him to him , his thoughts and delusions with its imagination and creativity in a bit of time .
and so he &apos;s entflieht his quälenden .
i understood that this is the nature of art .
this is why we do music , so we can make something that &apos;s in all of us , deep in all of us , our emotions , through our artistic lens , through our creativity , through our creativity .
and the reality of the public is coming all us , and move , inspired and the united states .
what &apos;s been doing , so it brought the music back into a community of friends .
the erlösende force of music brought back into a family of musicians who realized him , who recognized his talent and he was achtete .
and i &apos;m going to get over with nathaniel music , whether it &apos;s mad in the walt disney hall or in skid row , because he reminds me why i &apos;ve gotten to why i &apos;ve gotten .
thank you .
bruno giussani : thank you . thank you .
robert gupta .
robert gupta : i want to play something that i &apos;m stolen in unverschämterweise .
i hope you forgive me .
so i &apos;ve been doing a lot of fish in my life .
i only have two loved loved .
this first one , which was more like a passionate .
it was a beautiful fish , wohlschmeckend , good consistency , gehaltvoll , gehaltvoll , a bestseller on the menu .
what a fish .
even better , he was convicted in aquakultur , höchsten standards , standards standards .
so you could feel that you could feel it .
i had a relationship with this whole relationship about several months .
one day called the boss of the company and asked if i could depend on a event , could be on the sustainability of the farm .
&quot; of course , i said .
here was a company that was trying to solve what this unimaginable is become a problem for our chefs . how do we keep fish on our speisekarten ?
in the last 50 years , we have the ocean as we have geschlagen .
it &apos;s hard to überbewerten the destruction .
90 percent of the big fish that we love , the tunas , the tunas , the heilbutte , the lachse , schwertfisch , they &apos;re fulfilled .
it &apos;s almost nothing left .
so , probably , or a übel , fischanbau , fischanbau , a part of our future .
many arguments , we have a lot of arguments , and fischzuchtanlagen verschmutzen , the environment , most of you , and they are inefficient , we take tuna . a big disadvantage .
he has a futterverwertung of 15 to one .
that means 15 pounds of wildfisch , so you get a pound of a pound .
not very sustainable .
don &apos;t really good .
so here was a company , the one company trying to do it right .
i wanted to put them .
day day before the event , i called the head of the company for the company .
let &apos;s call it .
&quot; i said , &quot; i said , &quot; just to have the facts , you &apos;re famous for this , so far away from the ocean , that you don &apos;t care . &quot;
&quot; that &apos;s true , &quot; he said , &quot; we are so far away that the waste is distributed from our fish , not concentrated . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; we &apos;re basically a personal world .
this futterverwertung of 2.5 , said , &quot; he said .
&quot; the best in the industry . &quot;
2.5 , a great thing .
&quot; 2.5 , what do you do ? &quot;
&quot; the sustainable proteins , he said .
&quot; great , &quot; i said . i said .
and at this dinner i lay in bed and thought , what &apos;s the hell &apos;s hell ?
so i rang up on the next day , shortly before the event .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t , what are the serious proteins ? &quot;
he said he didn &apos;t know . he &apos;ll get it .
well , i &apos;m going to take a bunch of people in the company . nobody could give me a ordentliche answer , until i finally , i finally got to leitenden with the senior biologists .
let &apos;s call it a lot of it .
&quot; i said , &quot; what are the serious proteins ? &quot;
now , he mentioned some algae and some fischmehle , and then he said , hühnchen-pellets .
i said , &quot; hühnchen-pellets ? &quot;
he said , &quot; yes , feathers , skin , knochenmehl , reste , reste , getrocknet , getrocknet . &quot;
i said , &quot; how much percent of the brain tissue is chicken ? &quot;
maybe in the assumption of maybe two percent .
&quot; well , that &apos;s about 30 percent , &quot; he said .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t , what &apos;s sustainable , chicken , chicken ? &quot;
there was a long time in the room and he said , &quot; there &apos;s just too much chicken on the planet . &quot;
i entliebte me from this fish .
no , not because i &apos;m a selbstgerechter genießer and gutmensch .
that &apos;s me .
no , i actually micht in this fish , because i swear with god , i swear to god , the fish after that conversation has been named .
this second fish , that &apos;s another kind of currency .
it &apos;s the romantic way to know the way you learn to know the better you learn to learn the fish .
i first started eating in a restaurant in südspanien .
a befreundete journalist had been talking for a long time from this fish .
she has a sense of us .
he came up with a light surround , almost white color .
the chef had him verkocht .
it &apos;s twice .
he was still delicious .
who can make a fish so well after he was verkocht ?
i can &apos;t it , but this guy can .
let &apos;s call it miguel . actually , he &apos;s actually called miguel .
and no , he doesn &apos;t run the fish and he &apos;s not a chef , at least in the way they understand .
he &apos;s a biologist at veta la la .
this is a fischaufzucht in the südwestlichen corner corner .
it &apos;s near the river of the river .
until the 1980s was the farm in the hands of argentiniern .
they &apos;re giving fleischrinder on what was basically the wetlands .
they made that by making the land by the land .
they built this complicated suite of channels , and they sail rid of water out of the land and beyond the river .
well , they couldn &apos;t make that , that it &apos;s not economically .
and the school was a disaster .
it has about 90 percent of birds to this place for those place .
and so , 1982 , a spanish company , with the land .
what did they do ?
they have the river of the water .
they literally have the lever umgelegt .
instead of using the water , they used the canals to make the water .
they fluteten the canals .
they created a 11.000 hektar hectares of fischaufzucht -- barsch , meeräsche , shrimp , shrimp , aal , aal , and it &apos;s miguel , and his company , the most profound destruction of completely unexplored .
the farm is incredible .
i mean , you &apos;ve never seen anything like this .
they come on the horizon , who &apos;s a million miles away , and everything you see are geflutete channels and those density , voluptuous .
i was not a long time ago to miguel .
he &apos;s a tremendous guy , three parts of darwin &apos;s darwin and a part of the kiss . &quot;
okay ? there were we fought and i fought us through the wetlands and i keuche and schwitze , and i got matsch , and i got matsch to my knees and miguel in quiet .
here he lifts a rare gleitaar .
now , he said the mineralbedürfnisse of phytoplankton .
and here , here he sees a pattern of bundle that reminded him to the tansanische giraffe .
it turns out that miguel teil of his career in the mikumi national park has spent in africa .
i asked him how to become a fisch-experten .
he said , &quot; fish ? i don &apos;t know anything about fish .
i &apos;m an expert for relationships . &quot;
and then he goes away from a little bit of gerede birds and algae and algae .
and you don &apos;t understand me , that was really fascinating , you know , the biotische community , so in the way that the most of the species .
it &apos;s great , but i love .
and my head was schwach by this kind of verkochte stück , that i had at the end of the vorabend .
so i interrupted , i said , &quot; miguel , how come it &apos;s so good for good ? &quot;
he showed up the algae .
&quot; i know , boy , the algae , the phytoplankton , the relationships , that &apos;s incredible .
but what does your fish ?
how is the futterverwertung ? &quot;
now , he said to tell me that it &apos;s such a major system that the fish eat what they eat in the wild .
the most powerful biomass , the phytoplankton , the zooplankton , which is what the fish .
the system is so healthy , it &apos;s completely selbsterneuernd .
there &apos;s no food .
je from a farm that &apos;s not heard of their animals ?
and i was going to go on this day on this site , and i said , &quot; for a place , i said , &quot; for one place , &quot; for one of the place , &quot; and , &quot; well , unlike any farm , i &apos;ve ever been to succeed ? &quot;
in the moment , it was like a filmregisseur verlangt .
and we took a lot of the corner and a lot of the most amazing , thousands of haiti , a literally pinker and teppich carpet , and we &apos;ve got the eye carpet that way .
&quot; that &apos;s success , &quot; he said .
&quot; look , your bäuche , pink .
they schlemmen . &quot;
schlemmen ? i was completely overwhelmed .
i said , &quot; miguel , you don &apos;t schlemmen your fish ? &quot;
&quot; yes , he said .
&quot; we lose 20 percent of our fish and fischeiern on birds .
now last year , on this site , over the site , more than 250 different species .
it &apos;s the coolest and one of the most important private property in europe .
i said , &quot; miguel , is a good gedeihender , not the last thing you want to have a fischaufzucht . &quot;
he &apos;s his head , no .
he said , &quot; we &apos;re building extensiv , not even though .
this is a ökologisches network .
the flamingos eat the shrimp .
the shrimp eat the phytoplankton .
so the more the planet is the better the system . &quot;
okay , let &apos;s move it . a farm that doesn &apos;t have the animals to be feeds and a farm that &apos;s going to be their success in their own view of their own life .
a fischaufzucht , but also a vogelreservat .
oh , and by the way , that flamingos is not even going to be there .
they breed in a city of a city , where the bodenbeschaffenheit is better for the nestbau .
every morning , you fly to a moment of farm .
and every night , they fly away .
they do that because they can follow the gestrichelten white line of landstraße a92 .
seriously .
i &apos;d like to take a kind of journey of penguins , so i looked at the miguel .
i said , &quot; miguel , you fly to a kilometer of farm a kilometer , fly to a distance kilometer back to the evening ?
do they do that for the children ? &quot;
he looked at me , when i was just going to be a song of whitney in the houston .
he said , &quot; no . you do it , because it &apos;s better . &quot;
i didn &apos;t mention the skin of my beloved , and i don &apos;t like fischhaut . i don &apos;t like to sautiert . i don &apos;t like to knusprig .
it &apos;s this beißende , verkohlte taste .
i never have a few of them .
and yet , when i tried this restaurant in this restaurant , they didn &apos;t have to go to fischhaut .
she liked sweet and in a way , when you take a bite from the ocean .
i mentioned that to miguel and he nickte .
he said , &quot; the skin , like a sponge .
it &apos;s the last season before something in the body .
it &apos;s developed over the course of evolution to unreinheiten unreinheiten . &quot;
and then he said , &quot; but our water has no unreinheiten . &quot;
okay . a farm that doesn &apos;t want to be feeds . a farm that &apos;s misst their success on their success .
and then i realized , if he &apos;s told me , a farm that &apos;s not a unreinheiten , because the water , that &apos;s going through this farm coming out of the river coming out of the river .
it &apos;s a river that &apos;s all the things that are doing with the rivers , which is tend to lead to the rivers , they tend to be chemical pollutants , abfluss pollutants .
and if it &apos;s through the system , and this is the water , the water , as it &apos;s hereingekommen .
the system is so healthy , it cleans water .
so not only a farm that doesn &apos;t have a farm that doesn &apos;t have a farm that &apos;s not only a farm that &apos;s required to their success , but a farm , but a farm , which literally is a wasser-aufbereitungsanlage , and not only for those fish , but not only for you .
because if the water is herausfließt , versinkt it in atlantic .
a drop in ocean , i know , but i &apos;m going to take it , and that &apos;s what they do , because these love , as romantic is also , is also .
you could say that you &apos;re a recipe for the future of food , whether we &apos;re talking about barsch or fleischrindern .
now , what we need now is a radical new concept of agriculture , from one , in the food actually taste .
but for many people , it &apos;s a bit of radical .
we &apos;re not realisten , we &apos;re genießer . we &apos;re lover .
we love wochenmärkte . we love little familienbetriebe . we &apos;re talking about regional food . we &apos;re eating food .
and if they claim that the things that are the things that are going to be on the future , someone who &apos;s going to be somewhere on and says , &quot; hey people , i love pinke flamingos , but how do you feed the world ?
how are you going to feed the world ? &quot;
may be honest ?
i don &apos;t like this question .
no , because we &apos;ve already been doing enough calories to feed the world more than just just feed .
a billion people are going to be hungry today .
one billion -- that &apos;s more than ever before -- because of krasser inequalities in the distribution , not the gesamtproduktion .
now , i don &apos;t like this question because they have the logic of our nahrungssystems , the last 50 years .
the other grain of the füttere crop , schädlingsbekämpfungsmittel getreide , schädlingsbekämpfungsmittel on the earth , chicken on the earth , chicken , and the whole time , said , &quot; if we &apos;re going to feed people &apos;s more miserable , how bad can it be ? &quot;
that was the cause . it was the best one . it was the great agriculture .
we should call them , what she is , a gewerbe in abwicklung , a vibrant , das kapital capital , which is that this production .
that &apos;s not a gewerbe , and it &apos;s not agriculture .
our kornkammer is threatened today , not because of abnehmender zufuhr , but because of abnehmender resources , because of abnehmender resources , because of abnehmender resources , because of abnehmender resources , because of abnehmender resources , because of abnehmender resources , because of abnehmender resources , because of abnehmender resources , because of abnehmender resources , because of abnehmender resources , because of abnehmender resources , because of
not by the latest mähdrescher- , but through fertile land , but through fertile land , but through fertile land , not through the pump , not through the surface , but through the wälder , not by fischerboote , but by fish , but through fish .
they want to feed the world ?
let &apos;s start with the question : how are we going to feed ourselves ?
or better , how can we create conditions that are living in each community ?
to do that , look at the future of the future .
it &apos;s really old , and it &apos;s done .
capital , chemistry and machines are not going to be the obenan and it &apos;s never really good to eat .
so let &apos;s look at the ecological model .
that &apos;s that , that &apos;s two billion years of arbeitserfahrung .
look at the miguel , farmers like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like
these are not worlds , these are the wiederherstellen , the wiederherstellen , the wiederherstellen , the wiederherstellen , the extensiv , the extensiv , the extensiv , instead of erzeuger , the farmers who are not only erzeuger , but experts , but experts for relationships , but experts , experts , experts , experts .
because they are those who are also experts for taste .
and if i &apos;m really honest , you &apos;re a better chef than i ever will ever .
you know , that &apos;s right , because if the future is going to be delicious , it will be delicious .
thank you .
if i want to tell you about the one of the data that we want to do is that the totality of the data that we consume , is larger than the sum of their villages and instead of thinking about how we can take information that pattern is so similar to the pattern that they were not really looking for .
so , what we see here is a typical sterbediagramm of old age .
the program that i &apos;m using here is a little experiment .
it &apos;s called pivot and what i can do with a pivot , that i can filter a certain cause , say , we &apos;re accidents .
and immediately i see another pattern that &apos;s going to be .
and that &apos;s because in the mittelbereich , the people are the most of the long , and they &apos;re over here .
we can go to a step further and then pick the data and see that kreislauferkrankungen and cancer is the usual suspects , but not for everybody .
now if we &apos;re looking at the past and the age of age , we &apos;re saying 40 years or younger , we even see that accidents are even more about the way that people should do .
and who &apos;s shown that this is particularly true in men .
so you can see that this is the specific information , and data in this way in which this way in a lebendigen informationsgrafik .
and if we do this for raw data , why not do for the content ?
now what we &apos;ve got here are the titelbilder of every single single secretary , who ever had ever been before .
it &apos;s all here . it &apos;s all online .
you can also test it to my talk to your zimmern .
with pivot , they can also take them into a decade .
you can dive into a certain year .
you can jump directly to a certain copy .
now if i look here , i see the athlete that appear in this copy and the sportarten .
i &apos;m a lance armstrong , so i could go back to my seat to all the lance armstrong .
now , if i just want to get a gröberen , i could think , &quot; ok , what if i look at the topic of fahrradfahren . &quot;
so i go back and forth and erweitere the perspective .
now i see greg lemond .
and so you get a idea of that , if you &apos;re on this kind of information , gezielter , breiter , reinzoomen , rauszoomen , you don &apos;t go away or not just not just to just not just mention or not just not just to just not just mention .
you make something , that &apos;s actually a little different .
it &apos;s a bit between between and we think it changes the way information can be used .
so i want to take this idea to a little bit more and a bit of what a little bit is .
what we &apos;ve done here is we &apos;ve taken every single wikipediaseite and they reduced them on a little bit of a little bit .
the summary of the world contains a short and a symbol of the area .
i just just just ever get the top 500 of the prison .
but even in this decade , we can do lots of things .
and immediately , we get a sense of the issues that are on wikipedia .
now i &apos;m going to vote the topic .
now , after i chose the government , i know that the wikipediakategorien that &apos;s most likely to be at most of the people who are at the most people &apos;s head of the year .
this is really important , because this is a realization that &apos;s not in a single brain scanner .
that &apos;s only to recognize if you look at a step , and the whole thing .
and then , in a certain point of view , i can then go into the subject of the year of the year , &quot; and all of the people in the year , and all together .
now if i &apos;m going to see all these people , i know that the majority of these are regierungsbeamte . some of the science are coming from science . some of the economy , and there &apos;s my boss , and one comes from the musikbereich .
and interestingly , a whole , bono is also a ted prize winner .
so we can jump and see a look at all the ted prize winner .
you see , we see , we &apos;re at the net , the first time it really is a net , not only by side , but a lot simpler .
and so i want to show you what else to show you what a little surprise .
i just show you just the new york times .
pivot , this application -- i don &apos;t want to call a browser ; it &apos;s not a browser , but you can see websites -- and we &apos;re bringing these zoom-technologie to each other as this one .
so i can take a step back , and i can jump to a specific sektion .
so that &apos;s why you &apos;re just because you only see through this kind of web in this way , all the way to look at all the same way to look at the same way .
so i can take in my own course in a certain way .
here &apos;s the whole of the entire demonstration that i &apos;ve been doing .
and i can sort of anything i &apos;ve seen today , again , zurückholen .
and if i get a step back and look at everything , i can see my trajectory , and i &apos;m going to go back to my doctor , i think , for &apos; nepotistisch , here , for the betterment , or here , after live .
and from here , i can go into the side and you &apos;re going to get back .
it &apos;s a metaphor that &apos;s always used over and every time it makes it twice as the summe of the datenteile .
right now in this world , we think that data is a tasty .
we &apos;re talking about the fluch of the informationsüberflusses .
we &apos;re talking about &quot; the &quot; drowning in information . &quot;
what if we could turn these situation and the internet on the head , so that we can always go to another , starting to get to many things , and see patterns , which otherwise would be hidden , and so on the way that otherwise would be hidden ?
if we can do this , then this is a bisherige , maybe a new source of information .
and instead of moving just in information , we can know that we can get out of that .
and if we know know , we can even even get even more weisheiten out of it .
and i &apos;m listening to me , thank you .
i grew up with a gehörigen of science fiction .
in my school i went to school , every day a half per day .
and my nose always stuck in a book , a science-fiction-buch , which my thoughts in other worlds and on a erzählerische way of sitzende , unersättliche curiosity .
and that curiosity-driven curiosity , that i was also trying to do that , when i was not in school , and i said , &quot; samples , &quot; and &quot; samples &quot; and schlangen and teichwasser and teichwasser , and it was going to be done by the microscope .
i was completely wissenschaftsbegeistert , you know .
it was always about trying to understand the world and the boundaries of the possible .
and my love love to science fiction seemed to my environment , because at the late &apos; 60s , we flew to the moon and the deep sea .
jacques cousteau came in our living rooms with his fascinating shows that animals and places and a world full of miracles that we never imagined before .
that &apos;s probably true to the science-fiction-rolle .
and i was artist .
i could draw . i paint .
and since there &apos;s neither video games , nor weder videospiele , nor computergenerierten , the whole imagery of the media , i had to create the pictures in my head .
and we had to all the time . if we had all the children a book , we took the description of the autors and they projected them on the screen in our minds .
my response was to draw the drawing and the paint , aliens , robotern , robotern , raumschiffen , and all of all .
in the matheunterricht , i was constantly tapped from the teacher , the hinterm textbook , herummalte .
the creativity needed to get out of it .
and it was interesting . what i call me in jacques cousteau shows , was the thought of a world &apos;s idea of a world &apos;s life on our earth .
certainly i would never have a alien world in a spaceship , seemed to me , it seemed to me .
but here was a world that i could actually enter on the earth , and she was equally fascinating and exotic as what i &apos;d always imagined when i read this books .
so i decided when i was 15 .
the only problem was that i lived in a small village in canada , one kilometers away from the next ocean .
i didn &apos;t let me do it .
i was preparing my father until he finally finally went a tauchschule in buffalo , new york , and i had , on the other side of the border , where we lived .
i made my tauchschein in a pool of ymca in the winter of the winter in buffalo , new york .
but the ocean , a real ocean , i got two years later , until we moved to california .
since then , in 40 years , the republic of verstrichen , i spent about three hours of water , 500 hours of it .
and i learned that the world of deep sea , even in the flacheren ocean , even in the flacheren , so rich in faszinierendem life is really what we really might possibly really interesting .
the fantasy of nature knows no barriers , unlike our own , human imagination .
until today , i feel the very tiefste awe for what i see on my dives .
and my love to the ocean , with the same intensity as the same as i ever .
when i was then when i was a career a career , it was the filmmaking .
that seemed seemed to be the best way to tell my inner urge to create my need to create my need to unite .
as a kid , i went to the prisoners and so .
so films were films , images and stories . that &apos;s what they did .
of course , the stories i was aussuchte , from the science-fiction-bereich , &quot; the terminator , &quot; &quot; the aliens , &quot; and &quot; abyss . &quot;
&quot; abyss , i could have my predilection for the unterwasserwelt and the diving with the filmmaking .
so , my two passions is actually quasi .
something interesting happened to me , &quot; to solve a problem in this film , and we had to create a kind of liquid wasserwesen -- we had to go to computergenerierte , griffen , cg , cg , cg , cg .
what was that was the first computergenerierte soft-surface-figur , who ever had to see the first thing ever .
and the film was not a cash , exactly , he said , &quot; he said , &quot; i realized it &apos;s a little bit of amazing : the audience around the world was like hypnotisiert , the zauber of the magic .
according to arthur clarke , the gesetz is bekanntlich technology and magic .
so they saw something magical .
and that &apos;s what i found was extremely exciting .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s got to be in the filmkunst . &quot;
so we went in the &apos; &apos; &apos; 30s , &quot; my next film , even further .
with ilm , we made the guy from liquid metal . the success was very keen , how this effect would come .
and it worked . and we had a little bit of a little bit , and the effect in the audience was the same . but we &apos;ve got a little bit more money .
from these two experiences , a whole new world , a very new world of creativity for filmschaffende .
so i started a company with my good friend who was the time of the best make-up- of the best make-up- and creature-designer , they called digital domain . &quot;
the basic idea of this company was , the phase of the analoger processes , to start to start to change the same and start with digital produktionen .
and that &apos;s what we did and that we were going to get a one of a sudden .
but in the middle of the &apos; 90s , we realized that we were in the creature- and character-design , which we had started to langsam .
i had written this piece of avatar , which was written the bar in the sachen of visual effects and computergenerierter effects in the very new heights , with comparable human being , but the realistischen of cg , who should be all the cg of cg , and the world should be cg .
but the bar is quite beautiful . and people in my company told me that we haven &apos;t been able to create the lage that we &apos;re able to do .
so i &apos;m going to do this , and i made this other film about the great ship .
i &apos;ve got this as &quot; the &quot; romeo and julia on ship , and it was a liebesfilm epischen of magnitude , a leidenschaftlicher film .
but i really wanted to get the real wrack of titanic .
so i made the film .
that &apos;s the truth . the studio knew that .
i &apos;ve convinced you , by saying , &quot; we &apos;re diving to the wreckage . we also movies the real world .
we &apos;ll show it in the eröffnungssequenz of the film .
that &apos;s tremendously important . it &apos;s a good leap of marketing . &quot;
and i persuaded them to fund a expedition .
sounds sound . but it &apos;s going to come back to the fact that your imagination can create a reality .
and then we created six months later , in a reality , in which i fell in a russian tauchboot , four miles under the surface of the surface , and i &apos;m the real titanic through a bullauge .
that wasn &apos;t a film , no hd , which was real .
so , that really umgehauen me .
and the ones that are tremendously , we had to make cameras and all those kinds of cameras and all kinds of things .
and i noticed how very these tiefseetauchgänge , a weltraummission .
well , they were also hochtechnisch and bedurften planning .
you get into this particular brain , you &apos;re in this dark neighborhood , feindselige umgebung , where there &apos;s no hope for rescue , if you &apos;re not going to go back .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s just as i was in a science-fiction-film .
that &apos;s real cool . &quot;
i was obsessed with the study of the deep sea .
anyway , from the part of the part , with curiosity and science . it was anything ; it was curiosity . it was imagination .
and it was a experience that couldn &apos;t give me .
because , you know , i could imagine a creature that we could design a visual effect , but i couldn &apos;t imagine what i could see outside of the fensters .
in some of the following expeditions , i &apos;ve seen creatures in thermalquellen , and sometimes things that i &apos;ve never seen before , sometimes things that had ever seen before , and for the science of time , when we saw them , even even a words .
so that &apos;s really umgeworfen , and i wanted to get more .
and so i met a bit of unusual decision .
after the success of &quot; the &quot; titanic i said , &quot; okay , i want to put my hauptberuf as a filmmaker in hollywood , and i &apos;m going to get a little bit for a while . &quot;
and then we started to say , &quot; we were treating the bismarck , and they were erforschten with roboterfahrzeugen .
we went to the wreckage of the titanic .
we took small robots that we had built , which was a fiberglaskabel abwickelten .
our intention was , hineinzutauchen , and the inside of the ship was never done before .
nobody ever had the inner inside of the wracks , and you didn &apos;t have any resources for this . so we developed the technology technology .
and there &apos;s a lot of the deck of titanic , in a tauchboot , and see planken , which is very similar to this sort of resemble here , and i know that once was there .
and i fly with a little roboterfahrzeug of the ship &apos;s ship .
i actually put it only , but my consciousness is within the vehicle .
it felt like i was physically physically physically out inside the titanic .
this was the surrealste form of a déjà-vu that i &apos;ve ever experienced . because before i was going to be able to see what the same thing was , i knew what was going to happen in the lichtkegel of the vehicle , because i was monatelang , when we were the film .
so the set of the set was a very genaue copy of the ship .
so that was a very strange experience .
she made me that this telepräsenz-erlebnis that you can use , you know , you know , you know , and so that your own consciousness can be in the vehicle , in these different form of the existence .
it was really a really bad level of the very old level of the very old level of the very old level .
and maybe a little deeper view of what might happen in some decades , if you have to do something about something , to do something like , to do something like a möglichen , in all kinds of post-humanen zukunftszenarios that i can imagine as a science-fiction-fan .
so after these expeditions , we started learning what we saw there , really appreciate the way , to appreciate this tiefseequellen , where we saw these incredibly amazing animals , and that &apos;s sort of außerirdische , but here &apos;s the erden .
they live with the help of chemosynthese .
they don &apos;t exist in a middle of sunlight , how we do it .
and so you see animals that just held straight to a 500 degree centigrade that they can survive .
at the same time , i was also interested in weltraumwissenschaft , which was the science-fiction-einfluss of my childhood .
and so i ended up with the people who are interested in space and the right to nasa and the right to the nasa and the right to do the right , and they drive up to russia , and they &apos;re going to go to the international case of the mission protokoll , and then fly , and then take our 3d-kamerasysteme .
that was fascinating .
but at the end , it was waiting for me that i took weltraumwissenschaftler with us in the deep deep sea .
i took them with them with them , and they &apos;re zugang to the world &apos;s the world , astrobiologen , planetenwissenschaftler , planetenwissenschaftler , planetenwissenschaftler , people who were interested in the extremes of the extremes , so they could take samples and so forth .
we &apos;re using the unclear , but actually , science , more specifically , weltraumwissenschaft .
so the circle of my existence is the circle of my existence , as a child , as a child , and the implementation in reality .
and over the course of this voyage i learned a lot of learning .
i &apos;ve learned a lot of science . but i think you can also do a director to be a director like a leader or so .
i didn &apos;t understand much from leadership before i antrat these expeditions .
because i had to say , &quot; what do i do here ?
why do i do that ? what &apos;s coming out ? &quot;
these blöden films don &apos;t make money .
we &apos;re playing the chance of the fight . from the ruhm .
all of all , i think i was between &quot; titanic &quot; and &quot; avatar &quot; and had the nails to gefeilt on a towel on the beaches .
i &apos;ve got all these films , this guy , for a very small audience .
no one , no honor , no money . what do you do ?
you are doing it to the job , to the challenge , and the ocean is the herausforderndste environment that &apos;s because of the seltsamen of the entdeckerrausches , and because of the curious connection , which is , when a small group of people &apos;s working .
because we &apos;ve done all this with only 10 people to 12 people who have spent years for years , sometimes we were two to three months on the sea .
and in this community , you realize that the most important thing that you &apos;ve got to be , because you have a task of a very much effort that you can explain to any other part of it .
and if you go to land , and we had to do it , the fiberglas , and the difficulties , which is , and the difficulties , if you &apos;re just going to go to lake , and that &apos;s how to explain the other , and that &apos;s how to go back to the other , and they can know something together , and know that they never
there &apos;s a link , a massive respect .
so when i came to do to turn my next film &quot; i tried to turn the same thing , and then you &apos;re going to be a very different thing , and that &apos;s how to make the team of the box .
and it &apos;s really changed the dynamics .
so i went back to a little team on a little team of unbekanntem terrain , and we did not have a new technique that hadn &apos;t yet yet .
that &apos;s very exciting .
a very significant challenge .
and we were given for a period of a period of a period of a time .
so , making my way to make my way to make movies , completely .
there were people who were making this ozeanwesen , and on the planet , it was really transportiert .
for me , it was more a kind of a prinzipielle way to do my job , the job , the actual process that has changed .
so what can we close from all of these ?
what lessons we &apos;ve learned ?
i think first , i think , first of the curiosity .
it &apos;s the most powerful human property .
our imagination is a force that can actually create a reality .
and the next team is more important than all the lorbeer of the world .
and then come to me , young filmmaker , who say , &quot; give me a advice i can do something like this . &quot;
and i say , &quot; don &apos;t you get yourself .
it &apos;s going to be other for you . not to yourself , bet , don &apos;t give yourself . but not even taking risks . &quot;
nasa has a lieblingssatz , &quot; fail is not alternative . &quot;
but in art and to explore , you have to be an alternative , because there &apos;s a vertrauensvorschuss .
no important endeavor , the innovation , has been the risk of risk .
you have to be ready to take these risks .
this is the thought i &apos;d like to give you to you with the way to give you to the way . failure is a choice , fear , but it &apos;s not . thank you .
today i talk to you about energy and climate .
and that &apos;s what i may be surprised , because my vollzeitbeschäftigung in foundation is mostly primarily to use vaccines and seeds , to make the things we need to do and to deliver the poorest two billion .
but energy and climate are extremely important for these people , just even more important than any other one for every other planet .
klimaverschlechterung means that their saaten are not growing over many years . it &apos;s too much to get too much , and things are going to be able to change the way that it can be able to withstand their hard environment .
that leads to hungersterben . it leads to uncertainty . it leads to the riots .
so , a climate change is going to be a long time for you .
and also , it &apos;s the energiepreis for you very important .
and the fact that if you only could reduce the price , you could reduce the price , energy , energy , energy at the most effective .
now , the energiepreis is about the time .
in fact , the fortschrittsgesellschaft of energiefortschritten .
the kohlerevolution , the industrial revolution in the 20th century was in the middle of the 20th century , and in the 20th century , we have refrigerators , we can make modern materials , we can make modern materials .
so we &apos;re in a wonderful situation with electricity in the rich world .
but if we reduce the price -- let &apos;s let the price down -- let &apos;s make a new barrier and that barrier are with co2 .
co2 is the planets that the planets and the equation is actually pretty clear .
they summieren the ausgestoßene , which leads to the temperaturerhöhung , which is a couple of very negative people , and that temperaturerhöhung has a very very negative impact , and maybe worse , that the natural world is not going to adapt to the natural world , and so all of that systems are not anpassen .
now , the exact evidence of a co2-anstieg and the dadurch of the dadurch temperaturveränderung and where their other character are , there are some of them , but not very many .
and there &apos;s certain unklarheit about how bad these consequences are going to be , but they will be very bad .
i asked the top-wissenschaftler of the top-wissenschaftler of the mehrmals , &quot; we need to go down to close zero ?
don &apos;t have half the way or a quarter ? &quot;
the answer is : until we come close to zero , the temperature will continue to move .
so it &apos;s a great challenge .
it &apos;s different than to say , we have a 3.5 of a 3.5 of a 3,5 lkw , which is to get under a three feet , and you can get to get it down to the same below .
this is a very long way to go down to zero .
well , we &apos;re looking at a lot of kohlenstoffdioxid , about 26 billion tons .
every americans are about 20 tons . people are from poor countries , less than one .
in average , it &apos;s about five tons on the planet .
and somehow we have to make changes that we have to go to zero .
it &apos;s extremely constant .
just different economic changes , it &apos;s affecting it all over the way to go to the rapidem and to go to zero to zero .
this equation has four factors . you have this thing to take us to zero , and that &apos;s going to take this thing to zero , and that &apos;s going to take us from the number of people who are using each person in the average of the average of the average energy , which is a energieeinheit .
so let &apos;s take every factor of every factor and we think how we get to zero .
probably one of these numbers are very close to zero .
now , that &apos;s fundamental algebra , but we go through .
first we have the population .
today lives today live billion people , people today , life expectancy , people today , life today , life expectancy , people today , life today , life expectancy , people today , life today , life expectancy , people today , life today , life expectancy , people today , life today , life expectancy , people today , life today , life expectancy , people today ,
and it &apos;s on nine billion zu. that are moving on nine billion .
if we &apos;re very successful with new vaccines , who are gesundheitsvorsorgung and reproduktionsmedizin , we could be able to take it for 10 percent 15 percent , but we see a slope to see 1.3 .
the second factor are the services that we use .
this is all the wireless that we eat food , clothing , fernsehen , etc .
these are very good things and armutsverringerung , that &apos;s almost to make any of the planets for every planet .
it &apos;s great that this number gets rises .
in the rich world , we could do a abstriche , and we could make a abstriche , but in the average , that number two and more than the water will grow , and that &apos;s more than double the number of services that will be a person .
here we see a very ambitious service . there &apos;s a very similar way to read the homework ?
and these students don &apos;t have it , so they go and read your schulaufgaben under the straßenlicht .
now , in efficiency , the e , the energy per service , there &apos;s a good news .
we have something that doesn &apos;t go up , not up , that &apos;s not going to go up , not up , that &apos;s not going to go up , not up , that &apos;s not going to go up , not up .
because of different successes in the lichtsektor , through other methoden , through new methods in häuserbau , there are many services , whose energy are also going to reduce their own services to reduce 90 percent .
in other forms of how the manufacture of düngemitteln , 105 : 56,000 : &amp; : &amp; : &amp; : &amp; , or luftverkehr , or luftverkehr , or luftverkehr , is a lot of little .
the overall , if we are optimistic , we might get a reduction to a factor of three or maybe even a factor of a factor of a factor of a factor .
but the first three factors are now at 26 billion dollars , and it &apos;s not just 13 billion tons , and that &apos;s simply not enough !
so let &apos;s see the fourth factor -- and this is a key thing -- that &apos;s the amount of co2 that will be a lot of energy .
it turns out the question is whether you can get to zero .
if you burn coal , no .
if you burn natural gas : no .
almost every herstellungsmethode for electricity today , spend , contributing to the renewables and nuklearenergie .
so what we need to do on a global level , is to create a new system .
we need energiewunder .
now if i take the term &quot; miracle &quot; i don &apos;t use the impossible .
the microprocessor is a miracle . the pc is a miracle .
the internet and the services is a miracle .
people have contributed to the development of these miracle .
there &apos;s no way that you have a miracle that you need a miracle to a certain date .
you just normally get it wrong , and some of them are not coming .
in this case , we have to give you a little bit of vollgas and a miracle in very short time .
well , i wondered how can i really respond to the really basic ?
is there a natural illustration , a demonstration that &apos;s going to have the idea of what people are here ?
i remembered my last year when i went to mosquitoes and somehow , and somehow i liked it .
the idea was really a really tangible , you know , there are people who live with mosquitoes .
for energy , i noticed this .
i decided that the freilassen of fireflies is going to be the environment to the environment .
so here &apos;s some natural natural .
you &apos;ve told me that they don &apos;t bite . actually , you will not be the glass .
well , there are all kinds of spielereilösungen like this , but they &apos;re not all very much .
we need solutions , or some of the powerful scaling , and yet , there are a lot of directions that people are looking for , i really see , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really ,
i have tides , geothermal , fusion and biofuels .
you might have a moderaten , and if you &apos;re doing better , i think , if i &apos;m going to be a little , but my brain is that we have to work on all those five , and we can &apos;t give them all of them because they &apos;re einschüchtern , because all of them have significant problems .
let &apos;s start to look at the burning fossil fuels , burning of coal or natural gas .
what you need to do , but it &apos;s not just , but it &apos;s not the way to get all the co2 to the burning of the body , and then you get to find a pressure and then hope and hope that there &apos;s it .
there are some pilotprojekte that are on a 60 percent -- 80 percent of the brain will get to get 100 percent , but it &apos;s going to be very difficult to get a very difficult to get the individual of co2 , but the biggest problem is the lagerzeitfrage .
who will make it make it ? ?
who can ensure something , what literally has been larger than any kind of garbage , you can imagine from nuklear- and other things ?
this is a lot of volume .
so that &apos;s a hard piece .
next next : nuklearenergie .
it &apos;s also three big problems . the cost of the brain , and the question in hochregulierten countries are high , and the question is that you can &apos;t go wrong , despite the human spirit that the fuel is used for weapons .
and what do you do with the garbage ?
because even though he &apos;s not very big , there &apos;s a lot of concerns .
so three very difficult problems that may be solvable , and they should work .
the last three of the five . i &apos;ve summarized the last three .
it &apos;s the renewables as they &apos;re called often .
and also the -- though , though it &apos;s amazing that they don &apos;t need a fuel -- they have some disadvantages .
for one is the energiedichte that these technologies are generating dramatically than the technologien of kraftwerken .
these are energiefarmen , you &apos;re talking about lots of quadratkilometern , more than a regular power station .
and also , these vents , they are unterliegen .
the sun shines not the whole day , it doesn &apos;t seem to be every day and the same time , the wind blows .
so you have to depend on these sources , a way of having energy , the energy in times when they &apos;re not available .
so there &apos;s a big deal here . there &apos;s challenges in the transmission , and if we say , for example , the energy of the country is , they don &apos;t just have the technology , they need to be able to deal with the risk of the risk of where you have the energy from where else comes from where you have .
and there &apos;s the lagerungsproblem .
and to show the dimension , i made all kinds of batteries , and i think , for the amount of cars , computer , handys , and i found that the world &apos;s the world , and i found that all the batteries that we &apos;re doing now , and i found that the world &apos;s the same thing that we might have now to do , less than
so we need a big breakthrough , something that &apos;s going to be a factor of 100 better than the approaches of time .
that &apos;s not impossible , but it &apos;s not so easily .
that &apos;s what happens if you try to try and say , these unterbrochenen sources of saying 20 percent -- 30 percent of the rest of the rest of the rest .
if you want to get 100 percent of the land , they need a incredible wunderbatterie .
well , where shall we go to : what is the right approach ?
a &quot; manhattan project ? how do we get the target ?
what we need is a lot of companies that work on this . hundreds .
in every five of those five , we need 100 people .
so , in many , you &apos;ll say , &quot; are mad ! that &apos;s good .
i think there &apos;s a lot of the ted group there are many of them .
bill of the big bang has multiple companies , including a named esolar that &apos;s called the great solarthermaltechnologien .
vinod khosla investiert investiert in dozens of things that make great things and interesting ways and i try to support this .
nathan myhrvold , and i fund a company that &apos;s perhaps tangible , maybe the nuclear approach .
there are some innovations in the nuklearbereich ; modular , liquid .
evolution has stopped a while ago , so it &apos;s not a great surprise that some good concepts were coming .
the terrapower-konzept means that you instead of a part of the urans , which is a percent , the u235 , we decided to burn the 99 percent of the world .
this is a pretty crazy idea .
but in fact , you &apos;ve been thinking about a long time , but you could never get the best , but there &apos;s a modern supercomputer , but it &apos;s been moderne , you know , you can simulate it , and you see , it &apos;s the right materialienherangehensweise , it looks like it &apos;s going to happen .
and because you &apos;re going to burn these 99 percent of the brain &apos;s disease , is very much better .
in fact , you &apos;re also verbrennt the garbage , and you can even use the waste of today as a antriebsstoff .
instead of the head , you burn it , you burn it . a great thing .
that &apos;s going to be used by that , a little bit like a candle .
you see that it &apos;s a column , often , as a &quot; wandernde wave called reaktor . &quot;
that &apos;s really the treibstoffproblem .
here &apos;s a picture of a place in kentucky .
this is the waste that 99 99 percent . you &apos;ve got the part that &apos;s burned today , so it &apos;s called aufgebrauchtes .
the u.s. u.s. u.s. u.s. u.s. u.s. u.s.
and if you &apos;re ozeanwasser inexpensive , and just filtriert , you get enough fuel for the rest of the planet .
you know , there &apos;s a lot of challenges , but it &apos;s an example of many hundreds of concepts that we need to get forward .
let &apos;s think how we should measure our success .
how should we look like our minds ?
well , we go to the target that we &apos;re going to do , and then we talk about the zwischenschritt .
many talking about 80 percent of the population growth to 2050 .
it &apos;s really very important that we get there .
the next 20 percent of the 20 percent will be made in poor countries , and still a bit of agriculture . hopefully , and cement cement and cement and cement .
so to reach these 80 percent , the developed world , including places like china , their elektrizitätsgeneration , their elektrizitätsgeneration completely completely .
the other note is whether we can use the null-emissionen technology , whether it &apos;s in all developed developed countries , and we &apos;re on the way to get it to the rest .
that &apos;s super important .
that &apos;s going to be a research that zeugnisses .
if we go back from where the 2020 is supposed to look like ?
it should be the two elements .
we should use the effektivitätsmaßnahmen using the way to move on the way . the less we will be emittieren , the geringer , the co2-summe , and it &apos;s also the temperature .
but actually , this note for the things that we &apos;re doing is not going to take the companies that are not entirely to the great reduktionen , or even something like others that are the other things that are the speed of innovation .
these are the breakthroughs , we have to track them with vollgas , and we can measure : in firmenzahlen , in pilotprojekten and regulierungsänderungen .
there are many great books to this topic .
we &apos;ve got the choice &quot; we have the choice &quot; and david mckays , &quot; sustainable energy without without . &quot;
they &apos;re going to go through and create a framework where this can be discussed in discussing this way , because we need to need it for all of all sides .
there &apos;s a lot of things that have to come .
that &apos;s a wish .
a very specific wish that we have this technology .
if you just give me a wish for the next 50 years , i could give the president , a vaccine , and i love that desire , or i could make this wish , halbierter , halbierter , is that i &apos;ll make a better point of co2 that &apos;s going to be a wunsch .
this is the greatest impact .
if we don &apos;t get this wish , the digging between long and the disease is becoming human beings between the u.s. and china , between poor and rich , and almost all of those two billion are going to be very much more worse .
so what do we need to do ?
for what outcomes do i do ?
we need to make a difference for more sustainable .
if countries are in places like koppenhagen , they should not only talk about co2 .
they would take these innovationsstrategie , and they would be shocked from the ridiculously small range of geldern that are being spent for those innovative views .
we need marktanreize , co2 emissions , cap &amp; amp ; d , something that creates a preissignal .
we need to spread the message .
we need to have a dialog and more dialogue and more and things that are going to be undertaken by government .
it &apos;s a more important wish , but i think we can fulfill it .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you . thank you !
thank you very much . just to understand something better -- first , you can give us a notion of these investment ?
bill gates : to get the simulation on a supercomputer , all the great scientists , we only have a few of the great scientists , and even if we have a few of our materials in a russian crime in a russian crime , to ensure that it &apos;s going to work out , is only in the 100en million .
the hard step is building the first reaktors , another billions of billions , the regularien and the place that actually makes the first of it .
once the first one is done , if it &apos;s like , it &apos;s all right , because it &apos;s all right , because the government is different than the nuklearenergie , as we know them .
to understand the right thing : that means deep in the ground , almost like a vertical column of a column column , a vertikale nuklearen , this iron verbrauchten , and then it starts to move up up ?
bg : exactly , you have to be new befüllen , so there are many people , so there are many people and many of them , and that thing that &apos;s wrong and the thing that you can open and stuff , and that &apos;s not good ! that &apos;s not good !
but if you have very cheap fuel , you can see it for 60 years -- think of a column -- they &apos;re buried on a column -- they &apos;re buried in the whole wine .
and it &apos;s sitting there and it &apos;s been done for 60 years and then it &apos;s done .
a nuklearreaktor , who provides a solution for the garbage .
bg : well , what happens to the garbage , you can leave it , there &apos;s a lot less waste with this method -- then you take it into the next reactor and burning it .
and we start using the garbage , which is already exists in this kühlbecken or trockenbehältern , and that &apos;s our startbrennstoff .
so what that is that is a problem that we have in our offspring and so that &apos;s what &apos;s called the müllvolumen dramatically during the process .
but as you have with different people of this world , about this possibility of this possibility have spoken , about this possibility of this possibility , have spoken to these options , about this possibility of this possibility , over these options , have spoken to these options , about this possibility of this possibility , over these options , have spoken to these options , about this possibility
where is the biggest interest in this way , so what really does ?
bg : well , we don &apos;t have a lot of interesting offenlegungsregeln for everything that &apos;s called &quot; the &quot; nuclear power &quot; in the name of the world , and there are the people in russia , india , and i &apos;ve been here , and i &apos;ve been talking about the energieminister and talk about how this was the energieagenda .
i &apos;m optimistic . you know , the french and japanese have something in the direction .
this is a variant of one thing that was made .
this is a huge step forward , but it &apos;s like a faster and a country , and some countries have this built , that &apos;s everybody who has a quick reactor one , a kandidatat for our first first .
in their idea : taking a chance to make a life really in life ?
bg : well , we need one of these skalierbaren , stromgenerierenden things that are very cheap , we have 20 years to get 20 years to get 20 years .
that &apos;s basically the deadline that has the deadline that we have to do is the umweltmodelle aufgezeigt that we need to cover .
and , you know , terrapower , if everything is good , and that &apos;s a big wish , could it keep it easy .
and luckily , there are dozens of companies today , and we need hundreds of companies , which is , as if their approaches , that are spending for their pilots for their pilots .
and it would be best if there &apos;s multiple , because then you could use a mixture .
anyway , we need a solution .
now , the great kinds of great kinds of breakthroughs , this is the biggest thing you know ?
bg : a energiedurchbruch is the most important .
that would be without the umweltherausforderung , but it &apos;s still so much more important .
in the nuclear sector , there are other innovative companies .
you know , we don &apos;t know the work as well , but there &apos;s the modular method that &apos;s another approach .
there &apos;s a liquid reaktortyp that seems to be difficult , but maybe that &apos;s what we say about us .
and so there &apos;s a different way of thinking about a million times a million times a lot of energy , and therefore , if you can deal with the problems and the cost of the problems , and the cost of the world , and the impact on the country and other things , almost in a very good league .
if that doesn &apos;t matter what ?
we need to have to highlight the notfallmaßnahmen to try to try to keep the erdtemperatur of the stable ?
bg : if you come in this situation , it &apos;s like you too much too much , and i &apos;ll be a heart attack , and what you do is you need a herzoperation or something .
there &apos;s a forschungsrichtung that &apos;s called geoengineering , which is called a different techniques to deal with the warming , so we had 20 years to get 20 years to get us to us .
that &apos;s just a versicherungsmethode .
you hope that we don &apos;t need it .
some people say , you know , you don &apos;t really know , because you don &apos;t get the insurance that you &apos;re going to do , because you know that a herzoperation save .
i don &apos;t know if you &apos;re going to be the smart , but there &apos;s a discourse of this problem , but there &apos;s a discourse in a geoengineering of that , if you have to have the disposal , if you get to the disposal , or those innovation , or those innovation , or those innovation , when we expect .
klimaskeptiker : have you a or two sentences to convince you to convince you ?
bg : well , life is the world &apos;s life in very different ways .
those who make science arguments are very few .
say , there are negative impact that have to do with clouds that are useful to the clouds ?
there are very , very few things that you can say , there &apos;s a chance to have a million .
the hauptproblem here is like aids .
you make the mistakes now , and you pay a lot of it very much later .
and so the idea is , now , if you &apos;re not going to invest all kinds of dringenden problems , and it &apos;s not necessarily the most pleasurable thing -- and there &apos;s the ipcc of the ipcc not necessarily , and there &apos;s people in the rich world , and there &apos;s no way to look at the world &apos;s ipcc and say , &quot; okay , that
the fact is that these uncertainty should make us .
but my dream is that if you make it economic , and the theme of the co2 is , &quot; okay , i &apos;m not saying it &apos;s not a co2 , i said , &quot; okay , i &apos;m not saying it , but i &apos;m going to be able to accept it because it &apos;s cheaper than the previous method . &quot;
and that would be the answer to the björn lomborg that if you &apos;re using all the time , and the energy use of the time , all the other goals , the bekämpfung of malaria , the bekämpfung of malaria , and so that it &apos;s a dumb waste of resources , while there are better things that we can do .
bg : well , the actual spending for the research -- let &apos;s say the u.s. spending 10 billion per year -- that &apos;s not as dramatic -- that &apos;s not as dramatic .
amongst other things not suffer .
you come to great geldsummen , and you can see people in the vernünftige , if you have something that &apos;s not economically , and it &apos;s trying to fund that , for me , the most waste .
it &apos;s because , you know , you &apos;re very briefly , and i &apos;m just going to be the lernkurve , and i think we should try more stuff that have the potential to be very much more .
if the abstrich you get you , a very high energiepreis , then you can only get the rich .
i mean , everybody &apos;s going to spend five times for our energy to change our lifestyle without changing the lifestyle .
for the bottom two billion , but it &apos;s a disaster .
and even lomborg , you think about .
now his new masche is , &quot; why don &apos;t that do that ? &quot;
he still is still becoming , because of his former stories , with the skeptiker-camp associated , but he understood that that &apos;s a very solitary group , and therefore he &apos;s going to give it the forschungsargument .
and this is a new man that i hang for appropriate .
research , it &apos;s just mad , like a little bit of that supports .
bill i think i &apos;m talking about almost all the people here , if i say , i hope you will be true that you will be true . thank you .
bg : thank you .
a couple of years ago , at ted , peter skillman , who was peter skillman , called the marshmallow-herausforderung . &quot;
the idea is pretty simple . vierer-teams , the größtmögliche müssen must have the größtmögliche structure with 20 miles , about a 1m tape , about a marshmallow .
the marshmallow must be on top .
and , though it really does seem really , really , it &apos;s really hard to do it because it &apos;s very fast .
and so i thought that this is a very interesting idea , and i &apos;ve transformed it into a design-workshop .
it was a huge success .
since then , i &apos;ve been doing about 70 workshops with students , with students , and architects , even with the ctos of the fortune-50-unternehmen , which is something that enabled to enable the nature of collaboration and i want to share with you some of them .
so , normally , most people will get to the task of the task .
you think about it , you think about how it will be , you &apos;re going to make them macht , they &apos;re doing it , they &apos;re doing it , they &apos;re doing it , they &apos;re doing it , they &apos;re doing it , they &apos;re doing it , they &apos;re doing it , they &apos;re doing it , they &apos;re doing it , they &apos;re doing it
then they invest a little bit of time in planning and organization , and they &apos;re going to get out of sync .
they invest in the zusammenbau of the time in the zusammenbau , continually continually wachsender , wachsender , in the zusammenbau , wachsender , in the zusammenbau , wachsender , in the zusammenbau , wachsender , in the zusammenbau , wachsender , in the zusammenbau , wachsender , in the zusammenbau , wachsender , in the zusammenbau , wachsender , in the zusammenbau , wachsender , in the zusammenbau of
and finally , until they don &apos;t have time anymore , someone takes the marshmallow , and they put it on the top , and they &apos;re behutsam , and you get a step back and forth , &quot; and &quot; ta-da ! &quot;
but then , what happens , almost , that &apos;s what the ta-da is , &quot; the ta-da &quot; is , because the weight of the marshmallows is that the whole thing is moving and einstürzt .
there is a series of people who have a lot more more than others , and below the other , and below the worst sind .
she lies , you &apos;re going to be confused and produce really dürftige .
and of course , there are also teams that have a lot more more and the best ones in the best absolventen of the kindergartens .
and that &apos;s pretty amazing .
how peter told us , they didn &apos;t only create the highest towers , but also the most interesting structures of all .
what you might be wondering is : how does that ? why ? what &apos;s with ?
and peter tells me , &quot; none of the children spend time to be the boss of the spaghetti sauce . &quot;
they don &apos;t invest in the zeit .
but there &apos;s another reason for another reason .
and that is that bwl-studenten training were trained to find the right plan , ok .
and then we then realize it .
what happens if you &apos;re going to see the marshmallow on the top , they don &apos;t have time more and what happens ?
it &apos;s a crisis .
sounds familiar , what ?
what &apos;s different different enough is that they start to start with the marshmallow , and they &apos;re building successful prototypes , and that &apos;s what they &apos;re doing the marshmallow on the top , so that they have mehrfach prototypen prototype .
konstrukteure , these kinds of collaboration as a core of a iterativen .
and with each trial , the children are getting the children to feedback what works and what not .
so the performance is that the performance of prototypes , and we see , but let &apos;s see how different teams .
for average , for most of the most of the importance of the most of the importance of 50cm , bwl-studenten , and not much , but not much , more than the adults .
who &apos;s on the most successful ?
architects and engineers , fortunately .
now , the highest thing is what i &apos;ve seen .
and why ? because they can understand triangles , and they &apos;re sich-selbst-verstärkende geometric patterns to build the key structure .
and ceos &apos;s fair about average , but it &apos;s interesting .
you &apos;ll get a exekutive on the team , you &apos;ll get better .
it &apos;s incredible . you can see , and see this team , and see this team . &quot;
you can predict the predictions . why is this ?
because they have special capacity of prozessbegleitung .
they &apos;re losing the process , you &apos;ll understand it .
and the team that would take and work on the work that &apos;s going to be better better .
so dedicated and prozessfähigkeiten and their combination of success .
if you have 10 teams , the hallmarks of the characteristic , you get about six , the stable structures .
i tried a bit of a bit .
i thought , we &apos;re going to bring the pokereinsatz .
so i offered a 10000 dollars for software for the winners .
what do you think of these design-studenten ?
what was the result ?
this is what happened . not a team had a stabile structure .
if anyone had built a 2,5cm high school , he would have worn the price home .
so it &apos;s not interesting that high levels of a strong effect have ?
we &apos;re using these exercise with the same students .
what do you think of ?
now , you understand the benefits of the &quot; prototyping . &quot;
so that was so the same team of the same team of the best .
they produced the highest construction , and they &apos;re going to be at the lowest .
there are so tief-greifende lessons for us about nature , about nature and success .
they might ask : why would somebody actually invest the time to create a marshmallow-challenge ?
the reason is , i create digital tools and processes to help us help teams , cars , video games and &quot; .
and what the marshmallow-challenge is doing , they help them identify them .
because , frankly , each project has its own marshmallow .
the challenge offers a shared experience , a shared language , and build the right prototype .
and this is the value of this experience , this kind of simple exercise .
and those of you who are interested in , can go to marshmallowchallenge.com .
it &apos;s a blog where you can see the marshmallows .
there &apos;s a schritt-für-schritt-anleitung there .
they find crazy examples from all the world , how people are going to optimize the system .
there are also weltrekorde .
and the basale lesson , i think , is actually , actually , is actually a verbindender sport .
it begs that we all have to focus all our senses on the task and that we &apos;re using our thinking , how our emotions and our emotions , in the challenge that &apos;s us .
and sometimes a little prototype of this experience , which is , what it needs to be , by a &quot; uh-oh &quot; -- &quot; to a &quot; ta-da &quot; of course .
and that can make a big difference .
thank you .
we do as a machine that we have a machine , we have a machine , we have a machine , we have a machine , we have a machine , we have a machine , we have a machine , we have a machine , we have a machine , we have a machine , we have a machine , we have a machine , we have a machine
a big machine , a cool machine , ted-artige machine , and that &apos;s a time .
and everybody has to have to have to go into this room .
and you can go into the past , you can go to the future ; you can &apos;t stay in here and now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now ,
and i wonder what you would choose , because i asked my friends in my friends , and they wanted to go all the past .
i don &apos;t know . they wanted to go back to the time before it was there or twitter or twitter . &quot;
i don &apos;t know .
i &apos;m confident that you somehow have somehow hingezogen to wunschdenken .
and that &apos;s what i understand .
i &apos;m not part of this group , i have to say .
i don &apos;t want to go past the past , and that &apos;s not because i &apos;m a adventurers -- i &apos;m a magical designer -- i &apos;m a magical .
it &apos;s because there &apos;s no way back to this planet , they go forward .
so i want to go into this machine , and i want to go to the future .
this is the greatest time that has ever been on this planet , whatever you &apos;ve been on , and , in fact , &quot; health , wealth , mobility , sinkende .
there never had never been a time like this .
my favorite writers died all of them .
my grandparents for those numbers on the side of the 70. .
my parents are 80 on the fersen .
so there was a lot of a nine at the beginning of my todeszahl .
but it &apos;s not about people like us , because this is a greater thing than that .
a child that can be born today in the middle of the world today , as long as the richest man in the world .
think about it . this is a incredible fact .
and why is this ?
smallpox . the smallpox has killed billions of people on this planet .
they have a way to change the earth &apos;s earth &apos;s the way to a way , how it &apos;s not a war .
they &apos;re gone . they &apos;re disappeared .
we have them bezwungen . send .
in the rich world , there are diseases that millions of us have even threatened by one generation than we have yet .
diphterie , röteln , kinderlähmung ...
does anybody know somebody else , what that &apos;s ?
vaccines , modern medicine , our ability to feed billions of people , which are also successes of scientific method .
and from my view , the scientific method , things like , if it works , it &apos;s going to change it , if it doesn &apos;t change it , one of the greatest achievements of mankind .
so that &apos;s the good news .
unfortunately , that &apos;s the whole good news , because there are some other problems , and they &apos;ve been replicated , and they &apos;ve been often mentioned , and they &apos;ve been often mentioned , and they &apos;ve been often mentioned , and they &apos;ve been often mentioned , and they &apos;ve been often mentioned , and they &apos;ve been often mentioned , and they &apos;ve been often mentioned
and one of them is that despite all our achievements , all of our achievements to make a billion people every day .
this number goes down , and it &apos;s very fast , and that &apos;s a shameful .
and not only that , we have used to use our imagination to give these world .
drinking water , urbares land , regenwälder , oil , gas , gas , and you &apos;re disappearing , and if we don &apos;t get out of this chaos , we can also get out of this chaos .
so the question is : can we do that ? i think .
i think it &apos;s clear that we can produce food , the billions of people , without rape , on the country .
i think we can power these world with energy that they &apos;re not destroyed at the same time .
i really think that &apos;s really , and no , that &apos;s not a wunschdenken .
but this is me on the night -- one of the things that i think was awake at night , and we never really needed the scientific progress as well , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never , never
and we were never able to do it , and we were able to tell him for him , as we can today .
we &apos;re on the brink of amazing , amazing events on many areas , and i really think we have to go back to see the time , to find a time to go back to the time we &apos;ve been trying to have progress in the progress that we &apos;ve been talking about , in which we have the progress of things , in which now .
people are going to believe in their faith , and that &apos;s how closely that you can &apos;t free them .
not the truth is going to be free .
and you &apos;re listening to , everybody has a right to be a rather , even a rather rightly on his mind to progress , to progress , to progress , to progress , to progress , to progress , to progress , to progress , to progress , to progress , to progress , to progress , to progress , to progress , to progress , to progress ,
but you know what you don &apos;t have right ?
they don &apos;t have a right to your own facts ; &apos; tschuldigung , they don &apos;t have .
and i took a while to try to figure out .
about a decade ago , i have a paper on the new yorker , &quot; a little article .
and i was amazed at resistance , on the end of the resistance , what most the most exciting is in the history of mankind in history .
i didn &apos;t know what i should do , so i just did what i do , i put a paper and went .
and soon i was writing a paper on this conversation in india .
the same thing , just larger .
the people played mad .
so i also made a paper , and i couldn &apos;t understand why people thought , &quot; why they thought that you were going to be a random , a random way of creating a übergriff in the field of nature .
but you know , i do what i do . i emailed the article , i made .
i mean , i &apos;m journalist , journalist , journalist , i am journalist , journalist , journalist , i &apos;m journalist , journalist , journalist , i &apos;m journalist , journalist , i am journalist , journalist , journalist , i &apos;m journalist , journalist , i am journalist , journalist , journalist , i &apos;m journalist , journalist , i am journalist , journalist , journalist , i
we &apos;re like , we &apos;re rich , we go to food , that &apos;s okay .
but this article made me worried , and i couldn &apos;t figure out why , and finally i found it .
and that &apos;s because these fanatics who made me crazy , which was not even comfortable at all .
these were umsichtige people , people , people , people .
they were exactly how people in this room .
and that &apos;s what i got to do is to do it .
but then i thought , you know what , we are honest , and we are honest , and we are honest , and we are honest , and we are honest , and we are honest , and we are honest , and we are honest , and we are honest , and we are honest , and we are honest , and we are honest , and we
we are at a point where we don &apos;t have the same relationship to progress .
we &apos;re talking about zwiespältig .
we &apos;re talking more ironic with little diamond : &quot; progress . &quot;
okay , so there &apos;s reason that , and i think we know what are the reasons that are .
we have the confidence in institutions , in authority , and sometimes in science , and there &apos;s no reason why not be so much .
you can just call a few names , and people will understand .
chernobyl , bhopal , the challenger , vioxx , massenvernichtungswaffen , weapons of the us-präsidentschaftswahl 2000 .
i mean , you know , you can vote your own list .
there are questions , and problems with people who we thought they were always quite right . so they &apos;re skeptical .
ask you to ask , ask , you ask the evidence , demand .
don &apos;t take anything for granted .
but now it &apos;s coming , if you get the evidence to get this evidence , and we &apos;re not good at it .
and i can say that from the reason that we &apos;re now in a epidemic of fear , as i never saw and never see .
about 12 years ago , a story was published a story that was masern the autismus-epidemie of the measles , mumps , mumps , mumps , and röteln vaccine .
very frightening .
trials were conducted to see if that was born .
and we should be done ; that &apos;s a serious matter .
the data came in .
the data came out of the united states , from sweden , from sweden , from sweden , from sweden , and they were all the same , no correlation , no correlation .
it doesn &apos;t matter . it doesn &apos;t matter , because we think what we see is what we see what we think is we &apos;re going to feel real .
we don &apos;t believe in a bunch of the dokumente of a regierungsangstellten who gives us data , and i understand that , i think we all do .
but you know what ?
the result of it was devastating , was the very smart , was devastating , was the result of it was devastating .
so , for the very same for this fact , the united states is one of the only country in the world where the impfrate of the world &apos;s impfrate .
that &apos;s skandalös and we should be ashamed .
it &apos;s horrible .
what &apos;s happened is that we could do that .
well , i understand that . i do .
because somebody &apos;s masern ?
has a single one in the audience ever seen ?
not very often .
in this country , but in this country , but the 160.000 , in the last year .
these are many deaths by measles , 20 per hour .
but because it &apos;s not happening here , we can touch it , and people can herumlaufen , and people like jenny can be around and analphabetismus from fear and larry .
and you can do it because they &apos;re not connecting and not connecting the way .
they don &apos;t understand that these things seem to be the same , but almost never the same thing .
and that &apos;s something that we need to learn , and it &apos;s very fast .
this guy was a hero , jonas salk .
he befreite us from one of the worst geißeln of humanity .
not fear , no qualen , kinderlähmung , puff , disappeared .
the guy doesn &apos;t have this so much .
he &apos;s called paul offit .
he &apos;s just designed a few other people a rotavirus-impfstoff .
he can save the lives of 400- , 500,000 children per year in the developing world .
pretty good , not ?
well , that &apos;s good , aside from that paul apparatus and talking about vaccines , and says , how do you just stop wasting the people .
and that &apos;s what he does is .
so paul is a terrorist .
if paul talks in a public anhörung , he can &apos;t tell you without the bewaffnete .
he gets to get the phone , because people love to tell you that they know where his children go to school .
and why ? because paul made a vaccine .
i don &apos;t need that , but vaccines are essential .
you take them to fort , you get the diseases , horrible diseases , and that &apos;s what &apos;s happening .
we now have now states now .
and that &apos;s worse , and pretty soon will die of children , because that &apos;s just one question of numbers .
and they &apos;re not only going to die at measles .
what about kinderlähmung ? let &apos;s take this . why not ? why ?
a kommilitonin of me has written a couple of weeks ago , and said , i &apos;m a bit of schrill .
nobody &apos;s said that ever said .
she wouldn &apos;t be against her kid , not a kinderlähmung .
fine .
why ? because we don &apos;t have a kinderlähmung , and you know what ?
we didn &apos;t have a kinderlähmung in this country yesterday .
today , i don &apos;t know , maybe there &apos;s a few hundred years ago , maybe you &apos;re going to go back to los angeles , and right now , it &apos;s about ohio .
and a couple hours , he lands and mietet a car , and he comes to long beach , and he &apos;s going to come to a bit of this fantastichen tonight tonight .
and he doesn &apos;t know that he &apos;s infected with a lähmenden disease , and we don &apos;t know , because that &apos;s how it works .
this is the planet we live . they don &apos;t pretend that it &apos;s not .
we love to lie in lies . we love this .
have you all read every morning all of your vitamins ?
echinacea , a little antioxidantium that helps you to go on the site .
i know that you &apos;ve done that because half the americans are doing every day .
they take the stuff , and they take choice , and it doesn &apos;t make any difference , how often we &apos;re trying to figure out that they &apos;re useless .
the data points that all the time .
they &apos;re hearing your urine . more , they never have never .
this is okay , they want to pay 28 billion dollars for dark dollars .
i agree with you .
dark matter . dark .
why do we do that ? why do we do that ?
well , i think i understand -- we &apos;re going to hate the industry .
we hate a lot to strong government . we don &apos;t have faith in the system .
and that &apos;s not what we &apos;re not . our healthcare system is mies .
it &apos;s cruel to millions of people .
it &apos;s absolutely amazing , and seelentötend itself to us .
so we &apos;re running away , and where we run ?
we &apos;re walking into the poor placebo-industrie .
this is great . i love the placebo-industrie .
but you know , that &apos;s really a serious matter , because it &apos;s crap , and we give billions of dollars .
and i &apos;ve got all kinds of little little little bits .
none of it -- gingko , betrug , echinacea , echinacea , echinacea , betrug , betrug , but i don &apos;t even know what that is , but we give billions of dollars , it &apos;s fraud .
and you know what ? if i say that , shouting me , &quot; what do you want to do ? let &apos;s do the people who you want .
so they feel good . &quot;
and you know what ? you have wrong .
because it doesn &apos;t matter if it &apos;s the gesundheitsminister , who says , &quot; hmm , i &apos;m going to adopt the evidence of my experts , or some of my experts , or some of my patients , who wants to treat his patients with kaffe-einläufen .
if you &apos;re going to go on this way , where belief and magic and science , they &apos;re going to be a place where they don &apos;t want to be .
they &apos;re going to thabo thabo in south africa .
he was taught 400,000 people to teach people , because he insisted that red beete , knoblauch and zitronenöl viel than the antiretroviral drugs that we know is that they can know the trajectory of aids .
hundreds of hundreds of thousands of unnötiger deaths in a country that &apos;s going to be worse than any other disease .
don &apos;t tell me that these things don &apos;t have consequences .
they have them . they always have .
well , the hirnloseste epidemic where we &apos;re just going to be in this particular battle between the befürwortern veränderter and the bio-elite .
this is a idiotische debate . she needs to stop .
it &apos;s a debate about words about the metaphor .
that &apos;s ideology , not science .
all we eat , every reiskorn , every branch , everybody &apos;s zweig , everybody &apos;s changed , was changed by the people .
you know , there was no mandarinen in paradise .
there was no cantaloupe-melonen .
there was no weihnachtsbäume . we &apos;ve done this all .
we did it in the last 10 years .
and some of it worked and some of them don &apos;t .
we &apos;re actually losgeworden what doesn &apos;t work .
now we can do it . and of course , there are risks , but we can do something like vitamin a lot in rice , and that can help millions of people , millions of people to lose their lives .
that &apos;s not what you want ?
i have to say that i don &apos;t understand .
we &apos;re going to get to veränderte food .
why do we do that ?
now , what i &apos;m listening is , too many chemicals , pesticides , pesticides , hormone , monokultur , we don &apos;t want to be huge fields with one thing , that &apos;s wrong .
we don &apos;t want to have the firms of companies .
we don &apos;t want to have the companies that have to own .
and you know what my answer is that ?
yeah , they &apos;re right . we do this .
it &apos;s true , we have a huge nahrungsproblem , but it &apos;s not science .
that &apos;s what we do with science .
it &apos;s quite , morality , moral .
you know that science is not a company .
she &apos;s not a country .
she &apos;s not a idea ; she &apos;s a process .
it &apos;s a process , and sometimes it doesn &apos;t work , but the idea of the science is to do , because we &apos;re afraid to do a real physical , and you can see millions of people from the flourishing .
you know , in the next 50 years , we will have to have more food than the moment . 70 percent .
these investment in africa in the last 30 years .
embarrassing .
they need that , and we don &apos;t give them .
and why ? what &apos;s going to be changed .
we don &apos;t want to encourage people to eat this verrottete stuff like to take .
so , the age of a half is a half billion people .
it &apos;s about a potato .
it &apos;s just a bunch of calories . it &apos;s mies .
it has no nutrients , it hasn &apos;t a protein , and scientists build all this .
and then people would be eating the food and wouldn &apos;t be blinded .
they wouldn &apos;t be starving , and you know what ?
that would be nice . it wouldn &apos;t be chez , but it would be beautiful .
and all i can say , why do we fight this ?
i mean , what we &apos;re asking us : why do we fight this ?
because we don &apos;t want to have genes ?
it &apos;s not about genes . it &apos;s not about chemicals .
it &apos;s not about our ridiculous passion for hormones , our food supply , better food , einzigartiger food .
it &apos;s not about a rice krispies , it &apos;s about getting people on life , and it &apos;s going to be a time , which means that it means .
because you know what ?
if we don &apos;t do that if we do so much , we &apos;re doing so much how we do it in something that we &apos;re doing , i don &apos;t want to be guilty , to be high-tech of high-tech .
there are no other description for what &apos;s happening here .
it &apos;s selfish , it &apos;s ugly , it &apos;s not worthy of , and we really need to stop it .
so , after this incredibly funny entertainment , you might want to say , &quot; do you want to go into this ridiculous time , and in the future ? &quot;
anyway . that &apos;s what i want to do .
now , in the moment , you &apos;re in the present , but we have an incredible possibility .
we can put this time on everything we want .
we can hinbewegen them , where we want to go to the hinbewegen , and we &apos;ll move them to where we want .
we need to take these conversations , and we need to think , but if we &apos;re going to go into the time , and we &apos;ll be happy to have it .
i know that we can get it , and it &apos;s the way it &apos;s a little bit of what the world needs now .
thank you .
thank you .
so for some time , i &apos;m interested in the placebo-effekt . it &apos;s odd that it &apos;s a very curious that &apos;s going to be a bit like i think , as a deception , when you &apos;re going to be a delusion that &apos;s going to be just enough to be enough . &quot;
in other words , zuckerpillen , in some of the research , in some studies , in some studies , in some of a research , which is , because the person thinks that the person thinks , for example , if you &apos;re just going to be able to believe , if the patient is just enough to believe , a measurable impact in the body , which is
a deception will become something , because somebody &apos;s so perceives .
so we also understand each other , i want to show you a very basic , very simple .
and i &apos;m going to show you how he works . this is a trick who has been at least since the 1950s in every zauberbuch for children .
i myself have a ihn of the cub magic of the pfadfinder magic of the 1970s .
i &apos;m going to give it for you to do it and then you explain it .
and then i &apos;m going to explain why i explain it .
so , look what happens .
the knife that you can see , my hand , you can investigate them .
i &apos;m going to be the knife that &apos;s just in my mind .
i was a little bit back to my sleeve .
and to make sure that nothing in my sleeve disappears , or from him , i &apos;m going to just throw my wrist right here .
so you can see that , you can see that it &apos;s not going to be a time , and as long as i can get here , nothing in my sleeve , or anything .
and the goal is very straightforward .
i &apos;m going to open my hand , and hopefully if anything goes , it &apos;s going to be messer by my naked physical physical magnetism .
it &apos;s actually so stuck in its place that i can shake it without the knife .
nothing goes into my sleeve , or come , no trickserei . and you can study anything .
ta-da !
now , that &apos;s a trick i often have little kids who are interested in magic , because you can learn a lot about deception when you &apos;re looking at the täuschung , even though it &apos;s a very simple trick .
probably many of you are familiar with this guy .
he works on this : working on this .
i think the knife in my hand .
i say i &apos;m going to be my wrist to make sure that nothing in my sleeve is disappears or herauskommt , and that &apos;s a lie .
the reason why i &apos;m my wrist , is that it &apos;s the real secret of illusion .
so in the moment , where i &apos;m going to see my hand from you , so you can see it from the back , this fingers , my zeigefinger , just from where he was in a position where it &apos;s so ausgestreckt .
great trick ?
there &apos;s a back in the back room who was not a childhood .
so he &apos;s here . right .
and if i &apos;m going to umdrehe , change the change of your position .
and now you might talk about why this is a deception , why not only the one finger here , because the mind and the way it &apos;s going to make information , they don &apos;t count information , they don &apos;t count , one , two , but they &apos;re as a group .
but it &apos;s not really here . and then i got my hand .
of course , it will be stuck there , but not by the magnetism of my body , but by a trick , through my zeigefinger , who &apos;s there .
and if i close my hand , the same thing i &apos;m going to get through , by this movement that &apos;s verborgen .
i take this hand path . and here &apos;s the knife .
this trick you can do your friends and neighbors . thank you .
well , what does that do with the placebo-effekt ?
one year ago , i read a study that really umgehauen me really correctly .
i &apos;m not a doctor or scientists , and therefore , that was a amazing thing to me .
it turns out that when you get this , if you put a needle in a white ball , in the form of a aspirintablette , is that just a round , white , which has a certain effect .
but if you put the shape , in which they take the placebo , for example , and they &apos;re going to change the blue and a letter to a letter , and they actually make a letter to it , is actually better effective .
and that , though , though , though , though , though , though , though , no one &apos;s a pharmazeutische -- it &apos;s just bloß .
but a white pill is not as good as a blue pill .
what ? that really was really what i really did .
but it turns out that it &apos;s not all the time .
if you take a look , the more effective than the number of any shape .
a guy who &apos;s a farbige , which is at a end of yellow , and at the other red , is better than a white capsule .
and also the spider doesn &apos;t play a role .
a pill twice a day is not as good as three pills -- i can &apos;t remember the exact statistics . sorry .
but the key thing is , ... ...
... -- that also the dosierungen of the dosierungen .
and the shape is playing a role .
and if you want to have the ultimate placebo-effekt , you have to reach the needle .
right ? a syringe with a wirkungslosen -- a couple of milliliter substance that you &apos;re going to be injected in patient .
that creates a very powerful picture in mind . that &apos;s very much more than a white pill .
this is really -- i &apos;m going to show you another time when we have a picture .
so the fact that the white pille don &apos;t seem so good as the blue pill that doesn &apos;t seem as good as a kapsel that doesn &apos;t seem as good as the needle .
and none of it has virtually any more sophisticated property . it &apos;s just our faith that was in a stronger effect .
i wanted to know if i could use this idea for a magic .
i suppose , i &apos;m going to take a delusion , and let &apos;s look at it .
we know that we know that we have to be the needle that you have to go to the needle .
this is a 18 inches long , and it &apos;s very , very , very , very spitz , and i &apos;ll get a little bit of a little bit of sterilisieren .
this is really my meat . it &apos;s not damians spezielles meat .
this is my skin . this is not a spezialeffekt of hollywood .
now i &apos;m going to take this needle in my skin , and through them , until they &apos;re coming on the other side of the side .
if you &apos;re going to be a piece -- if you &apos;re going to take a look at it -- i &apos;ve got a couple of friends in the hotel , and some people i didn &apos;t know , and it &apos;s a woman who had grown .
so i &apos;m going to suggest if you &apos;re going to get quickly , you look at the next 30 seconds , or , you know , i &apos;m going to get the first two , and i &apos;m going to make the first day of the back .
you can see it right now , but you can also see , but also , if you want .
so , it &apos;s like , right here , where my meat begins to do at the bottom part of my brain , i &apos;m just going to make a little einstich .
i &apos;m going to get sorry . do you make it nuts ?
and now just a little bit of a little bit of my skin and on the other side .
now we &apos;re actually in the same situation that we had .
about it .
but now you can &apos;t count my fingers , right ?
so , i &apos;m going to show you . this is one , two , four , five .
well , yeah , well , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah ,
i know what people think if you see this .
they say , &quot; okay , that &apos;s not as dumb and durchsticht itself to try to give us a few minutes for us . &quot;
well , i &apos;ll show you .
how does this look like this ? pretty good .
yeah , i know .
and people say , &quot; okay . i don &apos;t see it . &quot;
people are coming in the nebenräumen now .
let me show you what i &apos;m going to show you .
this is really my skin . this is not a spezialeffekt of hollywood .
this is my meat , and i can herumdrehen the herumdrehen .
i &apos;m sorry . if you &apos;re going to get a way , look away , look at you .
people who come back on the back , which is , &quot; well , that &apos;s right , but if it &apos;s very impressive , but if it was real , he would be a hole and there &apos;s a hole , and it would be real , it would be true . &quot;
okay , let me give you a little bit of blood for you .
yeah , here &apos;s it .
so i would normally get the needle .
i would take my arm and show you that there &apos;s no lesions .
but i think in this frame here , and with the purpose of a year , from a year , from a year , i &apos;m going to go to the needle , and so from the stage .
we &apos;ll still meet a few times a few times .
i hope you &apos;ll be happy . thank you .
everybody speaks today about happiness .
i &apos;ve got some people who are going to count the number of books that were released in the title of the last five years , and they gave them about 40 years , and there were a lot more .
there &apos;s a massive wave of the whole world &apos;s health care .
there &apos;s a lot of glücks-coaching .
everybody would like to make people happier .
but despite all of these tide of work , there are multiple cognitive drop that it almost impossible to think about happiness .
and my talk today is mostly going to be fallen .
this is true for laien , who think about your own happiness , and it &apos;s true for scientists who think about happiness , because it turns out that we are very similar as a mess .
the first of this fall is a widerstreben , complexity zuzugeben .
it turns out that the word is not a useful word , because we &apos;re making lots of different things .
i think there &apos;s a particular meaning that we could do it , but in large , but it &apos;s something that we need to be able to give up , and we will have to assume the complicated perspective of what well-being is .
the second reason is a statement of experience , and memory : essentially , they &apos;re going to be happy in his life and happy life with his life or happy .
and these are two very different concepts , and they are both of the zusammengeworfen of happiness .
and the third is the konzentrations-illusion , and that &apos;s the sloan fact that we can &apos;t think about a single idea of creating well-being without his meaning .
i mean , that &apos;s a real cognitive trap .
there &apos;s no way to get there , it &apos;s right .
now , i would like to start with one example of someone who had a story after one of my lectures , who was a story , who said , &quot; he said he &apos;d have a symphony , and it was absolutely glorious music , and it was a fürchterliches sound .
and then he added , really , really emotional , that &apos;s the whole experience .
but that didn &apos;t .
what it was ruined was the memories of experience .
he had had the experience .
he had 20 minutes of music .
they don &apos;t think of it because he was with a memory of a memory , and the memory was ruined , and the memory was everything he had to keep .
what really tells us is we can think about ourselves and other people think of two different types of self .
there &apos;s a erlebendes self that lives in the present , and the present , able to experience the past , but basically the present .
it &apos;s the erlebende self that the doctor &apos;s anpricht -- you know , if the doctor asks , &quot; do it hurt when i &apos;m going to go there ? &quot;
and then there &apos;s a erinnerndes self , and the story of our life itself is coming , and it &apos;s a dasjenige that &apos;s going to be the doctor , which is , &quot; how do they feel like that ? &quot;
or , &quot; how did your journey after albania ? &quot; or so .
these are two very different units that the erlebende and the erinnernde self and the two to the beiden is part of the durcheinanders of the happiness .
now , the erinnernde self is a storyteller .
and that &apos;s really what really is really a fundamental response to our memories -- it starts immediately .
we don &apos;t just tell stories if we do to tell ourselves stories .
our memory tells us stories that is what we &apos;re allowed to keep in our evolutionary terms is a story .
and let &apos;s start with a example with an example .
there &apos;s a old study .
these are real patients that &apos;s been fed by a painful procedure .
i won &apos;t go to the details . it &apos;s not painful , but she was painful than this study in the 1990s .
they asked , all 60 seconds to report their pain .
and here are two patients . these are their records .
and they &apos;re asked , &quot; who &apos;s more comfortable ? &quot;
and that &apos;s a very simple question .
patient has more more , and his darmspiegelung was longer , and every minute of pain , the patient had had patient and more .
but now there &apos;s another question : &quot; how very thought of these patients that they &apos;re going to go ? &quot;
and here is a surprise : a surprise : a surprise .
and the surprise is that patient has a lot of social commentary on the darmspiegelung , as the patient as patient b.
the stories of the darmspiegelungen were different , and because a very important part of the story is , how they end -- they &apos;re flying -- it ends -- it ends -- it ends -- it ends -- it ends -- it ends -- it ends -- it ends -- it ends -- it ends -- it ends -- it ends -- it ends -- it ends -- it
and none of these stories is very erbaulich or great -- but one of you is that deutlich ...
but one of them is clear worse than the others .
and the worse , the worse is the right place on the end of his peak , and it &apos;s a bad story .
how do we know ?
because we asked these guys to her darmspiegelung , and also , much later , &quot; how bad was the whole thing ? &quot;
and she was a lot worse for a b for a b .
now , that &apos;s a unique conflict between the erlebenden self and the erinnernden itself .
from view of the erlebenden , b had a bad time .
now , what you could do with patient , and we &apos;ve done a clinical trials , and it &apos;s made of the klinische experiments , and it &apos;s actually working on the darmspiegelung of the patient , you can actually put the tube in the tube without destroying it .
that &apos;s what &apos;s going to do is that the patient , but only a bit less than before .
and if you do that for a couple of minutes , you &apos;ve got a couple of minutes that the erlebende self is , and you have to have a lot of the other thing that the erinnernde itself is a lot better than the patient is , because now you &apos;ve got patient a better story about his experience .
so , what is a story from ?
and that &apos;s true for the stories that makes us memory and it &apos;s also true for the stories that we invent .
and so a story is more sophisticated , meaningful moments and end .
end are very , very importantly , and in this case , the end .
now , the erlebende self lives alive .
it has a lot of the augenblicke of the erlebens , one after another .
and you ask : what happens to these moments ?
and the answer is really simple . they &apos;re always lost .
i mean , most of the great majority of our life -- and i know that the most important thing is true , which means that the psychological of a life of a life is about 600 million people . that &apos;s about 600,000 , and most of them don &apos;t leave them .
most of you are completely ignored by the erinnernden itself .
and yet they get the impression that they should count , that what &apos;s happening in this area of the erlebens is what we &apos;re doing .
it &apos;s the finite resource that we &apos;re using to the world .
and as we use them to be important , but that &apos;s not the story that the erinnernde self was .
so we have the erinnernde self and the erlebende self , and they &apos;re really quite different .
the biggest difference between you is the same thing with time .
from the view of the erlebenden self , if you have a vacation and the second week , as the first one is the zweiwöchige vacation twice as the einwöchige vacation .
so that doesn &apos;t work for the erinnernde self .
for the erinnernde self , a zweiwöchiger vacation was barely better than the einwöchige vacation because there &apos;s no new memories .
they didn &apos;t have the story .
and in this way , it &apos;s actually a critical guy that &apos;s a critical variable that &apos;s a erinnerndes self , and that &apos;s very few upon a very few influence on this story .
well , the erinnernde self makes more , and tell stories .
it &apos;s actually a lot of the decisions that &apos;s because if you have a patient , because if you have a patient , who &apos;s two different surgeons , and he said , &quot; well , it &apos;s the wählt who &apos;s the memory that &apos;s going to be selected .
the erlebende self has no voice in this election .
in fact , we don &apos;t really choose between the radar . we &apos;re going to vote from the experiences .
and even if we think about the future , we think we don &apos;t usually think of our future .
we think about our future , as a vorausgesehene memories .
and basically , you can look at this , you know , you know , you know , as a character of the erinnernden themselves , and you can think of the erinnernde itself , that sort of erlebende itself through the erlebende itself that doesn &apos;t need the erlebende self .
i have the idea that if we &apos;re doing vacation , we &apos;re going to do that very often , which is , we &apos;re doing vacation for us to go back to the rest of the erinnernden .
and that &apos;s a bit hard to justify , i think .
i mean , how very zehren we do from our memories ?
that &apos;s one of the explanations that &apos;s been given for the whole dominance of the arable self .
and when i think about it , i think , i think , a few years ago , i think , a couple of years ago , who was the most exciting thing i had ever had , and i think often often that &apos;s what often i think often i think about other people &apos;s disease .
and i &apos;ve probably got to take my memories from this dreiwöchige journey , i would say about 25 minutes for the last four years .
now , if i ever had the head of the head of the 600 images , i spent another one more .
well , that &apos;s three weeks , and that &apos;s the appropriate half hours .
there seems to be a bit of a bit .
well , i like a little bit of a little bit , you know , you know , like a little bit of the zehren , but even if you &apos;re more a bit of it , and why we give away a real question , and why we give memories of the weight in the verlgeich of the weight that we &apos;re getting into the weight of the weight
so i want to think that you &apos;re thinking about a thought .
imagine your next vacation , you know that at the end of the urlaubs , all of the images are going to be annihilated , and they get a amnestisches drug , so that they &apos;re going to remember nothing .
well , would you choose the same way ?
and if you think a other way , there &apos;s a conflict between themselves , and you must think about how you decide this conflict , and that &apos;s really not obvious , because if you &apos;re going to think of the case , you can get a response to the sense , and if you think of the senses you might get a different response .
why we pick the urlaube , which we chose is a problem that &apos;s a problem with a choice between the two types of self .
well , the two species of self has two terms of happiness .
there are two concepts from happiness that we can apply to one per per one .
so you can ask questions : how happy is the erlebende self ?
and then you would ask them , how happy are the potential in life itself ?
and they &apos;re all -- happiness is a pretty complex process .
which is the emotions that can be measured ?
and , by the way , we are now able to get a pretty good idea of happiness itself over time .
if you &apos;re asking for happiness , it &apos;s a very different thing .
that &apos;s not what &apos;s happy is to live a person .
it &apos;s what you &apos;re talking about , or you know , the person is when those person think about their lives .
very different term .
anybody who is not going to be the terms of the human relationship , and i &apos;m also a lot of the amount of researchers about well-being that &apos;s the meaningful of the happiness for the happiness and the way that they have the kind of art. on the planet .
the distinction between happiness itself and happiness itself is recognized in the last few years , and now you &apos;re going to have the two separat .
the gallup of the gallup organization has a global survey , where more than half a million people have asked about what they think about their lives , and there were other efforts in the direction .
so we started to start learning about the happiness of the self .
and the main lesson that we think is , i think they &apos;re really different .
you can know how content somebody &apos;s somebody with your life , and that doesn &apos;t really make it much about how happy he lives and vice versa .
just to give you a sense of the correlation , the correlation , which is about .5 .
what that means is that if you would hit somebody and you would say , oh , your father is a zwei-meter-mann , how much would you know about his size ?
well , you would know something about its size , but there &apos;s a lot of uncertainty .
they have so much uncertainty .
if i tell you that somebody has its life as eight on a scale of 10 , you have a lot of uncertainty on how happy he is with his erlebenden self .
so the correlation is low .
we know something about what happiness &apos;s happiness .
we know that money is very important , and so that &apos;s very important .
we know that happiness is mostly to be satisfied with people who like , time we like to spend time with people who like .
there are other pleasure , but it &apos;s the way .
so if you want to be lucky enough of the self , they will do very different things very different .
the conclusion that i said , what i said is that we really don &apos;t really want to think as a replacement for well-being .
it &apos;s a completely different term .
well , very quickly , another reason we can &apos;t think about happiness is that we don &apos;t think about the same things , and if we &apos;re actually life .
so if you ask the simple question , how happy people are in california , they &apos;re not going to get the correct response .
if you think that question think that people have to be happier when they &apos;re going to say , in ohio life .
and what &apos;s happening is that if you think about life in california , think about the difference between california and other places , and we say , in climate .
well , it turns out that climate change isn &apos;t very important for the erlebende self , and it &apos;s not very important for the nachdenkliche self , which is what happy people are .
now , because , because the nachdenkliche self is , you can end up -- some people could go to california .
and it &apos;s kind of interesting to pursue what happens to people who are going to be moved to california , to become happier .
well , your erlebendes self isn &apos;t happier .
we know that .
but one thing is going to happen , because you think they &apos;re happier , because if you &apos;re going to think about it , you will be remembered , like the weather in ohio , and they &apos;ll feel that they &apos;ve met the right decision .
it &apos;s very difficult to think about well-being , and i hope i &apos;ve got a sense of how hard it is .
thank you .
thank you . i have a question .
thank you .
now , when we spoke to a couple of weeks ago , you &apos;ve seen me , for me , it was a pretty interesting outcome that came from this spring .
is something that you can make us to do with you , because you have a few minutes ?
daniel kahneman : sure .
i think the most important outcome that we found in the &apos; 80s , which is a number that we didn &apos;t expect .
we found that in terms of happiness itself .
if we looked at how feelings are different with income .
and it turns out that under a income of 60,000 dollars in the year , for americans , and that &apos;s a very powerful tool of americans , but it &apos;s a great representative student , but it &apos;s a great representative of income , under 150 dollars in the year of 150 dollars in the year 2020 .
60,000 .
dk : 60,000 .
60,000 dollars in year , the people are unhappy , and they &apos;ll get progressively , they &apos;ll get it .
we get a absolutely flat line .
i mean , i &apos;ve seen that flache lines .
what &apos;s happening is that money doesn &apos;t have a erlebnis-glück beschafft , but that lack of money are certainly elend , and we can measure this misery very , very clearly .
in the sense of the other self , the erinnernden self , they get another story .
the more money you &apos;re cutting the production of the commodities .
that &apos;s not true for emotion .
but danny , in the entire american , it &apos;s about life , freedom , the quest for life .
if people take this befund seriously , i mean , it seems to be all the way to put everything on the head , for example , for instance , for instance , for example , for example .
there &apos;s a chance that politicians generally generally think of the country , like the seriousness , and make politics ?
dk : you know , i believe there are a lot of the role of the role of the glücksforschung in politics .
the recognition is going to be slowly in the united states , no matter , but in the u.k. , they &apos;re just going to just happen in other countries .
people are the people that they think they should think happiness is to think about politics .
it will take a while , and people will discuss whether they want to explore whether they want to explore their erlebnis-glück , or if they want to explore the lebens-bewertung , so we have to get this discussion .
as you can reach happiness is very different , very different depending on how you think and whether you think of the erinnernde themselves or whether you think of the erlebende themselves .
that &apos;s going to influence politics , i think , in the next few years .
in the united states , you &apos;re going to measure the erlebnis-glück of the population .
that &apos;s going to think , in the next one or two decades of the national statistics .
now , it seems to me , this topic , or should be at least the most exciting debate for the next few years .
thanks for the invention of the behavioral economics .
thank you , danny kahneman .
i &apos;m jane mcgonigal . i &apos;m like video games .
now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , for 10 years , and my aim for the next decade is , to save the world in reality , as you can save in online-spielen .
i have a plan for this . i want to persuade more people , including all of them , more time with play , and tollerer play games .
we spend three billion hours a week , with online-spielen .
some of you might think , &quot; this is a whole lot of time for games . &quot;
maybe something too much time when you &apos;re a lot of problems we have in the real world .
but in fact , my research at my research on the institute of the future is precisely the opposite .
three billion hours per week , not nearly enough to solve the world &apos;s problems .
in fact , i &apos;m convinced that if we want to survive the next century on this planet , we have to increase that time .
i calculated that the time needed to spend on 21 billion hours per week .
so , that seems to be something called a little bit , so i can start to do it , so if we want to move problems like hunger , poverty , global warming , i think , we need to try to play games for at least a week for the end of the next decade .
no , i mean it really seriously .
why ? this picture describes this picture , why i believe that games are so essential for survival of the human species in the future .
this is a fundamental player &apos;s head of the photographer .
he wanted to play the feelings to play . so he built a camera to the players .
this is one of the classic computer games .
if you &apos;re not a player , you might give you some of the nuances of nuances in this picture .
you probably see this sense of urgency , something fear , but also , it &apos;s also äußerste , but very , very hard to resolve the very difficult problem .
if you play , you see some nuances here , the nach eyes and the mouth are a sign of optimism , and the eyebrows indicates of the south african .
this is a player who &apos;s on the outskirts of a sogenannten .
oh , you know this . ok . so we have some players here .
a epischer victory is a result that &apos;s so amazingly positive that they didn &apos;t know that it knew that it was impossible .
it was almost beyond the imagination .
and if you &apos;re able to get it , they &apos;re shocked to be able to get something like this . this is a epischer victory .
this player is a short of a epischen victory .
and this is what we have to see on millions of faces in the world , if we take the next to the next century , the face , the face , the face of the rande of a epischen .
well , unfortunately , we look at this face of real life when we &apos;re growing difficult problems .
i call it as the &quot; in life , i &apos;m bad . and it &apos;s my face , you see ? o.k. ? o.k. ?
i &apos;m a bit like i &apos;m a life in life , i &apos;m sick .
this is a graffiti in my former home in berkeley , california , where i was in my inbox , why we &apos;re better than in games .
this is a problem that have many players .
we think we &apos;re not as good as well as playing .
and i don &apos;t just have to do it , though that &apos;s what i &apos;m going to do .
we &apos;re going to achieve more in spielwelten , and i mean , my good deal with the motivation , to do something to do with collaboration .
if we &apos;re in a spielwelt , i think many of us are able to turn into our best version , anytime , hartnäckig , the problem solving the problem , as long as needed to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to
and in reality , if we fail , if we &apos;re going to be obstacles , we often feel different .
we feel overwhelmed . we feel like , we feel threatened , maybe , maybe , maybe , maybe give , frustrated , frustrated .
these emotions have never , if we play games , they don &apos;t just play .
and that &apos;s what i wanted to study as a student .
why is it impossible to think of games , you could not just reach anything ?
how can we convert these feelings from the play in reality ?
so i looked like the world of warcraft , like the ideal environment that &apos;s going to be the ideal environment for collaborative problem-solving .
and i &apos;ve found some things that make epic genes in the online-welten of the epische .
so first , if you &apos;re going into one of these online-spiele , especially in the world , especially in the world , there are a lot of different characters who are willing to give you a weltrettende mission , and it &apos;s immediately .
but not only any mission , but a mission that fits perfectly to your present level , right ?
so they create that .
they never get a job that they can &apos;t solve .
but always on the edge of your capabilities , you have to get out . but there are no unemployment in the world of warcraft .
you &apos;re not around and dreht . there &apos;s always a very important thing to do .
and there &apos;s a staff .
where they also go , hundreds of thousands of people who work with them to engage their epic mission .
we don &apos;t have the real life that we don &apos;t have the sense that it &apos;s a fingerschnipsen of a fingerschnipsen .
there &apos;s this epic story , this inspiring story , why we &apos;re there and what we &apos;re doing .
then we get this whole positive feedback .
they have determined by &quot; level , &quot; and &quot; + one of the strength &quot; or &quot; + &quot; + one of the intelligence . &quot;
this is the real feedback , there &apos;s no real life .
if i leave these stage , i didn &apos;t speak : plus-one one crazy idea , + i think , 20 idea , + 20 crazy idea .
i don &apos;t get in real life in the real world of the feedback .
so the problem of the kooperations-online-welten of the world &apos;s population of warcraft , that it &apos;s so satisfying that it &apos;s so much more likely to be on the outskirts of a epischen sieges that we &apos;re going to spend our whole time in these spielwelten .
they &apos;re just better than the reality .
until today , all of the world &apos;s world &apos;s world record millions of years of 5,93 spent years of trying to solve the virtual problems of azeroth .
that &apos;s not necessarily a bad thing .
it sounds like a übel .
but to see it in context : before 5,93 million years ago , we started to go to the first primatenvorfahren .
so the first aufrechte primate .
ok , so if we talk about how much time we spend with play , it &apos;s just possible to make sense of the time in terms of the time of human development , which is extraordinarily .
but also , because it turns out that we &apos;re using this whole time to play , actually , actually , actually , that change the change , which is what we &apos;re able to do as humans .
we &apos;re developing to collaborative , more , more .
that &apos;s the truth . i believe .
consider this kind of interesting statistics that recently published by a researcher of carnegie mellon university , the average young man in a country of a country with a country of starker hours to the 21st century .
so , 10,000 hours is a very interesting number , from 2 : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons :
first , for children in the united states , 10.080 hours of the genaue , which they spend in school , from the fifth grade to the end of the high school -- when you never lacks missing .
so we have a complete parallelbildungsweg , on the young people , which means to learn how it means to be a good player , how everything they learn to school .
and maybe some of you have some of you a new book of malcolm gladwell , &quot; überflieger . &quot;
so you know your theory of success , the theory of success .
it &apos;s based on the great research research research of the research research that we spend 10,000 hours to the mühsamen of a millimeter , to the 21st century , we will get to coordinate it .
we &apos;re going to be so good at what the most exciting people are the most exciting people .
so what we have here is a whole generation of young people who are meister-spieler .
so the big question is , &quot; what are the players good good ? &quot;
because if we could find that , we never had a chance to have a lot of human potential .
so many people have been in the world that at least an hour per day .
these are our meister-spieler . 500 million people , who are extraordinarily good in &quot; something . &quot;
and in the next decade , we have another billion player , which are very good in whatever .
if you haven &apos;t heard it , haven &apos;t heard it , yet it &apos;s not heard about it , you haven &apos;t heard it , yet it &apos;s not heard yet .
the spieleindustrie entwickelt , the energy of the konsolen , the energy of energy , and on the mobilfunknetzen , instead of the breitband-internet , so in india , in india , china can play online .
you would expect a additional billion player in the next decade .
so we have total 1.5 billion player .
so i started thinking about what it is , what it &apos;s to do is to make these games .
here &apos;s the four things i found .
ok , imagine how extreme selbstmotivierung .
dringlichkeits-optimismus is the desire to do something , a barrier to the conclusion that we have a great hope for success .
player always believes that a epischer would be possible , and that it &apos;s always worth trying to try and try to try and try to try and try to try and try to try and try to try and try to try and try to try and try to try and try to try and try to try and try to try and try to try and try to
and player doesn &apos;t sit around .
and player are masters in spiders of spiders in spiders .
there &apos;s a lot of interesting research that show people that we like to do more people after we played with them , even if they have a specific .
the reason for this is that it &apos;s a lot of trust to play with someone with somebody .
we rely on that somebody else will spend that the rules is that the rules is that we have the same goal and to the end user .
so enables this enables the zusammenspielen that &apos;s growing by the thick , trust and interconnected .
as a consequence of that we build stronger social relationships .
glückselige productivity . fantastic !
you know , there &apos;s a reason why the durchschnitts-word of warcraft-spieler hours of warcraft-spieler hours per week , sort of as a teilzeitjob .
the reason is that if we play , we are actually happier to work , hard when we &apos;re going to relax , or not .
we know that we work as human beings , if we work hard , i do work .
and player are always ready to work hard when you get the right job .
and finally , epic meaning .
so player love , part of the ehrfurcht of missionen gebietender ausmaße .
here &apos;s a hintergrundinformation , to illuminate the right light . you know all the wikipedia , the largest greatest world .
the second largest women in the world , with almost 80,000 einträgen , the world &apos;s greatest wiki .
five million people use it every month .
they have more information about the world of warcraft in the internet , as any other topic in every other new woman .
they create a epic story .
they create a flight of the understanding of the knowledge of the world &apos;s world .
ok , so that &apos;s four superpowers that are leading to a single outcome . players are super-mächtige individuals , individuals .
it &apos;s people who believe that they can change the world as a single world .
and the only problem is you believe you can change the virtual worlds , but not the real .
that &apos;s the problem that i try to try to solve .
edward castronova is a volkswissenschaftler .
his work is awesome . he studied why people are so much time , energy and money in online-welten .
and he says , &quot; we &apos;re not going to be a less than a massenemigration of a massenemigration in virtual worlds and online-spielumgebungen . &quot;
and that &apos;s a economist . so it &apos;s logically .
and he says ... &quot; he says ...
not as i &apos;m ... i &apos;m a game play , i &apos;m a bit of a bit .
so he says that makes sense of that actually , because players can reach into the real life .
you can play in play in play , social social media as real life . you get more feedback and rewards in real life .
so he says , it &apos;s completely logically that player is more time to spend more time in the virtual world than in real world .
i first meet , that &apos;s logical .
but it &apos;s definitely not optimalsituation .
we need to start to turn the real world in a game .
my inspiration comes from a event that 2,500 years .
there &apos;s these ancient cube , from schafsknöcheln . you know ?
before these fantastic spielecontrollern , there was schafsknöchel .
and that was sort of the first of people to entwickelten .
and if you &apos;re using the werken of the old greek historikers historikers , you may know , you know , you know , you know , you know , and the story of how to invented games .
according to the herodotus , more meaningful würfelspiele , in the kingdom of famine , during a famine .
supposedly there was a great deal of the könig , that the king of lydien from lydien , that &apos;s how the king was decided to get a crazy idea .
people . people fought .
it was a extremes of situation . you needed a extremes .
so they invented , according to loud , das , the würfelspiel and vereinbarten , a single strategy , you would eat . at the next day you would play .
and they would be very excited in the würfelspiel , because games are so fascinating and us with befriedigender , glückseliger productivity , they were able to forget that it was not going to eat anything .
and then the next day you would play . and the next day you would eat .
and according to the herodotus , they survived as 18 years by the day by a day and the next .
likewise , i think we &apos;re going to put games today .
we &apos;re going to get games to get the suffering of the real world .
we &apos;re going to play games to the world that doesn &apos;t work in the real world , everything in real life is not satisfying , and we &apos;ll bring us what we need from play .
but it doesn &apos;t have to be the end .
that &apos;s the exciting thing .
according to 18 years after 18 years was not better , so i decided to the king , a last würfelspiel .
they shared the kingdom in two .
they played a würfelspiel and the sieger of a epischen adventure .
they verließen lydien , and they made a new home , and they just did just come back to the survival of people , and they were looking for the rest of the surviving and looking for the rest of a neighborhood in which they were able to thrive .
that sounds crazy , right ?
but the latest dna-beweise show that the etrusker , the etrusker , the same empire , the same dna as the old lydier .
so scientists came to the notion of the notion of the notion of the notion of herodotus history .
and geologists found evidence of a global abkühlung , who almost took 20 years to explain what the famine might explain .
so this crazy story is voices .
you may have saved her people through play , by having a gerettet in games for 18 years , and then they had these eingebung and so much about the other way that they have the entire civilization .
so , we can also also .
we &apos;ve been playing with the 1994 of 1994 .
this was the first strategiespiel in real world of warcraft . that was about 16 years ago .
they were playing 18 years for years , we &apos;ve been playing for 16 years .
i &apos;m going to suggest we &apos;re ready for our own game .
so they sent half of their civilization on the quest to search for a new world , so i take my 21 billion per week .
we should be surprised that half of us have a half a day with play a day , until we have the problems of the real world .
i know you &apos;re going to ask , &quot; how do we solve problems in play ? &quot; and precisely that question i &apos;ve been working on for the past few years .
we have this banner in our office in palo alto , it &apos;s actually how we should understand the future .
we don &apos;t want to try to say the future .
what we want to do is the future .
we want to visualize the best result . and then people tend to make this idea that this idea of reality .
we &apos;re going to imagine a epische of our public interest , and give people the options to get them .
i &apos;m going to show you very briefly three games that i designed to try to try to get people to do the epische of the future in their own future .
this is &quot; world without oil . &quot;
the game is from 2007 .
it &apos;s a online-spiel , where they have to overcome a ölknappheit .
the ölknappheit , but we have enough online-inhalte , so you can see it , and they &apos;re going to be able to live in the game , and they &apos;re going to be able to live in the game , and they &apos;re going to be able to live in the game , and they &apos;re going to get the real life , and they &apos;ll get to the
we have this game with 1,700 players in 2007 . and we &apos;ve been trained since the last three years .
and i can tell you , it was a hidden experience .
nobody wants to change your life because it &apos;s good for the environment or because we should .
but if you &apos;re in a epischen adventure and said , &quot; we &apos;re going to go . &quot;
this is a very amazing adventure to go on .
find out how they survive . most of our player , the die have been beibehalten in the game .
so we have a lot of the next game , a bigger , higher goal than just ölknappheit .
we have the game game , &quot; superstruct &quot; on the future .
so the amount of the computation is a supercomputers that people have only been left for 23 years on the planet .
this supercomputer is called &quot; global aussterbungs- , &quot; of course .
the call of player , we &apos;ve got almost like a &quot; jerry-bruckheimer &quot; -film .
they know jerry bruckheimer-filme , where it &apos;s the &quot; dream-team , &quot; you have the astronauts , the scientists , the ex-sträfling , and only together , they can save the world .
but in our game , instead of five people , we say , everyone is in the dream-team , and it &apos;s our job , the future of energy , food , security , security , security and the future of social justice .
8,000 player played the game for eight weeks .
they found 500 of the incredibly creative solutions that you can see , if they &apos;re superstruct .
and the last game is , we put on on third march . it &apos;s a game in collaboration with the world bank .
if you finish the game , you get from the world bank , which is the award of social media , which is 2010 .
we work with universities in the very schwarzafrika and the store to learn to learn social networking .
we have a comic comic . we have a level of level , &quot; for example , &quot; level , &quot; for regionales , sustainability , sustainability and ingenuity .
i want to invite you to share with you with young people around the world , anywhere in the world , especially in entwicklungsgebieten , which are struggling to save their own social enterprises to save the world .
i &apos;ll come to end .
i want to ask you something .
what , think about it ?
we have all these fantastic players , we have games that show us what we can do , but we have the real world not saved .
well , i hope you &apos;re hoping that i &apos;m sure that players are the human resources that we can use to work in real life , and that games are a great meaning for change .
we have this whole superpowers , glückselige productivity , the ability to knit the ability to knit social networks , dringlichkeits-optimismus and desire for contraband meaning .
i hope that we play together with meaningful games to survive on this planet to survive .
and i hope you will be able to play with me and play with you .
if i &apos;m going to vorausschaue in the next decade , i &apos;m sure i can make any of those things : that we can create any future future , and that we can play all together .
so i say , let &apos;s start with the weltverändernden games !
thank you .
i would like to tell you what i &apos;d like to write a few months ago to write a few months ago .
i always have my synonym-wörterbuch , but i was with the very bearbeiten of the text , and i noticed that i never have been in my life , which means &quot; disabled &quot; means &quot; disabled &quot; . &quot;
i read you to you .
&quot; disabled , &quot; verkrüppelt , hilflos , hilflos , zerstört , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , geschwächt , geschwächt , geschwächt , geschwächt , geschwächt , geschwächt , geschwächt , gelähmt , gelähmt , nachgebessert , nachgebessert , nachgebessert , nachgebessert , nachgebessert , kaputt , kaputt , ausgezählt , ausgezählt , nutzlos , nutzlos , nutzlos , nutzlos , nutzlos , nutzlos .
antonyme : healthy , strong . &quot;
i &apos;ve got this list of a friend of mine , and had to laugh , it was so ridiculous , but i had to stop and stop and stop and sammeln , and i had to collect the sammeln of this überfallartigen , and the verbundenden of the emotionalen shock .
of course , that was a ausgefranstes , old synonym-wörterbuch . i just thought that the output has to be quite old .
but in fact , it was a copy on the early 1980s when i started to build my school of my selbstbild outside of my familiären , and to form my selbstbild , and to form other , and to me around me .
and god thank you , i didn &apos;t use a synonym-wörterbuch .
would i have a serious seriously , i would be born in a world that someone who would be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to have the life in the middle of the opportunity and adventure that i &apos;ve experienced .
so i immediately , i immediately , i immediately come to 2009 , and expect that i find a ansprechenderen contribution .
here &apos;s the aktualisierte version of this eintrags version .
and not a lot of it is much better .
and particularly , i think the last two words of &quot; near antonyms &quot; and &quot; healthy . &quot;
but it &apos;s not just the words .
it &apos;s about what we think about the people that we describe to these words .
it &apos;s about the values that are stuck in these words , and how we construct these values .
our language , our minds are thinking about and how we see the world and people around us .
a lot of altertümliche societies , including the greeks and the romans , really believed that the women &apos;s the aussprache of a fluchs , because what you can do is also laut loud .
so what do we want to actually do is actually manifestieren -- a man or a healthy man ?
in keeping a human mind , a human being , a child , could be a child , you could , and you could give them a different and ideas .
wouldn &apos;t it be nice to open to you ?
a man who opened my opened up , my pediatrician was my pediatrician in a.i. institute in delaware .
it &apos;s called dr. pizzutillo . a italo-amerikaner whose name , whose name , as you can think most americans couldn &apos;t correctly correctly correctly . so he was always dr. .
and dr. p. was always very busy , and was very much for teaching kids for children .
i found the time i spent in this hospital , just amazing -- to my physiotherapie .
i had to include a lot of different times , and i had to do all of these dicken , elastischen bändern -- and i &apos;ve got this bänder , and i &apos;ve got this bänder , and i &apos;ve got them to get to the other . i &apos;ve got them . i &apos;ve got them .
and imagine , i &apos;ve actually been talking to the fünfjähriges child with dr. p. and so , trying to stop these drills , natürllich without success .
and he &apos;s a day , he was looking at me at one of my research , and they were just ermüdend and gnadenlos -- and he said , &quot; wow , aimee , you &apos;re so strong , kraftvolles , and young girl , you will be one day .
and if you can give it a hundred dollars . &quot;
and that was a simple trick of dr. p. , so i wanted to do the research of the online , with the prospect that the richest fünfjährige girl in the state department was going to be in the second to see the täglichen in the second to see my everyday übungs-horror with new eyes , and so it was a new and vielversprechendes experience .
and i wonder how much vision of me as a strong vision of me and i could introduce a lot of young girls , and i could imagine as a one of nature , and kraftvollen and atlethischen .
this is just a example of many , how adults can be able to make a child &apos;s imagination .
but as the already zitierten examples of the synonym-wörterbüchern examples of the synonym-wörterbüchern , and we don &apos;t imagine our language , and imagine our language , something that we would all be like , to allow us to see each other as a man .
our language , our language , the social changes that has been transformed in many cases , in many cases .
from the other way , of course , from the other , of course , you can say that my legs can be sagen , kniegelenke , kniegelenke , who are going to be able to use their natural impact , and they &apos;re not allowed to talk to the limit , which is not to speak to the natural world , to create their own identity , to create
so , perhaps , the one of these technological changes , because the other thing that &apos;s always happened that every other thing that anyone can be there , and that anyone can be a very different way and that the human ability to adapt to , and that the human ability to adapt to our biggest plus .
the human ability to adapt to the human mind , because people are always asking me to tell you about the widrigkeiten , and i &apos;m going to ask you to be a little hump , and i always felt very uncomfortable to answer people who are asking questions about people , and i understand why i understand why .
this phrase from the idea of the idea of the idea that success is , in fact , erfolg , and happiness , if i could get the whole experience of the experience , because i could get the full of life , because i could get the full of life with a prosthetic , or whatever people live with my disability .
but the truth is that we change ourselves , and of course we &apos;re going to be able to believe in the challenge , whether they physically physically physically physically physically , emotionally or even both both both , or even both both both .
and i &apos;m claiming that it &apos;s good .
widrigkeiten are not a barrier that we have to get to our lives to get better .
widrigkeiten just are just going to our lives .
and i tend to see the widrigkeiten as my shadow .
sometimes i sometimes , i sometimes , sometimes it &apos;s not very , sometimes he &apos;s hardly to see , but he &apos;s always all the time .
and i want to suggest that the impact of the brain &apos;s brain &apos;s brain &apos;s brain &apos;s brain activity is the schwere of a human history .
there are the live of the lives and challenges , and the challenges are just different and every person that &apos;s different with it , but the question is , not whether we can come to widrigkeiten or not , but how we can do it .
so we &apos;re not only responsible to the people who love the people we love to preserve to schicksalsschlägen , but they also do it to get it to get it .
and we &apos;re not going to do our children , if we can give them the feeling that they can &apos;t adapt .
you have to be able to do two things : to be the medical fact , and to the other matter of the social opinion , whether i &apos;m disabled or not .
and to be honest , the only real real and bleibende disability that i needed to be able to do that the world is continually , you can describe me to these definitions .
in our wish , people who are most reluctant to protect us , and the cold , hard truth about their medical care or even a prognose to the quality of life , you know , we need to look at the grundstein , we have to make sure that somebody &apos;s actually behindert .
maybe the human concept that &apos;s just going to happen in a broken system , and how we fix the repair , for every single disability than any one of each individual is a greater disability than the pathology .
if we don &apos;t treat a ganzheitlich , and not all of his forces and possibilities and then , we &apos;re also creating the natural struggle , you might have to have a disease , another disease .
we degradieren a man who has a value for our society .
so we have to look beyond the patologie , and we &apos;re looking at all the corner of human possibilities .
but importantly , it &apos;s the way that it &apos;s between our perception of our flaws and our great erfindergeist , one connection .
we should not be abwerten , or not , we should not try to avoid , you should not try to avoid them under the carpet , but it &apos;s about to recognize the widrigkeiten opportunities .
it may seem to be more about that , to ask that we don &apos;t necessarily have to get widrigkeiten , but that we &apos;re open to the open , you would be able to use them to use a kampf-ausdruck and maybe even dancing to dancing .
and maybe we can do it , widrigkeiten , widrigkeiten , stimmiges and useful and feel that way of their presence , and feel like that , as it &apos;s not as sophisticated as it .
in this year we celebrate the 200 darwin , and he was written by the charles of darwin , darwin , darwin , in my eyes , in a very very true in human character .
i would like to survive , not the strongest of his type of surgery , and not the intelligenteste of his way , but who can adapt to change .
for example , from conflicts of conflicts .
not only that &apos;s darwin , we know that the ability of human beings and aufzublühen , and aufzublühen , from the battle of human spirit , by konflikte .
so again , again , change and spider are the greatest skills of humans .
and maybe we know , from what we &apos;re doing , we &apos;re going to be , when we &apos;re really going to get .
and perhaps the sense of the widrigkeiten of widrigkeiten , a perception of the ichs , a sense of our own power .
we can give ourselves something that &apos;s what we can do .
we can give a new meaning that &apos;s going to be beyond severe times .
maybe we can see widrigkeiten as change .
widrigkeiten is a change for a change we haven &apos;t yet have yet .
i think the biggest damage we &apos;ve been wondering is to believe that we should be normal .
so , honestly , who is normal ?
there &apos;s no normal normal .
there &apos;s the common . but not the normal . and you would have to know the normal , and you know , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , if they really had them ?
i think it &apos;s not .
it would be great if we were going to be a different paradigm of the world , and the strength to formulate , and so we can invite the forces of very many children , and they can invite them to make their very special kids , and they &apos;re doing their very special and valuable qualities to society .
anthropolgen found that we found people from the members of our society , and that &apos;s a gefordert : meaningful and a contribution .
there are evidence that the neanderthals that you have , the neanderthals , in the neanderthals , people have been verletzungen with severe körperlichen , and that may have happened because the lebenserfahrung of these people in the society was valuable for society .
they don &apos;t have these people not as broken and see useless ; they were being treated as something and wertvolles .
a couple of years ago i went to the city , in which i grew up in a lebensmittelmarkt in the middle of the head , and i was there a scheffel tomato .
it was summer , and i had shorts .
and i hear a guy behind me , &quot; well , if that &apos;s not aimee mullins . &quot;
and i &apos;m going to take care of this older man . i had no idea who he is .
and i said , &quot; excuse me , i know ? i can &apos;t remember you . &quot;
and he said , &quot; well , you know , they were not going to remember me .
when i saw them , i got her out of your mother &apos;s belly . &quot;
oh , so .
and of course , it &apos;s made it click .
this was dr. kean , a man i only knew from my mom , because i was going to be , of course , to my birthday , to my birthday two weeks .
the doctor for the pränatale medical school was in vacation , and so my parents knew my parents &apos; husband who took me to the world , not at all .
and because i was born without wadenbeine , and my feet were going to come up with this and a couple of toes on this and a few toes at the other foot was , he had to be überbringen the bad news .
he said to me , &quot; i had to say your parents , you know , you had to be told , and never be able to be able to live in a life of life , and since then , they just lie to me . &quot;
so , really extraordinary , i &apos;d like to be able to get the zeitungsausschnitte of my entire entire whole childhood , whether i had to be halloween at the pfadfindern of the zweiten , whether i had to teach my scholarship , whether i had to teach the sportlichen of the sportlichen , and he used to teach those clips to teach his students to teaching his students ,
and he called this part of his kurses , the x , the potential of human being .
you can &apos;t just emphasize enough to the way that you can be the faktor factor for the quality of a human .
and dr. kean , he said , &quot; i learned that kids , if they &apos;re not going to get something else , and even if you &apos;re just a little bit of support , if you &apos;re a little bit of support , and then children can reach children . &quot;
you see , dr. kean has changed .
he understood that the medical diagnosis , and how somebody else is to do , two different things .
and i also have my thinking about the time when i asked me if i had asked me if i had my prostheses , if i had my prostheses and bones , and bones , i wouldn &apos;t have a second .
i wanted to get normal .
if you ask me , i &apos;m not so sure i &apos;m not sure .
and that &apos;s happening because i experienced something with my legs and not despite those experiences .
and perhaps that change could be also going to happen because i &apos;ve been wondering so many people who were opened up to me , instead of giving people to get me to me , or give me a picture of the überstülpen .
see , it really takes a human , which is , you know , you can give you the demonstriert of their forces , and they &apos;re through .
if you can give it to someone , your own , inner forces -- if you &apos;re making it , and for someone in a piece of a moment , they &apos;re very good for those people to be a very good teacher .
they bring them to open to open doors .
the actual meaning of the worts &quot; educate &quot; in the word &quot; educe . &quot;
it means , something that &apos;s going to be in one is that the potential .
again : what &apos;s going to do to do we want to do ?
in the &apos; 60s , was done in britain , and then the gymnasien was transformed in gesamtschulen .
they call this &quot; streaming trials &quot; in the united states , &quot; we call it &quot; tracking . &quot;
the students are going to move after notes .
and the a student , schüler , bekommen , the better teachers are teachers , and the better teachers are teachers .
they have a dreimonatigen talk about a dreimonatigen period of students , &quot; the &quot; a &quot; the note &quot; the note , &quot; it was told you , they were very clever , and after these three months , they actually write a really smart .
and of course , it &apos;s the heart of the heart that he was told that vice versa said , they &apos;re just sufficient .
and it was also after three months .
but only those who are still in school -- besides the students who had taken the school .
very importantly at this study was that the teacher was not eingeweiht .
the teachers didn &apos;t know that something was changed .
they were told that the einser-schüler was the einser-schüler and that the students are coated with the note . and they have a bit more and they &apos;re treated .
the only real disability is a ghost mind , a ghost mind , has broken a mind , not a hope , and he finds no more schön. , kindliche , kindliche , kindliche , and our issues of imagination .
but if we create the human spirit , to help prevent human spirit , and others get to find a beautiful and then setzen , and then we &apos;re going to be a kräfte , and then we &apos;re going to be a positive positive .
if a spirit of these qualities , we can create a new reality and create new daseinsformen .
i want to end with a poem that was written by a phalanx called hafiz , and the poem is , &quot; the god who knows , not the god of the name , but the god who knows , not only the god who knows , not only the god who knows , and he &apos;s always going to tell you , &quot; he always says , &quot; come
come here , dance with me . thank you .
how would you want to be better than you are ?
suppose i said , through a few changes of their genes , a better memory -- is a better memory -- more , more and faster .
or want to do it , more , more , more power .
want to be more attractive and more confident ?
how would it be , longer for life ?
or maybe they &apos;re one of those who are always going to be more creativity .
what would you like to do ?
what would you like to do is you &apos;d like to have one of them ?
creativity .
how many people would vote creativity ?
raise your hands . let me see me .
a couple . probably , about how many people are there .
that &apos;s very good .
how many would decide to decide for a good memory ?
a couple more .
how about fitness ?
a couple of less .
what about longevity ?
ah , the majority . the lsehe i like to do as a physician .
if you could only have one of those , it would be a very different world .
is it all the way that it &apos;s just einbildung ?
or it &apos;s perhaps possible ?
evolution is a andauerndes topic on the ted stage , but today i want to give you the idea of the issue .
the great geneticist in the 20th century , t.g. dobzhansky , who was a kommunikant in russian church , once a paper , with the title , &quot; nothing in biology , &quot; nothing in biology , &quot; nothing in the lichte of evolution . &quot;
now , if you &apos;re a bit of those who are not going to be a very good thing that &apos;s not a good thing to do that , that would be a very good at the biological , and i &apos;ll give you the permission , and you can give you a look at the erlaubnis of the book , which is about to be wrong , because nothing
but if they accept biological evolution , remember it &apos;s only about the past , or it &apos;s also about the future ?
is it for other elite or it &apos;s also to tell us ?
this is another one look at the tree of life .
in this picture , i have a lump of the busch in all the directions , because if you look at the edges of the tree of life , all the evidence of these areas have been successful , they &apos;ve had to be erfolg , they have survived ; it has its environment and strength .
the human part of this busches , which is at the end of course , of course , is what we &apos;re most interested in .
we &apos;re acquiring by a shared ancestor about six and eight million years ago .
in this period , perhaps 20 different spezien of hominids .
some of them come and went .
we &apos;re for about 130.000 for about 130.000 .
it seems , as we &apos;re very remote from the other parts of life , but actually , the most part of the lives , are the fundamental mechanisms , are the fundamental mechanisms of our cells .
is you realize that we can take out of the use of the world , and the mechanisms of the human bacteria can produce the protein of the human brain , which is used to treat the diabetiker ?
this is not like humaninsulin ; this is the same protein that &apos;s chemically ununterscheidbar from the pancreas .
and we &apos;ve seen bacteria about bacteria , you know , that everybody in our gut are more than the other organism that it &apos;s going to be useful in the rest of our body ?
maybe 10 times .
i mean , if you think , if antonio damasio asks her to her view , think about bacteria ?
our gut is a wonderfully gastfreundlichen environment for these bacteria .
it &apos;s warm , it &apos;s dark , it &apos;s feucht , it &apos;s very comfortable .
and you &apos;re going to be all the nutrition that you only could ever be wünschen without effort .
it &apos;s really a easier for bacteria , with occasional recommended of the pacific , jeodch forced to the exits .
but else , they &apos;re a beautiful environment for these bacteria , just as they &apos;re important for their lives .
they help from the digestion of the benefits of the space , and they protect them against certain disease .
but what will come in the future ?
are we in a kind of evolutionäres balance in the form of a species ?
or we &apos;re wired to be something else -- something that might even better to the environment is ?
now , let &apos;s go back to the time of the big bang , the solar system , the solar system , the solar system , about three billion years ago , perhaps three billion years ago , perhaps three of the earth , perhaps , perhaps , perhaps , perhaps , perhaps , perhaps , perhaps , perhaps , as a year , and then the human species ,
in this huge unvollendeten symphony of the universe , life on earth is only on the earth ; the animal , like a single stroke ; and the human life , a little notenverzierung .
we were we .
this is also the unterhaltungswert of this speech , so i hope , i hope , it &apos;s like to give you .
now , when i was a neuling on the college , i had my first biologiekurse .
i was fascinated by the elegance of elegance and beauty .
i fell in the power of evolution , and i noticed something very fundamental , and i &apos;ve got to be in most of the existence of life in the most of life , and all the cell , and all the genetic information of the cell will lead to both of the cell .
but at the time , as a mehrzelligen organisms began to change things .
sexual reproduction comes into the picture .
and so , very important : with the advent of sexual reproduction that &apos;s the genome of the genome , the rest of the body .
in fact , you could say that the unausweichlichkeit of the death of the death of the body in the evolution of the body in the same time is how the sexual reproduction .
now i have to say , if i got a musician , i thought , okay , so sex , death deaths , but it seemed to be pretty much fun to do , but with every year , it &apos;s too true to my greatest zweifeln .
i &apos;m a bit of the relationship to understand the emotions of george orwell who was in vegas his show in the &apos; 90s .
and one night , there &apos;s a pat on his hotelzimmertür .
he opens the door .
and he &apos;s a beautifully spärlich spärlich bekleidetes .
she looks like it , &quot; i &apos;m here for a super-sex . &quot;
&quot; that &apos;s wonderful , &quot; george says , &quot; i &apos;m going to take the soup . &quot;
i came to the realization that i was a destination that i was a destination in the other way that the goal was the goal of evolution -- not inevitably , just different .
i tried to preserve the body .
i wanted to give us healthy .
i wanted to take health for a disease .
i wanted to live a long and healthy lives .
evolution is all about the weitergabe of the genome to the next generation , and survival generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation generation
from a evolutionary standpoint , they are , and i developed the genetic fracht in the next level of orbit to turn into the ocean .
i think we would all be able to understand the mood , the woody to the woody , and he said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to get immortality through my work .
i want to do it by i don &apos;t go back . &quot;
evolution doesn &apos;t mean the longest life .
it doesn &apos;t inevitably inevitably the biggest , the strongest , or the fastest , and not even the klügsten .
evolution priviligiert the creatures that are best to adapt their environment .
it &apos;s only the test of survival and success and success and success .
on the bottom of the ocean , bacteria are there , the thermophil , and it &apos;s the hot thing , if fish were survival , if you were the vakuum fish , they have managed to do it for a bewohnbare environment .
so what does that mean if we &apos;re going on the game , which is what we &apos;re doing on the end , which is what we think about the place of the space in evolution , and particularly how we vorausschauen in the next phase , i would say that there &apos;s a series of possibilities .
the first is that we &apos;re not going to get ourselves .
we have a sort of balance .
and the reasons that we would be , for example , is that it &apos;s first by medicine , and so , is a lot of genes that were used to get the otherwise , and the population was made from the population .
and secondly , we have a species that we have our environment so that we &apos;ve managed to adapt to us , and we &apos;re focusing on to adapt to them , and we &apos;re looking at them to adapt them to them .
and by the way , we &apos;re walking and we get so much that they can &apos;t tell longer that they can &apos;t tell you that , is that isolation is necessary for evolution to stattzufinden .
a second possibility is that it &apos;s going to be a evolution of the traditional way of course , of course , from nature .
and the argument , here , the wheels is going to be the wheels of evolution , but they &apos;re unerbittlich .
and so far , if we &apos;re going to be a huge amount of isolation , if we &apos;re going to colonize a species , it &apos;s going to be able to be able to be able to make it more complicated and change the change of the environment that could produce evolution in natural ways .
but there &apos;s a third possibility , a verlockende , fascinating and terrifying , and terrifying , terrifying possibility to make a lot of the possibility of the possibility of a great way .
i call it neo-evolution -- the new development of course not just , but , but , but , but decided to make us more than the individuen. of us in the decisions .
well , how could that happen ?
how could it possibly be possible that we do this ?
let &apos;s consider the reality that people are doing today in some cultures today about their offspring .
they are in some cultures that choice , to have more men than women .
it &apos;s not necessarily good for society , but it &apos;s what the whole and the family .
so if you think if it &apos;s not only possible to choose the gender of your child , but also in the body of the body , the disease , the disease and needed .
what if they could make the genetic changes to make diabetes or alzheimer &apos;s disease or alzheimer &apos;s disease or the value of the building ?
wouldn &apos;t you want to want to do it , these changes in your genes ?
if we &apos;re going to be vorausblicken , these kinds of changes will be possible .
the human genome began in 1990 , and it took 13 years .
it &apos;s a cost billion dollars .
in the next year , when it was finished , they could do the same thing for 20 million dollars in the mid .
today , you can see a sequence of three billion pounds of human genome from about $ 20,000 and about the space of about a week of about a week .
it won &apos;t take any longer for a long time until the reality is that it will be the 1,000 dollars of human genomes , and it will be increasingly available for everybody .
a week ago , the national academy of the engineering academy of the world &apos;s national prize winner prize winner , two scientists , the independent world , developed the independent techniques that allowed to work on the natural process of evolution , and to make proteins in a way , which is what frances arnold is called the true of the direkte . &quot;
a couple of years ago , a couple of years ago , the lasker-preis of the scientists were taken in the lasker-preis of the research , a fibroblasten hautzelle , and through the manipulation of only four genes that &apos;s the cell to be a pluripotenten of the same time , a cell cell in the cell , is a cell cell in your body .
these changes are in the come .
the same technology that can make human insulin in bacteria , the viruses that can &apos;t make sense of itself , but also also the immunity of other viruses .
believe it or not , it &apos;s a experimental study in the hallway , with vaccine in the cells that &apos;s grown into the cells of a tabakpflanze .
can you imagine something good , that &apos;s coming out of tobacco ?
this is all today in reality and in the future .
so , imagine only two other changes .
you can change the cells in your body , but what if they could change the cells of your reputation ?
what if you could change the sperm and eizellen , or the newly frisch of the ei , to change their children for a life of life , eliminating the diabetes , the hämophilie , the hämophilie of cancer ?
who wants to not want to healthier children ?
and then the most common technology , the same engine of science that can enable change to prevent the changes , could allow us to adoptieren the verabschieden , hyper-kapazitäten -- the better memory .
why don &apos;t have the schlagfertigkeit of a ken jennings , especially if you can expand it with the next generation of the watson-maschine ?
why don &apos;t the fast muskelfasern that allow them to get rid of it faster ?
why not longer live ?
these are going to be unwiderstehlich .
and if we &apos;re on one spot where we can get to the next generation , and we can also see the attributes of the adoptieren , we will be transformed by alt-stil evolution .
we will have a process that will be in the rule of 100,000 years , and we can predict it for a thousand years , and maybe even the next hundred years .
these are decisions with the other ones , or their grandkids , are going to be more .
using these decisions to form a society that &apos;s better , the successful , which is more successful than it is ?
or we will have selectively different attributes that we want to have some of us , and not for others ?
will we be a society and a society is dielangweiliger and uniformierter , or robuster and vielseitiger ?
these are the kinds of questions we need to be to face .
and most of all , the deepest of all , we will never be able to develop the wisdom , and the wisdom of the wisdom that we need to make these decisions ?
in good , in evil , and once they might think , these decisions are going to be .
thank you .
i want you to imagine a little bit of a turn , a portable robot , who gives you a portable robot , or another , or another , aufzustehen , and go to go back .
we call the berkeley bionics bionics , these robots call this robot .
they &apos;re not something else , which is in the morning , and they &apos;re going to get the extra strength and they will improve their speed , and that will help you keep your balance .
that &apos;s actually the true impact of man and machine .
but not only that -- so they &apos;re going to connect with the universe and others out there .
that &apos;s not just a crazy idea .
so to show you what we &apos;re going to do is we &apos;re going to start talking about the american soldiers in the average of 100 pounds on its back , and it &apos;s the fundamental that they should carry more equipment .
of course , this leads to some major complications -- rückenverletzungen , 30 percent of it -- chronic rückenverletzungen .
so we thought we &apos;d think that we would take us to this challenge and create a exoskelett that would help with this problem with this problem .
so let me give you now to you now -- or the human universal universal of universal .
soldier : with the hulc-exoskelett , i can carry 200 pounds over the verschiedenartiges terrain , many hours long .
so , using his overall design , to go to the races , to make a difference and höchst movements .
it feels what i want to do , where i want to go and move my strength and perseverance .
we &apos;re so far , with our industriepartner of this device , this new exoskelett in this year .
so it &apos;s true .
now let &apos;s take our gaze to the wheelchair , something i particularly excited about .
there are 68 million people who are sitting in the world .
that &apos;s about a percent of the population .
and that &apos;s actually a conservative estimate .
we &apos;re talking about very young people who are struggling with the spinal cord of their lives -- 20er , 30er , 30er , by the fate , by the fate of the world &apos;s fate .
but it &apos;s also about the known population , whose number of people are converging .
and so the only option -- if it &apos;s about a hirnschlag , or to other complications -- is the wheelchair .
and so it &apos;s been around 500 years , since the way i say , very successful introduction .
so we thought we could start to start to write a totally new chapter in the area .
let me show you now , you know , you can imagine , by the way , the amanda of amanda boxtel , who has a rückenmarksverletzung suffered that has been a rückenmarksverletzung suffered that has been no longer had been running for granted for the age of 19 .
thank you .
as i said , amanda , our elegs .
it has sensors -- sensors -- sensors -- sensors -- sensors -- sensors -- sensors -- sensors -- sensors -- sensors .
his fully sensors sensors in the crutches , the signals that are signale in our onboard-computer , who &apos;s on your back , who &apos;s on your back .
here &apos;s also batteriepackungen , who &apos;s motorantrieb , the motorantrieb , as they &apos;re moving to their hips , they are also making their vorwärts , and very natural .
i was 24 years old , and in bestform , when a monströser purzelbaum while a skiabfahrt während .
in the fraction of a second , i lost each feeling and each movement below my beckens .
not long after a long time , a doctor in my krankenzimmer , and he said , &quot; amanda , you will never go back . &quot;
and that was about 19 years ago .
he &apos;s steel each fünkchen hope from my consciousness .
anpassungsfähige technologies have been ermöglich to go back to to drive again , and even to drive the hands of the hands .
but nothing was invented , that would go back to me , until now .
thank you .
as you can see , we have the technology , we have the platforms to make us to make us and talk to you .
it &apos;s in our hands , and we have the whole potential to change the whole thing to change the lives of future generations -- not only for the soldiers , or for amanda , but for all the rollstuhlfahrer , but for all .
thank you .
at home in new york , i &apos;m chef by the entwicklungsabteilung of a non-profit organization called robin hood .
if i don &apos;t have the poverty , i bekämpfe as a gehilfe of a volunteer löschzug in a volunteer .
now , in our city , in the volunteer , a hochqualifizierte berufsfeuerwehr , you have to be pretty early on the brandstelle to be able to get mitmischen .
i remember my first fire .
i was the second volunteer in the middle of the brandstelle , so i had quite good opportunities .
but it was still a race against other volunteers to reach the verantwortlichen hauptmann , and what we would do to do what our tasks would be .
when i found the hauptmann , he had just had a very serious entertainment with the hausbesitzerin , which is certainly a very serious days of their life .
it was in the middle of the night and they stood in the schlafanzug , and they &apos;re barefoot under a screen in the strömenden , while her house was in flames .
the other volunteer who was just a little bit like me -- let &apos;s call it lex luther -- -- and i was asked to go to the house and to go to the house and save the dog of the hausbesitzerin .
the dog ! i was a chance of envy .
there was a lawyer or a lawyer or vermögensverwalter , who was able to tell the rest of his life , which was able to tell people that he was going to save a living house , just because he was five seconds faster than i was .
well , i was the next .
the hauptmann winkte me .
he said , &quot; well , you must go to the house .
you must go up to the fire , and this woman must get a few shoes . &quot;
i swear .
well , not exactly what i &apos;d like to see , but i went -- the stairs , the flur , the echten , who was the echten , who was so ready to get the löschen , which was pretty ready to get a few shoes .
i know what you &apos;re thinking , but i &apos;m not a hero .
i finally went back to the bottom , where i met my own and the beloved dog .
we put our treasures out to the outside world where , where , not surprising , his much more attention than mine .
some weeks later , the feuerwache feuerwache , got a letter of the hausbesitzerin , where they &apos;re using the tapferen for the tapferen of the house .
one about all about all the time was geschätzte : somebody had a few shoes .
both in my profession , in my profession , in my career , as a volunteer , i &apos;m a zeuge of generosity and kindness in the big scale , but i also see the unconscious of the unconscious .
and you know what i &apos;ve learned ?
they &apos;re all important .
so if i see in this room , and people see a beachtenswerten success or on your way , i want to offer you to mind , you want to offer memory : wait .
they don &apos;t wait for a difference in life , until they &apos;ve got their first million .
if you give something , you give it now .
in a suppenküche , they put a park in the neighborhood , räumen , in the neighborhood , räumen , in neighborhood , in neighborhood , in neighborhood , in neighborhood , in neighborhood , in neighborhood , in neighborhood , in neighborhood , in neighborhood , in neighborhood , in neighborhood , in neighborhood , in the neighborhood , auf , in the neighborhood , nachbarschaft , in the
they &apos;re a mentor .
not every day will give us a chance to save life a human life , but every day , everybody gives us to change one .
so they go ; they &apos;ll save the shoes .
thank you .
bruno guissani : mark mark , come back .
thank you .
i just come from a community , the secret of mankind &apos;s secret .
a place where women are going to do the women &apos;s women , and the game is determined by sex , and the game is determined by the day -- where fun is a serious issue .
and no , it &apos;s not burning or san francisco .
ladies and gentlemen , your blood .
this is the world of wild bonobos in the middle of congo .
bonobos are together with chimpanzees , with chimpanzees , our lives .
that means we have a shared ancestor , a evolutionary grandmother that lived around about six million years ago .
well , chimps are known for their aggressivität .
but unfortunately , we have this aspect of the narrative in the narrative of human evolution .
but bonobos show us the other side of the medal of the medal .
whereas chimpanzees , of great , fear of einflößenden , fear of ermächtigten , die .
that &apos;s what &apos;s really happening because it leads to a very ausgesprochen society in the room of the room .
but unfortunately , bonobos are familiar with the least primates .
they live in the depths of the kongolesischen urwalds , and they are just hard to do it .
congo is a paradox -- a country of atmospheric crop and beauty , but also the heart of the darkness -- the arena of a violent auseinandersetzung who &apos;ve been gefordert for decades , and so many lives are in the first world war .
it doesn &apos;t surprise that these destruction also are survival of the bonobos .
fleischhandel and the decline of the baumbestandes , that you can &apos;t get a stadium with the verbliebenen bonobos , and even there we are not certain to be honest .
and yet , in this country of violence and chaos , you can hear a verborgenes laugh , you know , that the trees are shattered .
who are these related ?
we know them as &quot; love of war , because they have häufigen sex , also bisexuellen sex , with wechselnden partners , and social media companies .
i don &apos;t say that , that &apos;s the answer to all the humanitarian problems -- because life is more than the kama of the kama .
bonobos -- like human beings , love to play their lives .
game doesn &apos;t mean just kinderspiele .
and it &apos;s a game of us , and it &apos;s a fundamental essential for the bindung of relationships and care of tolerance .
and we learn to trust and the rules of the game .
play , in terms of creativity and resilience , and it &apos;s about the most powerful diversity of diversity -- diversity of interactions , diversity , diversity , diversity , diversity , diversity .
and if you look at your game , you see the evolutionary origins of origins , tanzes , tanzes and rituals .
play is the kitt who beieinanderhält us .
now , i don &apos;t know how you play , but i want to show you some unique footage of the wild .
first of a ballspiel , and i don &apos;t think it &apos;s not about fussball .
so here we see a young female and males in a verfolgungsspiel .
look at what they do .
this could be the evolutionary origin of the eiern , &quot; you &apos;re going to put it in the eggs . &quot;
so i think it &apos;s like him to do it , not true .
yeah !
so sexspiele are verbreitet , both at the bonobos as humans .
and this video is really interesting , because it shows up -- and this video is really interesting , because it demonstrates the ideenreichtum , with the ideenreichtum , like the testicles , and also , as the game is both to take both of trust -- while it &apos;s simultaneously ungeheuren .
but the game is a formwandler .
play is a formwandler and it can assume many forms of things , some of whom are ruhiger , phantasievoll , neugierig , maybe to find the other thing again .
and i want to show you that &apos;s fuku , a young female , and they &apos;re playing with water .
i think , as you &apos;re playing , we sometimes play , and we loten loten barriers of our inner and outer worlds .
and it &apos;s this playful curiosity that makes us are doing and interact , and the unexpected elements that we &apos;re creating , are the real value of creativity .
this is just a little vorgeschmack on the glimpses that are telling us in our past and present .
but they also also true a secret for our future , a future where we have to adapt to the brain , in the face of larger creativity , by larger creativity and druch cooperation .
the secret is that the game is the game to this skills .
with other words , play is our anpassungsjoker .
and to adapt to us , we have to adapt to a world world , we need to play .
but we will do the best we do ?
game is not a fool , not silly , not silly , it &apos;s not silly , not silly , it &apos;s not silly , not silly , it &apos;s not silly , not silly , it &apos;s not silly , not silly , it &apos;s not silly , not silly , it &apos;s not silly , not silly , it &apos;s not silly , not silly , it &apos;s
but it &apos;s not essential .
for bonobos and people are equally equally helpful to teeth and claws alone .
so if it &apos;s hardly appropriate , perhaps perhaps the nötigsten .
and so my primatenkameraden , let us describe this gift of evolution and collectively , while we wiederentdecken the kameradschaft and the wonder .
thank you .
i want you to imagine two couples of paare , at the same day , at exactly the exact same moment , every zeugt , a baby . okay .
so two pairs of each paare , each one of a baby .
now i don &apos;t want you to imagine the most important time because if you imagine the whole time , you will not listen to me .
imagine that just one thing you &apos;re doing .
and in this scenario , you imagine that in a case , the sperm one , the sperm a y , which is wearing the x chromosome on the edge .
and in the other case , the sperm of the sperm , the sperm of the x chromosome is to go on the x chromosome .
both both , both of them .
we &apos;ll come back to these guys .
for most of my activities , i have two degrees .
under a hat , i &apos;m going to take a story of the story .
i &apos;m a studied historikerin , and in this case , i study how people interacted with anatomy -- meaning human bodies -- like they were using körperflüssigkeiten , with körperkonzepten , with körperkonzepten , with körperkonzepten .
the other hat i &apos;ve been using at my work is the activist , as i say , as i say , as i say , as an ungeduldige , as the people who are patients of physicians .
in this case , i worked with people who have the körpertypen who have social norms in question .
so for example , i worked with people who are twins , the siamesische twins , two people in a body .
i worked with people with zwergenwuchs -- so people who were smaller than anything .
and very often , i &apos;ve worked with intersexuellen people , whose gender atypisch -- so people who don &apos;t have the average male or female körpertypen .
and as a general term , we can use the word for the word .
intersexualität comes in many different forms .
i &apos;ll give you just a few examples of the kinds of types of geschlechtsvarianten that are not the male or female standard .
in a case , you might have someone with a xy chromosomenbasis , and the sry gene of y gene , the protogonaden that we &apos;ve all had fötalen , we &apos;ve all been going to go .
and so the testicles is testosterone .
but because of that character that &apos;s missing the receptors to recognize the testosterone , not to be the testosterone of testosterone .
and that &apos;s what we call androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so much testosterone , but not reaction .
when the body evolved , the body is evolving more than the typical female female .
if the child born born , she looks like a girl .
she &apos;s a girl . she &apos;s going to be a girl .
but it takes until they get to the puberty and grow their breasts and develop their breasts , but they don &apos;t get your natural stuff to somebody &apos;s point that there &apos;s something different .
and they make a bunch of tests and finding them that they &apos;re instead of eierstöcken and uterus , in reality , and they &apos;re going to have a y chromosome .
and it &apos;s important to understand that you could actually hold these person for the brilliance , but they &apos;re not really .
women , like men , in our bodies , you have called the adrenalindrüsen .
they are in the back part of our body .
and the nebennieren , androgene , which are the virilisierende hormones .
most of the women , as i believe -- i don &apos;t know a typical woman -- i don &apos;t know my real chromosomenaufbau , but i think i probably think , probably , most women are actually going to speak at the androgene .
we produce androgen and we respond to androgene .
the consequence is that somebody has been a brain that the more androgenen than a woman who was born with testicles .
so , gender is really complicated ; intersexuelle are not only in the middle of the spectrum of gender -- in a certain degree , you can be about the whole bandwidth of bandwidth , you can be about all bandwidth , you can be about all bandwidth , you can be about all bandwidth ; you can be about the whole bandwidth of bandwidth , you can be about
another example , a couple of years ago , i got the call of a 19 man , and he had been born when young tv was born , he had a friend , he had murdered with his girlfriend , lived in his girlfriend , and he had found that he had found that he had eierstöcke .
he had a very creative form of a angeborenen .
he &apos;s chromosome , and in the womb , his nebennieren , were so much active that they &apos;re essentially a male hormonumgebung .
and as an consequence of the time , his genitalien male , his brain was to be exposed to the typischeren male male .
and when he was born , he saw a boy -- nobody was something .
and it wasn &apos;t until he was 19 when he was 19 , he got enough medical problems , because he was innerlich , because he was saying that the doctors found out that he was in the internal female female .
okay , just a single example for a variant of intersexualität .
some people with xx chromosomes , something that is called the ovotestis , which is eierstockgewebe by hodengewebe umhüllt .
we don &apos;t know why that happens .
so gender can occur in many different varieties .
the reason why children with this kind of body -- it &apos;s zwergenwuchs , or siamesische , it &apos;s intersexuell , it &apos;s intersexuell -- from surgeons to norm , it &apos;s not because this is for their physical health .
in many cases , these people are completely healthy .
the reason why they often have often been different from the many of these are eingriffe of the eingriffe of the world &apos;s social categories .
typically is typically that our system is to be a particular anatomical , that a certain amount of anatomische , with a certain identity .
so we have the concept that a female identity is called a female identity ; they &apos;re called a black person , a very african anatomy , to have a very african anatomy in terms of the history of the story .
so we have this terribly idea of this idea .
and if we &apos;re faced with a body that &apos;s actually actually a very different to us , is very different , and confused us into that term .
so we have a lot of different ideas about individualismus ideas .
and our nation is really based on a very romantic concept of individualismus .
now , you can imagine how the children are born when children are born in a body , the two people in a body , the two people in a body , the two people in a body , the two people in a body , the two people in a body , the two people in a body , the two people in a body , the two people
where i had experienced the last time , the most famous aufregung , was die läuferin semenya semenya letztes letztes , whose gender were in berlin who was asked by the leichatlethik bombings in berlin .
and many journalists , i think of the question of the question , &quot; what test you do , which is , if you &apos;re a verrät , whether or male &apos;s male female female or male . &quot;
and i had to explain the journalists that it doesn &apos;t have the test .
we now know that gender is enough that we have to admit that nature is not going to be saying , and we &apos;re going to be able to get the nature of male and female and intersexuell and weiblich and intersexuell and intersexuell ; we are the trennlinie of the trennlinie .
so we have a situation where the further further , the further that we have to have to have to have the more of our science , we have to have the kategorien of the anatomische categories , which is very simple , which are very simple , and they are much more unschärfer than we have .
and that &apos;s not only in terms of gender .
it &apos;s also increasing by race , which has been a lot more complicated than our terminologie approved .
in our textbooks , we &apos;re going to put in all kinds of unbequemen areas .
so we &apos;re going to take for example , for example , we &apos;re at least 95 percent of our dna with chimpanzees .
what shall we start with the fact that we &apos;re just going to distinguish us from a few nukleotide different sources ?
while we continue to continue our science , we &apos;re going to move forward to our science , we &apos;re going to get increasingly to anerkennen where we have to recognize that the simplistischen categories that we had probably had .
we see that in all sorts of areas of the human life .
one of the areas where we see that in our current culture in our current today , in our current states , are the struggle over the beginning and the end of life .
we have hard talks about what point to the human being , so that he &apos;s a different right to live than the world &apos;s life .
we have a very difficult wish today -- perhaps not as an public , perhaps , perhaps , in medicine -- about the question of when somebody dead .
our ancestors had never been struggling to fight when somebody was dead .
they have someone who was a feather , and if they moved to nose , and if they &apos;re moving , they haven &apos;t buried .
if you &apos;re not moved to that , you &apos;ve got them buried .
but today we are in a situation where we take people to entnehmen organs and they want to engage other people .
and as a consequence , we &apos;re at the struggle with the struggle with the very difficult question , when someone is dead , and that gives us a really hard position in which we don &apos;t have any simple categories like this .
now , you might assume that the whole data is really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really happy .
i &apos;m a political progressiv , i verteidige people with unusual bodies , but i have to say , it &apos;s nervous .
to understand that these categories are really much more insecure than we thought , makes me up .
and it makes me down to the democracy of the city of the ages .
so to tell you about this anspannung , i have to first have to first i first , i have to first have a big fan of the founding .
i know they were rassisiten , i know they were sexisten , but they were great .
i think they were so tapfer and strong , and so radical , in which they were doing all the years that i &apos;ve been looking at all the schmalzige das 1776 1776 , and it &apos;s not because of music that &apos;s absolutely to forget .
it &apos;s because of what &apos;s going on with the gründungsvätern .
the founding was from my view of the view of the sicht activists , and therefore .
what she was called zurückwiesen , and they &apos;re going to go through another , and it was a different , and it was beautiful and beautiful for us .
as you all remember , we take our founding into the concept of monarchy , and the monarchy in the bottom of the monarchy is actually on a very controlled concept of anatomy .
the ruler of the ancient world didn &apos;t have a concept based on the dna , but they had a concept of the geburtsrechts .
they had a concept of tens of thousands of resources .
they were the notion that people who have political power , these political power , that politische , because of the vererbten bombings , because of the vererbten of the grandfather , and so on .
the founding meadows would take this idea back and forth through a new anatomisches concept , and this concept said that all people were built .
they nivellierten that , and decided that the anatomisch , the similarities of the things that are not the differences , not the differences . and that was very radical .
now , they made that part because they were part of a aufklärerischen system in which two things were in common .
democracy grew up , but at the same time , the science grew .
if you look at the story of the founding space , that many of you were very interested in science , and they were interested in a concept of a naturalistischen world .
they went away from explanations , and meadows things like a übernatürliches concept , back where the transmission is on a very vagen konzepts of geburtsrecht .
they moved to a naturalistischen concept .
and if you look at the declaration of the declaration , you &apos;re talking about nature and the god of nature .
they don &apos;t talk about god and nature .
they &apos;re talking about the power of nature to tell us who we are .
and as part of it , they were actually going to show us a concept of anatomischen goods .
and so they really really wonderful , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , the future .
they didn &apos;t think about it , but what they did for us was great .
so what happened next ?
for example , the konzept of the founding anstrebten , the concept of the founding , which says , &quot; that &apos;s the gemeinsamkeit of the anatomische , and said , &quot; that &apos;s what we have a uterus and eierstöcke have a significant statement that we should have the wahlrecht , that &apos;s right to the right , and they have to be the right , etc . ,
and women successfully erfolgreich .
next , the successful civil rights , where we humans saw people like sojourner truth , who are about talking about it , &quot; am i not a woman ? &quot;
we find men in the marschierenden reihen of the bürgerechtsbewegung , who say , &quot; i &apos;m a man . &quot;
again , people who are hautfarbe , which focuses on the anatomical gemeinsamkeiten of anatomischen gemeinsamkeiten , again , successfully .
we see the same thing in the behindertenrechtsbewegung .
of course , the problem that we &apos;re starting to look at the commonalities of the way we &apos;re starting to ask for question why we &apos;re generating certain arguments .
now , i &apos;m going to , i want to try to highlight a particular process , fresh , anatomisch , in our culture .
i want to take a fish like a fish like a man .
i don &apos;t want to say that we should take away from the anatomy .
i don &apos;t want to say that the 5-jährige is right to give your informed consent or to marry .
so there are some anatomic trennungen that make sense of me , and we think , i think , keep .
but the challenge is to try to try to try to figure out what it are and why we keep them doing it .
so let &apos;s come back to these two creatures that are worden to the beginning of the talk .
we have two creatures , both two of the middle 1979 at the same day .
so we imagine that one of you , maria , three months , so she was born at the one of the juni of june .
in the other hand , in the other hand , it &apos;s born on the geburtstermin , so he &apos;s born at the one march of 1980 , so he &apos;s born on march of 1980 , so he &apos;s born on march of 1980 , so he &apos;s born on a march of 1980 , so he &apos;s born on a march of 1980 , so he &apos;s born
only because of the fact that maria 3 verfrüht was born , they were born , and they had all kinds of rights in the right of the right of the right of the right to have the right to have sex , right to choose the right .
heinrich has to wait for all this , not because he actually has another biological age , except for the birth of its birth .
we find other merkwürdigkeiten of what their rights are .
and i said , because you &apos;re saying that he &apos;s not saying the male -- although i didn &apos;t tell you that he &apos;s the männlich -- because you &apos;re going to be able to be able to get to the male , he can &apos;t make it up .
maria , not in all the states , can &apos;t be in all states , the same thing , the heinrich in all states , and that &apos;s right to marry .
heinrich can marry a woman , but maria can only be married in a few states .
so we have these dauerhaften categories that are in many ways that are good and questionable .
and for me , the question is : what will we do to do that , because we &apos;re going to do that in the realm of the anatomy that we have to admit that a democracy is that a democracy that could be prepared for anatomy , could be auseinanderfallen ?
i don &apos;t want to give science , but at the same time , it &apos;s sometimes that it &apos;s like science .
so where do we go ?
it seems like that , as a result , our culture of a pragmatic attitude , &quot; well , we need to pull them somewhere , so we pull them somewhere somewhere . &quot;
but a lot of people are turning into a very strange position .
so for example , for example , has decided to marry a man who means you don &apos;t have y chromosome , and a woman means that you have a y chromosome .
now in practice , people are not going to be tested in their minds .
but it &apos;s also very bizarre , because of the story i told you about the androgenrezeptor-defekt .
if we look at one of the founding modern democracy , dr. martin luther king , he offers us in his &quot; i have a dream . &quot;
he says , we should not ask people to &quot; the skin , but after the property of your character , and it &apos;s about anatomy .
and i want to say , &quot; yes , that sounds like a good idea . &quot;
but how do you do that in practice ?
how do you get people to their charaktereigenschaften ?
i also want to suggest that i &apos;m not sure that i &apos;m not sure that i should be able to get the rights in terms of humans , because i &apos;m saying that i &apos;ve got to know a series of golden retriever who probably tend to be more likely to make more people than some people who know .
i want to say that i &apos;m probably going to know some of the bright labradorhunde , who are fähiger , intelligentere , and reifere , and in a variety of different ways , to make their sexual relationships to make their sexual relationships as some of the sexual relationships as some of the 40-jährige relationships that i know .
so how shall we go to the question of the features of the character ?
it &apos;s a really hard .
and part of me asks what if the contents of a personality would be something that would be in the future -- using a few days ?
do we want to go to this direction ?
i &apos;m not sure where we go .
what i know is that it really seems really important to think about the idea that the united states is to make the united states about questions about democracy .
in our endeavor , we have done our thing right , and i think we would do our thing in the future .
we don &apos;t have the situation , like , in iran , where it &apos;s a man who &apos;s going to be hingezogen , with the death of death , with the death of death , it &apos;s ready to be a geschlechtsumwandlung , which he can stay alive .
in the way that these species are not in our way .
i &apos;m happy to say that we don &apos;t have these states -- a surgeon with a few years ago , which was a few years ago , who had a few years ago to make them a name .
but when i was talking to him , and he asked him , and he was hoch , who was highly riskante surgeries -- his response to its own country , that children are very bad , and therefore he had to do it .
i said , &quot; well , you &apos;ve got political growth in which instead of trusting a surgery ? &quot;
the united states is an incredible opportunity to be an incredible opportunity to allow people to be , without having to change the way to the nation .
so i think we need to be satisfied .
well , just to finish , i want to notice that i &apos;ve talked about the fathers .
and i want to think about the possibilities of how democracy might look like , or , if we could have more moms .
and i want to say something that &apos;s a feminist , and i think there may be different ways that the different kinds of things that are different from different kinds of anatomy , insbesonders , when people make a gruppendenken .
for years , because i was interested in intersexualität , i also interested in research for research in the area .
and one of the things i really thought is really interesting about men and women in ways that they think and in the world .
what we &apos;ve experienced from kulturübergreifenden studies , that women , in the average -- not any of the average , but in the average -- tend to be the complex social relationships and the purposes of people who are in the group , very much attention .
and so if we think about it , we have a interesting situation .
thirty-six years ago , when i made a graduate student , i asked me , my interest in my interest , who was my interest to feminismus , i think , as i said , it &apos;s a really hard question .
he said , &quot; tell me what at the feminism female . &quot;
and i thought , &quot; well , that &apos;s the dumbest question i &apos;ve ever heard .
in the feminism , it &apos;s about the stereotypes of gender , so that &apos;s not at the end of the age female .
but the more i thought about his question , to think about that , i thought there might be something like that there might be a little bit more weibliches in the canopy .
that &apos;s what should be , it could be something , in the average , the female brains of männlichen , which is different from male , which makes us aufmerksamer for the hochkomplexe social relationships , and to worrying the schutzbedürftige for the schutzbedürftige .
so the founding problem , the founding of the state of the state , as individuals , it could be , as we could see , if we can be able to make more mothers in this concept , we &apos;re more a concept of bekämmen , not only how to do it .
and maybe it &apos;s this , where we &apos;re going to go to the future , if we &apos;re going to go to the future , if we &apos;re going to be able to think about the individual körper , and more about the individual bodies , and more about the way to think about relationships .
so that if we try to make a more effective connection , we &apos;re going to think about what we can do for each other .
thank you .
i &apos;m a jessi , and this is my suitcase .
but before i &apos;m showing you what i &apos;ve got to do is i &apos;m going to make a very public domain , and that &apos;s obsessed with outfits .
i love to give each chance to find a different farbenfrohes , to find a rather complex outfit , and to fotografieren , and then bloggen .
but i don &apos;t buy anything new .
i get rid of my clothes in my clothes , and in second-hand-shops .
ooh , thank you .
second-hand-shopping allows me to give me the impact of my garderobe on the environment and also the geldbörse .
i meet all kinds of amazing people ; my dollars for a good purpose ; i see pretty unique ; and it &apos;s what makes you to do my personal insights .
i mean , what am i going to find today ?
will it have my height ?
will i like the color ?
it will cost less than 20 dollars ?
if all the answers are loud , i feel like i &apos;ve been asking .
i come back to my suitcase , and tell you what i &apos;ve been doing for this exciting week here at ted .
i mean , what does somebody mean with so many outfits ?
so i &apos;m going to show you what i brought .
i brought seven couple of slides , and that &apos;s all .
so for example , for a week , everything i did in my suitcase .
i realized that i wanted to go all the other , which i might want to get to wear , if i was only doing it .
and since you don &apos;t heard from me as the woman who &apos;s here at ted -- means that i found a couple of things .
and i would like to show you my outfits for this week .
sounds that good ?
while i do that , i &apos;ll also give you some of the lessons that i believe , or not , from these abenteuern , nothing new .
let &apos;s start with sunday .
i call this the temple tiger .
you don &apos;t have to spend a lot of money to make great .
you can almost always look at less than 50 dollars .
this whole outfit , including the clock , including me , and it was the most expensive piece that i carried in this week .
monday : color is something more powerful .
it &apos;s almost impossible to be bad , if you &apos;re wearing hellrote pants .
if you &apos;re happy , you get other people to get other people .
tuesday : anpassung will be totally überbewertet .
i &apos;ve spent a lot of time my life with my life , i &apos;m going to be myself , and i &apos;m going to adapt to the same time .
just simply you are who you are .
if you get to the right people , they won &apos;t understand it , they &apos;ll appreciate it .
wednesday : hug you for your inner child .
sometimes i say , i &apos;ve got to say , i &apos;ve taken out , as i can see , i &apos;ll be able to remember them .
i &apos;d like to say , &quot; thank you . &quot;
thursday : the key is the key .
if you think you &apos;re looking at something good , it &apos;s almost certain .
and if you think they &apos;re not going to look good , you probably have a right .
i grew up with a mother who taught me that day for day .
but when i was only 30 , i really understood what that means .
and i &apos;m going to make it a quick trip for you .
if you believe that you &apos;re inside and a wonderful person , there &apos;s nothing to do not be able to wear what they can &apos;t .
so there &apos;s no excuse for somebody here in this audience .
we should be able to do anything , everything we want .
thank you .
friday : a universal truth -- five words : golden pailleten , goldene .
and finally , saturday , a very unique , unique style , is a great way to tell you about a story , without saying a word .
it was always been always wondered and over again when i was in this week , just because i had a lot of conversation . and i had great conversations .
obviously , it &apos;s not all of that in my brain .
so before i go to brooklyn , i &apos;m going to go to the whole again .
because the lesson i &apos;m trying to learn from this week is that it &apos;s okay to go .
i don &apos;t have to get this stuff , because the next thing is , in the corner , it &apos;s always going to be a different kind of crazy , farbenfrohes , das , that &apos;s just a little bit like i have a little love in heart and search .
thank you very much .
thank you .
good afternoon , all together .
i have something here i want to show you .
think of this as a bildpunkt , as a flying bildpunkt .
that &apos;s what we call our lab , wahrnehmbares design .
let me tell you a little bit about it .
now if you take this picture -- i &apos;m a little bit of italians , and everybody in italy in italy with this picture in italy , but why i &apos;m going to show you this in the formula , which was something very interesting .
so a long time ago , it was so that if you wanted to win a formula of a race , then they took their budget and their money on a good car and a good car .
and if the car car and driver &apos;s good enough , they won the races .
now , you want to win a race , and you have a race to win , and you know something like this -- something that &apos;s in real überwacht , and some of the car that &apos;s going to be found out of the system , and then they use information to send and make things float and make things float into real time .
this would be , in ingenieurteams , a echtzeit-kontrollsystem call .
and basically , it &apos;s a system that &apos;s made out of two parts -- a spürenden part of a reagierendenteil .
what &apos;s interesting is , what &apos;s interesting is , is the echtzeit-kontrollsysteme start to our lives .
our cities were facilitated in the last few years , just with networks and electronics .
they become a computer in the free .
and as a computer in free , they start to react to other ways , they &apos;re going to be perceived and driven .
if we &apos;re städte cities , it &apos;s actually a big thing .
by the way , i want to mention that cities are only two percent of the earth , but 50 percent of the world &apos;s population are there .
they are 75 percent of the energiekonsums -- that &apos;s going to 80 percent of co2 emissions .
so if we do something with the cities , it &apos;s a big thing .
so over the cities , pulling all this sense , and it &apos;s a sense of the everyday life .
this is from a exhibition that &apos;s paola antonelli for moma later , in the year , during the summer .
it &apos;s called &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; to me . &quot;
well , all of our objects , our environment , let &apos;s start to speak back .
in a certain sense , it &apos;s almost as if any atom there is going to be a sensor , a sensor and a antreiber .
and it changes radically the interaction that we have people to have with our environment .
it &apos;s almost like the old dream of michelangelo , from michelangelo to michelangelo ...
you know , as a michelangelo , as a michelangelo that he took the moses , which he took on the end of the hammer , and it &apos;s still a little bit of the spot -- and said , &quot; perché non ? why don &apos;t you get ? &quot;
now today , we start to answer our environment to the very first time to respond us .
i &apos;m going to show you some examples -- again , with the idea of our environment and to .
let &apos;s start with the sense .
now the first project i want to introduce you to you is one of the first of our labs .
it was formed in italy in italy .
and what we &apos;ve done was , was actually a new kind of network that was used to the world , which is a mobiltelefonnetz -- and anonyme and aggregierte information from this network that &apos;s going to be collected by the betreiber of the betreiber , to understand how the city works .
the summer was a happy summer -- 2006 .
it was the fußball-weltmeisterschaft won the fußball-weltmeisterschaft .
some of you will remember , it was a italy for france , and then the end of the ende , the kopfstoß .
and finally , italy has ended up at the end of the end .
now you see what happens to what happened on this day , only passively , just at the network that &apos;s happening in network .
here &apos;s the city .
you see in the middle of the middle , the fluß tiber .
on the morning , front of the game .
you see the timeline up .
and then , in the early afternoon , people here and there , and there &apos;s the calls , and move .
the game begins -- silence .
france makes a gate . italy makes a gate .
halbzeit , people make a short call , go to toilets .
second halbzeit . the normal spielzeit .
first one , second .
zidane , in a moment of the kopfstoß .
italy wins . yeah .
now , in this night , went to the center .
they saw the big rash .
the next day , went to the center to make the siegerteam and the prime minister .
and then went down to all .
you see the picture of the space , where we have been for the beginning , for the beginning , people to celebrate -- to have a big party , and they see the blood at the end of the day .
now , that &apos;s just one example of how we can feel the city , in a way , and how we couldn &apos;t do it in a few years ago .
another example , another example of this : here &apos;s not about people , but to use things that we use and consume .
now , we know everything we are coming about our stuff .
this is a map that show you all the chips , which is made a mac of the way that they came together .
but we just know little about where things go .
so we actually designed a few small markers in order to track the garbage in the system .
so we have a number of volunteers who have a bunch of volunteers who have helped us a year ago , in seattle , who are dinge things that they were wegwarfen -- different kinds of things you can see -- things that they were going to be .
then we have the small chips , the small brands , on the garbage and to follow it .
here are the results that we &apos;ve just got .
by seattle -- of seattle ...
after a week .
so with this information , we realized that there &apos;s a lot of ineffizienzen in the system .
we can do the same things that &apos;s doing less energy .
the data was not available .
but that &apos;s what &apos;s happening a lot of unnützer transporte and complicated things .
but the other thing is that we believe that if we see every day , that the cup that we &apos;re talking about , not just to go away , it &apos;s still somewhere on the planet .
and the plastic that we still stay every day .
and if we show that people , we can get a behavior .
so that &apos;s the reason for this project .
my colleague , assaf , assaf biderman , could give you a lot more about the sense of the sense , and the many other wonderful things you can do with you , but i want to talk to the second part of the world , and that &apos;s the most important of our environmental environment .
and the first project is something that we &apos;ve made a few years ago in zaragoza , spain .
it started with a question of the bürgermeisters who came to us , and said that spain and südeuropa , and they have a beautiful tradition , in public places , in public places as part of the architecture .
and the question was : how could you reconcile technology , new technology ?
and one of the ideas that were on in a arbeitskreis ermittelt , and they were asking these tubes , and they &apos;re using , magnetventile , who are opening up and close .
they &apos;re doing so what a wasservorhang with bildpunkten water .
if these bildpunkte can go , you can write it , you can pattern , images , text ads .
and you can get to him , and he &apos;s open to you , to let them see them , how you can see this picture .
well , we &apos;ve introduced the mayor .
it &apos;s got him very well .
and we got to design the mission to design the expo of the expo .
we called it the digital water .
the whole building was made out of water .
there &apos;s no doors or windows , but if you &apos;re changing it , it will open up and you &apos;re going to go .
the rooftop was covered with water .
and if it &apos;s windy , if you want to reduce the syringes , you can actually take the roof .
or you could end up the building , and you can see the whole architecture , like in this case , you know , if you &apos;re the roof , you get images of people who were there , and they say , &quot; you have the building . &quot;
no , they didn &apos;t call the building , it &apos;s just that architecture almost almost goes away .
here you see , like this building .
you see the person who asks what happens in inside .
and here you see me when i was trying to test the sensors that &apos;s opened the water , not getting wet .
now , i should tell you what a night happened when all the sensors stopped .
but actually , it was a lot of fun for this night .
all children came from the building , because the way they were playing with the building .
not a building , that &apos;s not a building that would open to you , but a building , which still had a building and holes in water , you had to get to get a ride .
and that was , for us , very exciting , because as architects , engineers , as designers , we always think how people are using the things that we use .
but reality is always unpredictable .
and this is the nice thing to create things that are used by the people and interact with the people .
here &apos;s a picture of the building with the physical bildpunkten , the bildpunkten of water and the projections on it .
and this is what we &apos;ve taught us about this project , which i &apos;ll show you now .
imagine that these bildpunkte could actually start to fly .
imagine , you could take little hubschrauber , and each of you with a little bildpunkt with a little bildpunkt light -- almost like a cloud that can move through the space .
here &apos;s the video .
imagine a helicopter like the one you &apos;ve seen before , the other way , totally totally totally .
you can have these cloud .
you can have a kind of flexiblen screen or ad , like this -- a gleichmäßige formation in two dimensions .
or , for example , in three dimensions , which is changing , the light , not the position of the bildpunkte .
they can play with different kinds of different ways .
imagine , imagine in a different way or something , or something , in different auflösungen .
but then it could be a 3d 3d cloud of bildpunkten , and they can go to them and move through them , and you can see them from many , many directions .
here you see a real flyfire-steuerung , the herabsinkt around how previously had been going to form a gleichmäßiges pit .
if you turn the lights , it looks like this . so how we &apos;ve seen it before .
imagine that each individual is controlled .
it could have a single bildpunkt of a impulse who comes from people , from the movements of people or anything .
so i want to show you something here .
we worked with roberto bolle , one of the most powerful balletttänzer of our time -- the étoile on the metropolitan theater , and the scala in milan -- we have a movement in 3d 3d to use it as a impulse for the flyfire .
here you see dancing dancing .
on the left , you see the bildpunkte , the different eingefangenen .
it &apos;s simultaneously a echtzeit-3d-scan and a bewegungsaufnahme .
so that they can feel the whole movement .
you can do that all the time .
but then , if we have all of them all the time , they can play with them and play color and play .
that we want to use as a tool for the flyfire .
i want to show you the latest project we &apos;re working on .
it &apos;s something that we &apos;re working for the olympics in london .
it &apos;s called the cloud -- the cloud .
and the idea is , imagine that we &apos;re going to do that , and we &apos;re going to change the people with something and change the environment -- almost like us , wolkenbewegung , as you move a scheunentor , but with a cloud .
imagine that everybody can give a little donation for a bildpunkt .
i think that the remarkable of the great last year , the last decades , we &apos;re going to be from a digital world .
this has all disappeared , knowledge , and it makes it through the internet .
now today , we can start the first time -- and the campaign that showed that -- can we move from the digital world , from the digital world , from the netzwerke of the world &apos;s largest world of the physical world .
that can be in our case , that we use it to design and create a symbol .
that &apos;s what &apos;s built in the city .
but tomorrow , it can come to us to think about the next challenges -- think of the climate change or co2 emissions -- how can we move from the digital world .
so the idea is that we actually actually engage people to engage with them , where they do things together .
the cloud is again a cloud of bildpunkten , in the same way a cloud cloud is a cloud of a cloud .
and these particles are water , while our cloud is a cloud from bildpunkten .
it &apos;s a physical shapes in london , but with bildpunkten covered .
you can move inside and different kinds of experiences .
you can actually look at it from the bottom , which is the most important moments of 2012 2012 and making it as a kind of connection to community .
so both the physical cloud in the sky and something you can go to the top of the way , like the new berggipfel .
they can move .
and a kind of digital leuchtturm in the night -- but as a allerwichtigstes , a new kind of experience for everybody who want to go to the top .
thank you .
as an artist , i think , is very important .
by my work , i &apos;m going to express that people are not separate from nature and that everything is connected to each other .
the first time i was 10 years ago , in antarctica , where i saw my first eisberge .
the hypothetical awe .
my heart was to me , i was trying to figure out , as i was trying to figure out what i was .
the calving eisberge around me , 60 feet from the water , and i was only wonder that that was a snowflake on another other side , year to year .
and they &apos;re born as a kalb of a glacier or by indem .
every iceberg has its own individual personality .
they interact with the eindeutige , with your environment and their experience .
some of the data is focused and listened to the bitter end , while others don &apos;t aushalten it , and in a very compelling dramatic social field .
if you look at a iceberg , you think they &apos;re very easily , and they &apos;re just going to be , and just as we see humans .
but the truth is far away .
while a iceberg is schmilzt , i atme his vorzeitliche atmosphere .
during the iceberg of the iceberg , he releases the mineralstoffreiches drinking water , which is a lot of forms of forms .
i go to my photographs that &apos;s so much that i would do as i would do portraits of my ancestors , in consciousness that they are in these individual moments of these wise , and never exist .
it &apos;s not death when you melt ; it &apos;s not a end , but a fortführung of your life &apos;s life along the life .
part of the ice in the eisbergen i &apos;m very young -- a thousand years old .
and part of the ice is more than 100,000 years old .
the last pictures i &apos;d like to show you is a iceberg i &apos;ve got in kekertsuatsiak in grönland .
so rarely do you actually get a lot of the same iceberg .
here you see it .
on the left side , you see a little boat .
this is about five feet long .
please , you pay attention to the form of the iceberg , and where he &apos;s in the wasserlinie .
you can see here , he begins to roll , and the boat has to move to the other side , who &apos;s there .
that &apos;s the average size of a grönland-eisbergs .
he was about 120 feet from the water , or 40 feet .
and this video is in real time .
and just like , you &apos;ll show you the iceberg one side of his personality .
thank you .
my life is really extraordinarily to work through the work of a few amazing projects .
but in the coolest the coolest , i &apos;ve ever worked with this guy .
his name is tempt .
tempt was one of the leading graffitikünstler of the 1980s .
then , one day , he came from walking back and said , &quot; paps , my legs kribbeln . &quot;
and that was the outbreak of the size of the .
tempt is completely paralyzed today .
he can only use its eyes .
i was faced with him .
i have a company that design design and animation , so inevitably , inevitably a complex part of what we &apos;re looking at the car .
so we decided to have tony , tony -- tempt -- and his thing .
i met with his father and his brother and said , &quot; we will give you this money to you , you will give you money , you will give you money , you will give you money .
what do you do with it ? &quot;
and his brother said , &quot; i want to talk to tony .
i just want to just come back and said , &quot; wait for him , i &apos;ve seen , i &apos;ve seen stephen hawking -- can &apos;t all of all the paralyzed people to communicate this devices ? &quot;
and he said , &quot; no , only if you &apos;ve heard about the higher and a remarkable insurance , you can really do that .
normal people are not accessible . &quot;
and i said , &quot; how does your name you ? &quot;
anybody gesehen the film and taucherglocke &quot; ?
so they communicate -- so your fingers along .
i staunte , &quot; very archaisch , how can it be ? &quot;
so i came to the need to do with the need , just a check , and i asked a check out of the head of what i had was the same idea of how i should .
i was preparing to me , and i think he &apos;s his brother and his father -- my proposal is , &quot; tony , my proposal is , &quot; tony , you know , you know , we &apos;ll get a device , and we &apos;ll find a way to make his art .
because it &apos;s a farce that someone who &apos;s still wearing , it cannot communicate . &quot;
so i was talking about a few months later , a conference .
i met these guys from grl , and they have a technology that allows you to do a light on each surface , and then you can just draw a light on a laserpointer surface , and then you just to draw the negative surface .
so they pull up and make them make kunstinstallationen like this .
they say that all things that are there up there , there &apos;s a life cycle .
it starts with the throughput , the schimpfwörter , the bush-verleumdungen , and then the final people are actually making art .
but there was always a life in their pockets .
so i went home and she was talking to my wife , and we said , &quot; well , let &apos;s say , &quot; well , let &apos;s say , &quot; well , let &apos;s say , &quot; well , let &apos;s find out that one way to control , and then we should find a way to make a laser , so that it would be more awesome .
that was the advent of the journey .
and about two years later , about a year later , a lot of organization and a lot of things , and i &apos;ve done a lot of things , we &apos;ve reached some stuff .
first , we have the insurance to türen the doors , and actually get a device to communicate with the apparat , with the stephen -- a stephen hawking-maschine .
that was incredible .
and he &apos;s really extremely funny -- i call it yoda , because you talk to him , or you &apos;re going to get a email , and you &apos;re like , &quot; i &apos;m so unwürdig , this guy &apos;s incredible . &quot;
we also have seven bars of the world of all over the world -- literally , literally , all the way of all the world -- to us home .
my wife , my kids , my kids , and i &apos;ve taken into the garage , and these hackers and programmers and anarchisten and anarchisten .
many of our friends thought that we were beautiful to do that , and that we &apos;re zurückkämen and that we &apos;re zurückkämen and all the images of the walls , graffitis gewichen .
but for about two weeks , we went to strandpromenade , we went to the strandpromenade in venice , my children were also , my dog , and we created this .
it &apos;s called eyewriter , and you can see the description .
this is a cheap sonnenbrille that we bought on the strandpromenade of venice , something kupferdraht and some stuff from the hardware and the elektronikhandel .
we took a ps3-kamera , they have auseinandergebaut , they have a led-licht , and we have a device that &apos;s available -- you can build it , we can provide the code for free , the software , you can provide the software to free free .
so we have a device that &apos;s completely devoid of limitations .
no insurance can be querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , querstellen ,
no hospital , too .
every paralyzed can actually communicate with his eyes or draw .
thank you .
thank you very much , that was incredible .
so at the end of two weeks , we went back to the tempts room .
i love this picture , because it &apos;s the room from somebody else , and that &apos;s his room .
there &apos;s all this one of these rummel of the great unveiling of the great revelation .
and after about one year , two weeks , nudelparties , nudelparties , nudelparties , nudelparties , tony , tony , tony , for seven years .
and this is a slow picture , because this is his life , and he looks about his life .
we have the bed , so he can see it out .
we &apos;ve got a tedster to a wall of the parkplatztes of the hospital .
and he was starting to know , for the first time , in the beisein of his family and friends -- and you can only imagine what a feeling was on the parking .
but we also had to also have even in the parking lot in the parking lot , so we felt as a part of the sprüher-szene .
and at the end , he would end up with a email with the final content : &quot; for the first time , i &apos;ve got something about seven years .
i feel that i was under water , and finally , it &apos;s got up to the bottom and my head to my head , so i can breathe . &quot;
isn &apos;t it really mind-blowing ?
that &apos;s sort of like our kampfschrei .
that &apos;s what keeps us with the craft and we keep going on .
and we have to make a lot of that device .
it &apos;s a amazing device , but it &apos;s a zaubertafel .
and someone who has a kind of solches potential , so much more .
so we are , so we &apos;re looking at how you make it better , faster and stronger .
since this time we have all kinds of appreciation .
we have won a few awards .
remember , it &apos;s free , none of us .
it &apos;s all comes from our own pockets .
so the awards were , &quot; oh , that &apos;s fantastic . &quot;
armstrong twitterte : and then , in december , in december , we &apos;ve been honored to the world &apos;s default geehrt , which was truly class .
the coolste of this is -- and that includes the whole circle -- that it &apos;s going to be the april of the geffen , beim moca , a show of los angeles , &quot; which is called &quot; the &quot; kind of the streets . &quot;
and there will be so much the hardest of the straßenkunstszene of the straßenkunstszene of the straßenkunstszene of the straßenkunstszene -- banksy , shepard , shepard , caws -- all these guys will be there .
tempt is part of the show , which is pretty irritating .
so basically , when you &apos;re going to go , you know , if you see something , it &apos;s impossible , then it can be done .
everything in this room was impossible -- this stage , this one , this microphone , this microphone -- everything was impossible .
do you do it -- you all come here .
i &apos;m not a programmer and i never had a little bit with augenerfassungstechnologie , but i just did something about the amazing thing and i was surrounded by amazing people so that we could put something together in the legs .
and that question should be wondering , and that &apos;s where every single day , on every single day , which is going to be something that &apos;s going to be done , when i &apos;m going to go ? and if i don &apos;t , i think ?
thank you .
so i write for children , and probably probably american of the most amazing of the most often .
and i &apos;m saying the people that i don &apos;t want to come to a scientist .
you can have a farmer , or in leather , but no one ever had ever skied .
today i want to tell you from the other and the next .
well , a epiphany is a yemeni for a sense of something that you &apos;re going to be dropped somewhere .
you go to block and take it as a revelation .
this is a painting of a circle .
one of my friends did it -- richard bollingbroke .
it &apos;s the kind of complicated circle of what i want to tell you today .
my circle started in the &apos; 60s , in the &apos; 60s , ohio , where i was the klassenschwuchtel .
i was the one who was the one week in the jungentoilette green and blue and blue was beaten up until a teacher .
they saved my life by using the toilet in the lehrerzimmer .
it did , they did , they did screw it , they did , they did , heimlich , heimlich .
it did three years for it for three years for it for three years for it for three years .
and i had to go away from the city .
i had a thumbs , i had a daumen , and it was called 85 in california -- i found a lover -- and then i found it in &apos; 80s , i found it was important to aids-organisationen .
about three or four years ago , i got a call from the night sky , a call from this teacher , woman who said , &quot; i have to see them .
i &apos;m sad that we &apos;ve never met each other as adults .
can you come to ohio , and please come to the man , and you &apos;re going to come with the man of what i know it was .
and i should mention that i &apos;ve got bauspeicheldrüsenkrebs , and i want you to go . &quot;
well , at the next day we were in cleveland .
we saw them , we laughed , we were combining , and we knew that they were going to be in a hospice .
we found one of them , we brought them , and we got to take us to them , and we gave them to their family because it needed to be needed , because it needed to be , because it needed to be , because it needed to be , it was needed to be , because it was needed to be , it was needed to go ,
it was something that we knew .
and just as the woman who wanted me to learn me as adults , i &apos;d love to take care of a box , and they turned into a box in my hands .
what was happening was that the circle was closed , it was a circle -- and the revelation of the i spoke .
the revelation is that death is a part of life .
she saved my life , and my partner and i &apos;m going to be aware of your .
and you know , this part of life needs everything that &apos;s going to need all the rest of life .
he takes truth and beauty , and i &apos;m so happy that this is so often .
he takes the same -- he would need , love , love and delight . and it &apos;s about us to give these things .
thank you .
imagine a big explosion , while they &apos;re on the surface of a thousand feet .
so imagine a plane full of smoke .
imagine a fold , the klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack .
that sounds frightening anxiety .
well , i had a unique spot on this day ; i sat on 1d .
i was the only one who could talk to the flugbegleitern .
so i looked at the same , and they said , &quot; no problem , we probably have a few birds . &quot;
the pilot had already gewendet the machine , and we were not so far away .
you could see manhattan .
two minutes later , three things happened at three .
the pilot was the machine after the hudson river .
that &apos;s not usually the route .
he turns out the pit off .
imagine a geräuschloses airplane .
and then he said three words -- the emotionslosesten words that i &apos;ve ever heard .
he says , &quot; bereitmachen , &quot; to the point . &quot;
i didn &apos;t have to talk to the bordpersonal .
i could see it in your eyes , there was a horror , and that &apos;s where life was .
so i want to tell you three things that i learned about this day .
i learned that in a moment , everything else is .
we have this lebensplan , we have these things that we want to do in life , and i thought , i was thinking about all the people who wanted to do a hand , and it didn &apos;t , all the people who wanted to make all the experiences i wanted to do .
while i later thought about it , i noticed a phrase , &quot; i said , &quot; i am saying bad . &quot;
because if the wine is , and the person is there , then i &apos;ll open it .
i never want to make more stuff in life .
and this urgency , this goal , has changed my life .
the second thing i learned about this day -- and that was when we were walking the george washington , so i thought , &quot; there &apos;s one thing i really was really bereue .
i had a good life .
in my own humanity , and with my mistakes , i &apos;m going to get better , and i &apos;ll get better to everything i &apos;m going to do .
but in my humanity , i also gave my ego room .
and i &apos;m going to give the time that i wasted for bedeutungslose things , with people who mean something .
and i thought , i thought about my wife with my wife , to people .
and then after that , when i thought i was , i decided to make negative energy from my life .
it &apos;s not perfect , but it &apos;s much better .
i didn &apos;t have a couple of years with my wife .
it feels great .
i &apos;m not trying to have more , right ; i was happy to be happy .
the third thing i learned -- and it &apos;s as the inner clock clock , &quot; 15 , 14 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 . &quot;
you can see the water .
i said , &quot; please flieg in air . &quot;
i don &apos;t want this thing to be in 20 pieces of how you know it from these things .
as we age , i had this feeling , man , to dying , not a terrifying .
almost as we would prepare our lives for our lives .
but it was very sad .
i didn &apos;t want to go ; i love my life .
and these sadness really are really in a thought , which i just wanted to give one thing .
i just wish i could see my children see .
about a month ago , i went to a suite of my daughter -- erstklässler , not much more sophisticated talent ...
... not yet .
and i &apos;m going to feiere , i &apos;m going to get a little kid .
and in the world , everything was going to be a sense of me .
i realized that i realized that i was going to leave the dots together , that it &apos;s only about a great father .
more than anything else , my only goal is to be a good goal .
i was given the miracle that &apos;s not going to die at this day .
i got another gift to see the future , and then to live and to live in .
my call to all the call that you &apos;re flying , and imagine that you imagine , the same thing on your flight -- but you don &apos;t imagine it , and how would you change ?
what would you do , they would be called it , because they think they &apos;re always going to go for ?
how would you change your relationships and the negative energy ?
and more than anything else , they are the best parents that they can only be ?
thank you .
the idea behind the stuxnet computer-wurm is a simple simple .
we don &apos;t want the iran who build the bomb .
the most important post there is the development of nuclear weapons in the development of nuclear weapons .
the gray bar you see here , these are echtzeit-kontrollsysteme .
now , if we can control that , the systems that are controlling , which control and valves , we can actually engage with a lot of problems with the centrifuge .
these gray videos don &apos;t run with windows-software ; they are based on a completely different technology .
but if we can make it a effektives windows-virus on a laptop , which is used by a wartungsingenieur , to get these gray box to konfigurieren this gray box , we &apos;re in business .
and that &apos;s the planning of stuxnet behind .
so we start with a windows-dropper .
the nutzdaten , the nutzdaten , the zentrifuge , beschädigen , the centrifuge , the centrifuge and the iranian kernenergie-programm of the iranische .
that &apos;s a kinderspiel , or ?
i want to tell you how we &apos;ve discovered this .
when we started our research to stuxnet our research , six months ago , was completely unknown , what the meaning was and purpose of this .
the only thing we knew is very , very complicated , which is the windows- part , the dropper- part , he made of myriad zero- .
and it seemed to be a little bit more vorzuhaben , with these gray boxen .
so the erregte of our attention and we started a project project , which we started to create our environment with stuxnet infected , and investigated this .
and then something odd .
stuxnet , like a laborratte that &apos;s not like the cheese sandwich -- schnüffelte , but didn &apos;t want to eat it .
that was what i did not make sense of my eyes .
and after we had a different species of cheese , i went to me that this is a gezielter attack .
completely a specific target .
the dropper streift active on the gray box , when a special configuration was discovered , when the special program , which is trying to try to go to the destination .
and if not , then , does nothing do nothing .
so , the familiar , really , really , and we started working with that , almost around the clock , because i thought , well , we know what the goal is .
it could say , for instance , a us- american bike , or a chemieanlage in germany .
so we should be able to figure out better , what the goal .
so , so we extrahierten the angriffs- code and found that he &apos;s in two digital warheads -- a smaller and a larger .
and we also noticed that they were very konstruiert , by people , by people who had all insider- information .
they knew all of bits and bytes that they needed to attack .
probably , you probably knew the schuhgröße of the maschinenbedieners .
so they knew everything .
and if you &apos;ve already said that the dropper of stuxnet complex complex and high-tech , let me tell you , the nutzdaten are a science for themselves .
it &apos;s much more sophisticated than anything we &apos;ve ever seen .
here you see a clip from this angriffs- code .
we &apos;re talking about -- about 15,000 lines .
it looks like the phantom assemblersprache .
and i want to tell you how we were able to get this code to this code .
so what we were looking for first , because we were systemfunktions- aufrufe , because we know what this shape .
and then we went to timern and datenstrukturen and tried to bring this with the real world -- with potential purposes in real world .
so we needed theories over these targets that we could do .
so , to take this theories , we call us in memories that it &apos;s definitely definitiv to be a hochwertiges goal , and it &apos;s probably a hochwertiges goal , because it &apos;s the iran of the infections .
now , in this area there &apos;s not multiple thousand goals .
essentially , it &apos;s basically going to be on the buschehr and the urananreicherungsanlage in natanz .
so i said to my assistant , &quot; &quot; i &apos;m a list of all the experts in the experten of the zentrifugen and kraftwerke from our kundenstamm . &quot;
and i called her and i &apos;m zapfte her to compare her to you with your fachwissen , which we &apos;ve found in the code and in the data .
and that worked very well .
so it was possible to get the little digital digital sprengkopf with the rotorsteuerung .
the united nations is part of the centrifuge that they see these black object that you see .
and if you &apos;re rigged the speed of this rotors , you &apos;re actually able to recover the rotor and finally even the centrifuge .
so what we also discovered is that the goal of the attack was , it &apos;s slowly and to let it happen , and let &apos;s make it up to be able to make it to get to the trial , so they can &apos;t get to get behind it .
the great digital sprengkopf -- we got a glimpse of that , by looking at very precisely data .
so for example , the number of number one , very similar , very similar , you can &apos;t miss it .
i started to start with scientific literature , and it turns out that these zentrifugen in natanz , and found that they &apos;re structured in so-called sogenannten , and each rung contains 164 zentrifugen .
so that made sense of it .
and it &apos;s better .
these zentrifugen in iran are divided in 15 feet .
and guess what we found in the angriffscode ?
almost a almost identische structure .
so again , that &apos;s actually really good .
and this was great confidence for that we &apos;ve investigated here .
now , you don &apos;t understand me , that wasn &apos;t just that .
these results were achieved by multiple arbeit labor .
and often we just started to put a dead and we had to reinvent us .
anyway , we found that both digital number of warheads in reality , and the same destination , but from different directions .
the little sprengkopf , a kaskade , and überdreht , and they verlangsamt the rotors and the great sprengkopf with six kaskaden in the interaktion and manipuliert .
so , in a large and all of us , we &apos;re very confident that we &apos;re actually determined what the goal is .
it &apos;s natanz and it &apos;s just natanz .
so we don &apos;t have to worry about other targets that others could hit from stuxnet .
here &apos;s something really cool stuff that we discovered -- has really taken me out of the socks .
there &apos;s the gray box box , and the top of the zentrifugen .
now , what this thing is , is that it &apos;s the implications of sensors -- for example , for example , for example , for example , and it &apos;s legitimen code , which is , during the attack , with false data , with false data .
and actually , this false example of data has been recorded .
so it &apos;s just like in hollywoodfilmen , where during the verfolgungsjagd of the verfolgungsjagd , the überwachungskamera die mit gefüttert .
that &apos;s cool , not true ?
the idea is obviously not just to überlisten the maschinenbediener in the world .
in fact , it &apos;s still dangerous and we .
the idea is to cheat a digital fashioned sicherheitssystem .
we need digital sicherheitssysteme where a human maschinenbediener can &apos;t respond to be fast enough .
so in a power station , if the great dampfturbine is going to be fast , you have to open up to the millisekunden within milliseconds .
of course , that can &apos;t be done by a human being .
so , in this spot we need digital sicherheitssysteme .
and when the stakes are , then they can really happen things .
that &apos;s the power plant .
and not the maschinenführer , nor is it going to notice it .
that &apos;s scary .
but it &apos;s going to be worse .
and what i &apos;m saying now is very important .
think about it . this attack is generisch .
he has nothing to do with zentrifugen , with urananreicherung .
so he would work so well -- in a power station or in a automobilfabrik .
it &apos;s generisch .
and you don &apos;t have to -- as the attacker -- you don &apos;t have to have the nutzdaten of a usb- stick , how we &apos;ve seen it .
you could also use ordinary technology to distribute .
you &apos;ve only got to get it as far as possible .
and if you do that , you get a cyber- pit viper .
that &apos;s the consequence that we need to ask .
so unfortunately , unfortunately , the largest number of goals don &apos;t have the largest east in the middle east .
they &apos;re in the united states , in europe and japan .
so all these green areas , these are the zielreichsten environments .
we need to take the consequences and we &apos;re going to start to prepare better .
thank you .
i have a question .
ralph , it was very much of what people assume that people are going to be the mossad behind the hauptorganisation behind the hauptorganisation behind .
is that your mind ?
okay , you want to know ?
yeah . okay .
my view is the most popular , but the driving force is not israel .
so the driving force behind the cyber- is the cyber- superpower .
there are only one and the united states -- fortunately , fortunately , fortunately .
because otherwise our problem is even greater .
thank you for a heidenangst eingejagt . thank you . thank you .
i spent the last couple of years to place in situations that normally normally very difficult and at the same time .
i went to prison -- hard .
i &apos;ve worked in a kohlebergwerk , gefährlich .
i &apos;ve been shot in kriegsgebieten -- difficult and dangerous .
and i spent 30 days with this , nothing than this -- the beginning of the beginning -- the beginning of the beginning , a little hard in the middle , very dangerous at the end .
i actually have the biggest part of my career , which is , and it &apos;s just for the attempt to explore the trial , and it &apos;s so interesting to investigate the fesselnd and interesting , and hopefully what they &apos;re doing for the audience and make it accessible .
so when i knew i &apos;d come to come here to a tedtalk that &apos;s going to look at the world of branding and sponsoring , i knew i &apos;d do something else .
some of you may have heard about that i &apos;ve got a couple weeks ago in ebay .
i have a couple of facebook-nachrichten , some twitter-nachrichten , and i gave people the possibility that namensrechte the namensrechte of my tedtalk at the tedtalk .
and really , some of the great people and companies , for-profit , for-profit , for-profit , and i &apos;m sure that chris gelegenheit , who never occurred to the talk , which is , in the moment , the namensrechte had never been a title , and not many of those of evidence of what the subject was going to be .
so what you got to , was what you &apos;re going to be : my name here : my tedtalk , from which you don &apos;t have to be flying to the topic , and they &apos;ll ever be able to move to content to the ears , especially when i give your involvement to their participation .
but it &apos;s a very good opportunity , it &apos;s a very good opportunity .
you know how many people look at this tedtalks ?
a whole lot of a lot .
that &apos;s the way that the arbeitstitel is the arbeitstitel .
so despite that warning , i knew that anyone would buy the namensrechte .
if you asked me , if you were asked to , i wouldn &apos;t have been able to tell you to tell you this with confidence .
but in the new project i work , my new film , we investigate the world of marketing , which advertising .
as i said , i &apos;ve been going to be in some rather rather situationen situations , but nothing could be able to prepare me , nothing could be so hard to go to anything and so forth with this guy .
you know , i had the idea for a film .
what i want to do is a film about product placement , marketing , marketing , and advertising , the whole film is funded by product placement , marketing and advertising .
and the film is called &quot; the greatest movie sold . &quot;
so what the greatest movie sold is that everything is going to be , from above the beginning , from the beginning to the end of the end , with brands , totally with brands , which is , in the movie , that you see in the film , that &apos;s the brand x. .
now this tag , the qualcomm stadium , the staples center -- the staples center .
these guys are going to be connected to the film in the house -- forever .
and so the film is that the whole idea of this idea of what &apos;s what ? what ?
i &apos;m a redundante person .
that was more to the celebration .
it was &quot; in eternity for me . &quot;
but we won &apos;t only get the brand the brand as titelsponsor , but we &apos;ll ensure that we &apos;re going to sell any possible car in the movie .
so we can think of a shoe and he &apos;s going to be able to get the greatest shoe , which they ever have .
the greatest car that you ever are ever ever done , from &quot; the greatest getränk , &quot; the greatest drink , which they &apos;ve ever had , a aufmerksamkeit movie ever sold . &quot;
so the idea is to show that brands are a part of life , actually , to put them on the film ?
and we actually show the whole process of how it works .
the goal of the whole is transparency .
they &apos;ll see the whole thing in the movie .
so this is the whole concept , the whole film , from beginning to end .
and i would love to find myself , if i would help to do this .
you know , it &apos;s funny because when i first heard it first , it &apos;s the ultimate respect for the audience .
but i don &apos;t know how empfänglich people will be .
have you have a perspective -- i don &apos;t want to use &quot; a point , because that &apos;s a negative konnotation -- but you know how to develop ?
how much money is needed to realize that &apos;s what ?
1.5 million .
i think it &apos;s hard to meet them , but i think it &apos;s worth worth a way to make some really interesting brands .
who knows when the film comes out , we might see how a horde vollidioten .
what do you think , how the answer is ?
the answer is probably not going to be , &quot; no . &quot;
but it &apos;s a hard thing to do about the film or a hard thing ?
jk : both .
so ... so , does not be so optimistic .
so my lord , you can help me ? i need help .
i can help .
okay .
fantastic .
we need to think about what brands are .
yeah .
if you look at the people that they do to do it .
there are some places that we can apply us .
so , think of the camera .
i thought , &quot; do you think of the camera , &quot; i mean , that &apos;s what we wanted to do a hintergrundgespräch .
it turns out that it meant to be in reality , &quot; we want to do with your film . &quot;
and just so disappeared that disappeared , one after another .
not to do something about the film .
i was amazed .
they wanted to do absolutely nothing with the project .
and i was confused , because i thought , the whole concept that &apos;s the idea of advertising , your product as many people as possible to get as many people as possible .
especially in the world , in the world of new media , and the old media media and the zerstückelten media landscape -- it &apos;s not the idea that the power of these things are .
no , that was what i thought .
but you see , the problem was that my idea was a fatalen error , and that was .
in fact , no , that was not the mistake .
that wouldn &apos;t have been a problem .
that &apos;s how it would have been .
but what , what is the picture that &apos;s a problem .
you see , if you &apos;re transparency at transparency , in the google-suche , this is one of the first pictures , that seems to be .
i like to really , you know , the way you do is to do the sergey brin . now .
this was the problem : transparency , frei , and tücke , and sofort , and sofort , and charakterisiert , charakterisiert , and the access to information , especially what geschäftspraktiken is , the last line is certainly the biggest problem .
you know , we &apos;re hearing about a whole lot about transparency .
our politicians say our president , it &apos;s even our ceos , even our ceos say it .
but if it comes to that , it &apos;s going to be done , anything .
but why ? well , transparency is fear -- like this strange bear , who still brüllt .
it &apos;s unvorhersagbar -- like this strange landstraße .
and it &apos;s also very risky .
what else is that &apos;s risky ?
a whole mechanical cool eat food .
that &apos;s very risky .
so when i started talking to the companies and tell you that we wanted to tell this story , said , &quot; no , we want to tell you a story .
we want a story , but we only want to tell our story . &quot;
and you see , when i was a kid , and my father &apos;s lying me -- and there he was walking around , and he said , &quot; my son , he said , &quot; my son , there &apos;s three different versions .
there are your version , there are my version , and there &apos;s the true version . &quot;
so you see , we wanted to tell the true version of the world .
but there was only a company , a agency , and that was only because i &apos;ve been known to my name and richard bond , i realized that i had to do it alone , i had to deal with my team to the companies .
so what they started to do in , or what i started to do was to understand , was that if you start speaking with these companies , the idea of how your brand is understood , a powerful problem .
i have friends who make great , , gigantische hollywood-filme , and i have friends who do little independent-filme like i do .
and my friends , the great , , gigantische hollywood-filme , say that the reason why your movies are so successful , to the markenpartnern .
and then my friends , the little independent-filme , &quot; well , how shall we compete with these big , giant hollywood-filmen compete ? &quot;
and the film is called &quot; the greatest movie ever . &quot;
so how do we see a little bit of the movie ?
whenever i do on the way , and whenever i open the medizinschrank , you &apos;ll see a ban .
and every time i can interviewe , i can say , &quot; are you filtering enough for this interview ?
they &apos;re going to be ? you can see a little nervous .
i want to help you to calm .
so you might have a little bit of the interview of the interview . &quot;
and then we provide one of these great düfte .
either &quot; floral fusion &quot; or a paradise winds , you will have the choice .
we &apos;re going to be both for men for women , and for women , you &apos;re going to be , roll-on , or a stick , or whatever .
that &apos;s the kurzfassung .
now i can all answer your questions and give them a ausfühliche .
we are a smaller brand .
so as you &apos;ve talked about the smaller movies , we are a brand of a brand .
so we don &apos;t have a budget like others .
so , so to do things like this -- you know , people who are ban -- that &apos;s kind of why we &apos;re interested .
with what words would you like to describe you ?
so , it &apos;s blank .
that &apos;s a great question .
frau : überlegene technology .
technology isn &apos;t the way you should describe something that &apos;s going to be somebody else .
we &apos;re talking about the kühn , fresh .
i think , &quot; well , &quot; the fresh word is that these tools really , really , really , really , in contrast to the &quot; bekämpft odor and moisture . &quot;
it holds you .
how can we keep them longer , and better people , more fresh , three .
these things have a positivere effect .
and this is a millionen-konzern .
what about me ? what about the druchschittstypen ?
i have to talk to the man on the street , which are like me , otto-normal-verbraucher .
they &apos;re supposed to tell me something about my brand .
how would you describe your brand ?
hmmm ? my brand ?
i don &apos;t know .
i like to love really brave clothes .
&quot; &apos; 80s , 80er revival , except on the waschtag .
well , what is the brand gerry ?
unique unique .
i think the genre , who i &apos;ve seen , i think , is &quot; dark glamour . &quot;
i like many black colors , lots of grautöne and so forth .
but i normally have a accessoire , like sonnenbrillen , or a jewelry , or a jewelry .
if dan would be a brand , he would probably be a classic mercedes .
two : the brand i &apos;m , i would say , lässige fly .
and so , a single one : partly , partly , partly , partly , partly -- i don &apos;t know .
man : i &apos;m the schmusetyp .
i sell schmusetiere in the country , globally .
so i think that &apos;s my brand .
that &apos;s my brand in my little , verzerrten industry .
man 4 : my brand is fedex because i were ausliefere .
guy : brand gescheiteter alkoholsüchtiger schreiberling .
is that ?
journalist : i &apos;m a anwaltsmarke .
i &apos;m tom .
now , we can &apos;t all be all the tom-marke , but i see a lot of the intersection of dark glamour and lässiger fly .
and what happened is that i needed a experts .
i needed somebody who could come in my head , someone who really could really help me understand what you call the &quot; markenpersönlichkeit . &quot;
and so i found a company called &quot; olson zaltman in pittsburg .
they have companies like nestle , febreze , hallmark , hallmark , to explore this markenpersönlichkeit .
if you could do it for the best , they could help me .
they brought their pictures , yes ?
i have this . the first picture is a picture of my family .
just tell me a little bit like that , with your thoughts and feelings of them .
these are the people who are making my worldview .
tell me about this world .
md : this world ? i think the world is in the world where you live -- like people to live on a cliff , the family , the family , the job , and so .
all these things were going to come and start by a place , and i start with me , and start with my family in west virginia .
what &apos;s the next thing you want to talk about .
the next one . this was the most beautiful day of my life .
in which context is that the idea of thinking about the idea of what you &apos;re ?
it &apos;s like i &apos;d like to be like .
i like things that are different .
i like things that are queer . i like to make things happen .
tell me about the &quot; why &quot; -phase &quot; -- what does it tell us ?
what &apos;s the machete ? in what are you currently ?
why is it important , neuzustarten ? what does the red ?
so tell me a little bit about this part .
a bit more about you , that &apos;s not you .
what else do they have durchlaufen ?
... that doesn &apos;t have to be frightened . in which type of rollercoaster ?
eeeeee ! thank you , thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you
thank you very much for your patience .
yeah . well . well .
yeah , i don &apos;t know what it &apos;s going to be made .
there was a lot of crazy things .
the first thing i saw was that their markenpersönlichekti was two blocks , but it turns out , ergänzende pages has spurlock-marke pages -- the morgan spurlock-marke is a achtsame / verspielte .
that &apos;s very well .
and i think there &apos;s almost a contradiction .
and i think some companies are going to focus on a strength , instead of both of both .
many companies tend to be able to avoid -- and this is the human nature -- things that they &apos;re not sure , they &apos;re not sure , these things , and they actually get these welcome , and they actually transform them into something positive , and that &apos;s a geschickter .
what other brands are doing so ?
the first is a classic , apple .
and you can see it here , target , target , wii , mini , mini coopers and jetblue .
well , there are verspielte brands and achtsame brands , these things that come and go , but a verspielte , achtsame brand , achtsame brand , achtsame brand .
a achtsame , verspielte brand . how your brand brand ?
if someone would ask you to describe your markenidentität , your markenpersönlichkeit , how would you ?
they &apos;re a up-attribut ? they &apos;re something that blood is going to bring blood in wallungen ?
or are they more likely to be a down-attribut ?
are you something that &apos;s a little bit of ruhiger , reservierter , more conservative ?
up-attribute are things that are playful , fresh , frisch , zeitgemäß , zeitgemäß , abenteuerlich , abenteuerlich , ausgefallen , wendig , wendig , wendig , profan , magisch , magisch , magisch , magisch , magisch and mystisch like gandalf .
or are they more like a down-attribut ?
are they mindful and mondän like 007 ?
are they called etabliert , traditionally , pflegend , beschützend , mitfühlend , like oprah ?
are they reliable , stable , familiär , safe , safe , heilig , and how the dalai lama or yoda ?
and over the course of the film , we had more than 500 companies , who were tied and the down-firmen , and they said , &quot; no , because they wanted to be part of the project .
they want to do anything with this film , because they don &apos;t have control , no control , no control over the finished product .
but they &apos;re going to be found 17 markenpartner , who were willing to dispense that control of the same way to make someone with someone and the playful how i would have to tell stories that we wouldn &apos;t have to tell stories , and stories that we never would have had to do with a werber .
they befähigten us to tell the story of the neuromarketing , as we put the story in this film , you &apos;re using the lustzentren of the brain to make the lustzentren of the brain , both to make movies as well .
we went to sao paulo where the außenwerbung was banned .
in the entire city , five years has no anzeigentafel , no poster , no flyer , nothing .
and we drove in love in which companies are in the way that companies are in the way to make their way in which their way in which the verarmte schools in the americas .
the incredible thing that i was the most incredible thing about me is that the projects i had to do is the most important success , which i are , where i interacted with things .
and that &apos;s what these brands have done , what these brands have done , what these brands have done , what these brands have done , what these brands have done , what these brands have done , what these brands have done , what these brands have done , what these brands have done , what these brands have done , what these brands have done , what
because they umgingen the mittelsmann , they umgingen the agencies , and said that the agencies may not really have their interest in the sense .
i &apos;m going to negotiate with the artist right now .
i &apos;m going to work with him and make something else that people think that our minds are going to be our minds .
and how did it be for you ? what it successfully ?
now , there &apos;s the film in the film festival film festival , we can look at this .
according to the premiere , the first was the first place in january , and it &apos;s not even the whole thing -- there was 900 million aufrufe of this film .
that actually is actually a period of two , two of two weeks .
this is just online -- not a press , no television .
the film hasn &apos;t yet yet .
there &apos;s no even online . no streaming .
it &apos;s not going to come in other countries .
well , finally , the film has a very big deal .
and that &apos;s not bad for a project where almost every werbeagentur , with the languages , we &apos;ve had to recommended the client who had to get their fingers .
something i think is that if you &apos;re going to be able to make your chance , make sure that we &apos;re making the chance to get out of these risks .
i think if you &apos;re going to take people away from it , you &apos;ll get them closer to failure .
i think if you &apos;re making your employees , risks , you &apos;re going to get the whole company to get a profit .
i feel that we have to encourage people to encourage people to make risks .
we have to encourage people to have no fear to have a fear of possibilities that you might have verängstigen .
finally , in the rest , we should be able to welcome fear .
we should be able to put the bear in the cage .
they &apos;re called the fear . they welcome the risks .
a huge amount of a huge amount of a huge amount of a huge amount of a major , so we &apos;ve been welcomed .
and finally , we should welcome transparency welcome .
today , more than ever before , it &apos;s a little bit very far away .
and that said , with honesty and transparency , my head &quot; first talk &quot; was to tell you about transparency , &quot; i was welcomed with you , &quot; the $ of my good friends of emc , who &apos;s $ ebay for the namensrechte .
big data will be transformed for organizations in the world in large opportunities .
emc , &quot; they welcome to transparency , &quot; they welcome transparency . &quot;
thank you .
well , morgan , in the name of transparency , what &apos;s happened with the $ 7100 ?
that &apos;s a great question .
i &apos;ve got a check , which is a check , the ausgestellt of the ted-organisation , the sapling-stiftung -- a check in the höhe of $ $ to fund my ted-auftritt year .
my name is amit .
so , i made something else in google , and i &apos;m going to make a little bit of making a little bit with art and art , my chefin , who was also the green light .
and it took 18 months .
a lot of spaßiger and stories , which can i tell you , with 17 very interesting museums from nine .
but i &apos;m going to focus on the demo .
there &apos;s a lot of stories about why we did .
i think my personal view is very simple with this slide and your access .
i grew up in india .
i was a great education -- i don &apos;t have -- but i had a lot of museen and this artwork , and i had no access to this .
when i went to visit , and i started to visit this museums , i started learning a lot of learning .
and as i worked for google , i tried to make this desire -- art accessible to the technology -- with technology .
we then started a team , a great error , and we started this .
i &apos;m going to start with the demonstration , and you just tell them some interesting things that happened since the launch .
so you just go to googleartproject.com. .
you can see in all these museums here .
there &apos;s the uffizi , the moma , the hermitage , the hermitage , the rijks , van gogh .
i even come in one of my favorite , the metropolitan museum of the art museum in new york .
you &apos;re going to come on for two ways -- very straightforward .
click , and wumms , you &apos;re in this museum .
it doesn &apos;t matter where they &apos;re -- bombay , mexico , it doesn &apos;t matter .
you go up and self-awareness .
they want to orient in the museum ?
open the map , and they hop them with a click .
in fact , they &apos;re going to want to end up until the end .
just keep just further . lots of fun .
so , it &apos;s going to happen .
thank you , but the best one comes .
so i &apos;m a one of my favorite writers , erntearbeiter von of pieter breugel in the street .
i see this pluszeichen .
if the museum has given us the picture , you click on it .
this is one of the imagery .
this is all metadata .
those of you who are really interested in art can can be here -- but i &apos;m going to go away .
this is one of the images that we &apos;ve made with so-called the so-called sogenannten .
for example , this picture , for example , about 10 billion bildpunkte , i think .
and a lot of people ask me , &quot; what do you get for 10 billion ? &quot;
i &apos;m going to show you now : now you &apos;ll show you now .
you can really easily easily easily and rauszoomen .
you see something fun here .
i love that guy ; his expression is priceless .
but then they want to go deep .
and so i started playing with it , and i realized that there &apos;s something that &apos;s going on .
and i thought , &quot; wait for , that sounds interesting . &quot;
i went to close to the close , and i noticed that kids actually did something .
i &apos;m a little bit a little bit , talking a little bit , talking to some familiar , and found out that it &apos;s a game called squail , which is a gans on a stick .
apparently , it was quite popular .
i don &apos;t know why they did it , but i learned about it .
to go to go to go to go to go to go to the order to go to the site .
just to give you the overview to give you a moment , i just showed you what you &apos;re going to get .
here we were , and this is the painting .
but the best part is -- in a second .
let &apos;s quickly jump up to moma , again , in new york .
another lieblingsbild of me , sternennacht .
in the previous example , it was about finding details , finding details , finding details , finding details , finding details , finding details , finding details , finding details , finding details , finding details , finding details , finding details , finding details , finding out detail , to find out detail , finding out detail , to find out detail , finding out detail , to
but what if you want to see the pinselstriche ?
and what if you want to see how van gogh has this masterpiece ?
you put it in a box . you can actually go into it .
i &apos;m going to zoom in one of my favorite spike , until i really am the cracks .
that &apos;s sternennacht , never seen before .
now i &apos;m going to show you my favorite function .
there are many more , but i &apos;m missing the time .
that &apos;s the really cool part , it &apos;s called collections .
every one of you , everybody -- the same thing is whether you have a great house -- doesn &apos;t play .
they can go and spend their own museum -- from all these images , you can see your own collection of your own collection .
just simply , they go into -- and i &apos;ve created this , it means the power of the zoom -- you can umherzoomen .
that &apos;s the gesandten &apos; gesandten , in the nationalgallerie .
you can take all of them with all , your friends , and so a conversation you &apos;re beginning to feel about what they feel like they &apos;re looking at this .
i think , for me , for me , is that all the wonderful things not come from here .
they &apos;re not going to come from my own idea of the museums .
that should not be saying .
they come from the artists .
and that was a experience for me .
i mean , i hope that we are going to be built with this digital medium of art , and they &apos;re going to represent online online .
and it &apos;s the biggest question i asked , &quot; have you made this to replicate the experience of a museumsbesuchs ? &quot;
the answer is no .
it &apos;s supposed to have the experience .
that &apos;s what it &apos;s about . thank you .
thank you .
this is a diagram of your brain . your brain can be placed in two halves .
this is the left half , the logical side , and then the rights half the right side of the side .
if we had a measure of the aptitute of each of each hemisphere , we could have your brain .
for example , this one is , that somebody &apos;s fully charged .
this would be somebody who &apos;s completely intuitive .
now , where would you put your brain on this scale ?
some of us may have decided to be picked up for one of these extreme , but i think , for most people in the audience , your brain -- with a high aptitute that &apos;s in both hemisphären .
it &apos;s not as though they are both exclusive or anything .
you can be logically and intuitive .
and so i see myself as one of the people in the people , collectively with most of the other experimental quantenphysikern that need a good amount of logic to get the complex ideas .
but at the same time we need a good percentage of intuition in order to actually figure out the experiments .
how do we develop this intuition ? well , we love to play it with things .
so we go out and play with it and look at how it &apos;s reacting . and then we start to develop our intuition .
essentially , do you do the same thing .
so one of the intuitionen that you &apos;ve developed over the years , probably is that a thing can only be on a place .
i mean , it can sound about it that a thing is to think about two different places , but they were not born with this idea , they &apos;ve developed them .
i remember a child &apos;s child to see a bodenschwelle .
he was still a toddler and not very well at it and he fell .
but i bet that it &apos;s a very valuable lesson with the bodenschwelle of a very valuable lesson , which is not just going to be just over and they stay in one spot .
and this is a great konzeptionelles model of the world , so long they &apos;re not a teilchenphysiker .
it would be a real model for a teilchenphysiker , because they &apos;re not using with bodenschwellen , but with these little strange particles .
and if you play with your particles , they &apos;re all going to be able to do all kinds of weird things -- how they can fly through walls , or they can be able to be the same time to two different places .
and so they all wrote that observations , and they called them the theory of quantum mechanics .
this was the state of physics , a few years ago , you needed to describe the small , tiny particles .
but you didn &apos;t need to describe them to describe the great objects around us .
that &apos;s not my intuition , and maybe i &apos;m not so often with the other games .
well , i &apos;m playing with you , but not very often .
and i never seen them .
i mean , no one has ever seen a particle .
but my logical side has not been a humane .
because if all of these things are made out of particles , and all these particles , they shouldn &apos;t simply follow the rules of quantum mechanics ?
i don &apos;t see why that should not be so that .
so i would feel like that , so if we could feel that , if we could show that , if we can show that , that alltagsgegenstände alltagsgegenstände also follow the rules of quantum mechanics .
so i made a couple of years ago , right ?
i &apos;ll give a bunch of one .
this is the first object you can see that you can see in the quantenmechanischen .
so what we &apos;re looking at here is a tiny computer .
and you can see this green dot in the middle .
this is the piece of metal that i &apos;m going to talk about .
this is a picture of the object .
here i am pushing it . we &apos;re looking at the center here .
and here &apos;s a really big close-up of this little piece of metal .
so what we &apos;re looking at is a little piece of metal , it &apos;s like a springboard and it &apos;s above the edge .
so i made this thing to a similar way to make a computer .
i went to a clean space with new siliziumscheiben , and rackerte for 100 hours to all the great .
for the last little bit , i had to build my own machine -- to get this kind of swimming pool of hidden hole and the thing .
this thing has the ability to be the ability to be the ability to be a little bit to do it .
look , let me give you an analogy .
you know how to be in a full hope ?
i mean , if i &apos;m going to be in the elevator , i &apos;ll do all kinds of weird things , but then i &apos;ll get to all the other things , and i &apos;ll hear it all of these things , because i don &apos;t want to be able to do it , or , frankly , they &apos;re verschrecke .
so quantum mechanics says that unbewegliche objects are evolving .
the mitfahrer of unbewegliche objects are not only human , but also the light that seems to you and the wind , who are past and the heat of the space .
and so we knew that if we wanted to see that piece of metal , we had to take a quantenmechanisch metal , we had to send all the mitreisenden out of the schmeissen .
and that &apos;s what we did .
we have the light on a vacuum and saugten it , and it saugten the whole air and kühlten it up until almost a lot of metal , and it &apos;s the piece of metal , and it was the piece of metal , as it wanted to be verhalten .
so we measured his movement .
we found that it really makes it odd .
instead of it , it &apos;s just because it &apos;s just a long time there , it &apos;s about how this was about -- like a ausdehnender and together ziehender .
in which we put a little push , and we could not get it to the same time , and not to vibrate -- something that &apos;s allowed to be in quantum mechanics .
so what i &apos;m just telling you is what marvelous amazing .
what does it mean for a thing to vibrate and not to vibrate ?
let &apos;s think about the atoms .
so the first case : all the trillionen of atoms are mostly mostly there , and at the same time , the same atoms move down .
only to präzisen präzisen zeitpunkten .
the rest of the time they &apos;re delokalisiert .
that means that every atom in the same time , in the same way , which is , what the whole piece of stuff is , the entire piece of metal is in two different places .
i think that &apos;s right , right .
really .
it was worth me for all this year in the orange room , because , check it , the massstabsunterschied , the massstabsunterschied between a single atom and this piece of metal , about the same way between the piece of metal and you .
so if one of the time , the same atom at the same time , can be a piece of different places , this piece of metal in two different places , why not too ?
i mean , that &apos;s just what my logical side says .
so imagine , imagine , you would be a lot of time to multiple places , how would it feel like this ?
how would you deal with consciousness that your body is in space ?
there &apos;s another aspect of history .
when we aufwärmten it , the light light , and the box , we saw that the piece of metal in a piece of paper was .
and so i had to develop these new intuition that it looks like all the objects in the elevator are only more manageable , that are zusammen objects that are in a small room .
they hear a lot of little bars about how quantum mechanics says everything is connected to everything .
now , that &apos;s not right ; that &apos;s not right ; it &apos;s not right .
there &apos;s more behind it , it &apos;s still deeper .
it &apos;s so that these compounds , your connections with all the things you &apos;re in , literally define , and that &apos;s the tiefsinnige and strange of quantum mechanics .
thank you .
in 2007 , i decided we should be thinking about how we think about economic development .
it should be our goal that if families are thinking about where they live and work , they &apos;re going to be able to have the possibility of a hand , and they &apos;re auszuwählen at least one hand , to get the whole bewohner of the neue of the new inhabitants .
now , we &apos;re going to go away from this .
there are billions of people in developing countries , which is not even a single city that they were welcome to .
but the amazing thing is that they &apos;re so much more worth more worth than it costs .
so we could do the world with duzenden , perhaps even hundreds of new towns .
now , that sounds now , maybe they &apos;re going to have been thinking about the new cities .
but you just trade the construction of apartments from the cities .
imagine half the people who want to live in homes , that &apos;s already affecting this ; the other half of half , but not yet .
you could try to push the capacity of existing apartments .
but you know what you would do , you would be able to get there , and they were going to avoid the environment to avoid beschwerden and the brain .
so it turns out , it turns out , it &apos;s very hard to all of these extensions .
but you could go to a completely new place , a completely new level , the laws would support a specific support and not the construction .
so i proposed that governments are going to create the new surfaces that have been given for a city , and i &apos;ve got a name of a name .
later , i &apos;ve found that , about the same time , javier and octavio about the challenge of a reform .
they knew that every year , every year , every year , every year , they were leaving about the united states , and they wanted to know what they could do to make sure that these people can stay in their country and do the same thing in honduras .
and at this point , javier javier said , &quot; what happens if we want to go to a message of our country , which is a part of the american embassy , and if we want to go to a message of the american embassy , and if you want to go to the american side of the united states , you can go to the surface of the
in 2009 , 2009 , the summer was made under a very heftigen .
in the next elections , the pepe wahlen , pepe lobo in a turnaround , whose program , whose program , both of the program , as the schlichtung promised .
he forderte octavio , to become his stabschef .
in the meantime , i was in the meantime , i was preparing for a presentation .
by improvement , put and through the inquiry of stuff , i tried this complicated concept of charter city .
the first point is the importance of law , laws that you &apos;re not going to be interested in existing wohnungsbesitzer .
we &apos;re going to add new technologies , but for the progress , it requires technology and laws . and it &apos;s for laws , and it &apos;s usually for us .
in the fall of 2010 , a friend of guatemala was octavio octavio to the ted .
again , again , it showed him javier .
the two of the two things came to me .
and said , &quot; let &apos;s take the head of our country &apos;s land . &quot;
so we met in december in the sitzungssaal of a hotels in miami .
i tried to make sure how valuable cities are like how much they are as they are .
and i used this chart to show how valuable rohland is a place like new york . remember that a surface in some cases is worth thousands of dollars .
but it was a pretty abstract discussion , where there was a pause that was a break , and i said , &quot; paul , we might maybe look at the tedtalk . &quot;
so the tedtalk , in a very simple form of simple form , that a charter city is a place where a anfang is a gründungsvertrag , a gründungsvertrag , who was the laws that were going to be , and the way to decide the possibility of living or not .
so that &apos;s why i asked by the president of honduras , who said that we need to create this project that it &apos;s important , and that it &apos;s the way that it &apos;s our land is to get our country .
i was asked to come to tegucigalpa and then even a lecture and fifth january , i think , was a lecture .
so i was told a bunch of facts that was trying to do with facts , who has a sense of chart that &apos;s trying to make a lot of value in a city , it &apos;s going to be a very big town .
this is a picture of the city , and the sketch is the new airport , who built in denver .
alone , it has a surface of the flughafen , a surface of 100 quadratkilometern .
so i tried to convince the high-pressure of it if you want to build a new town , you &apos;ve got to start with a field of mindestens 1,000 quadratkilometern .
that &apos;s more than 250 thousand acres .
and we have all the applaudiert .
the faces of the audience were very serious and alert .
the head of the airplane came on the stage and said , &quot; professor romer , i thank you for your lecture , but maybe we might look at the tedtalk .
i &apos;ve got to my laptop on my laptop . &quot;
so i &apos;ve got to go to the hingesetzt , and you &apos;ve got the tedtalk .
and i &apos;m a point of the punch to the punch that a new city of human beings .
there were the possibility of living in a city that would be in honduras , instead of hundreds of kilometers away from the north .
and a new city , also includes new opportunities for executives .
the führungskräfte of the government was made out of the aid of partnerländern , you could benefit from their partnerländern , they could benefit from the aufstellen of the laws of the laws of the laws of the laws of the laws of the laws of the laws of the laws of the laws of the laws and the durchführung that everybody can trust that the charter is really really
and the realization of president lobo , was that the faith of the durchsetzung of the durchsetzung of the durchsetzung , was that the most important thing i thought was to make the foreign investors to make the foreign scientific investors , and that could be a town for all the parties in honduras , who had been in fear and mistrust .
we &apos;re in a area .
this picture is from this place .
it sums up there was a thousand square kilometers .
and shortly after that , at the 19th of january , they &apos;ve voted with the verfassung for a change to have a verfassungsgemäße that &apos;s regelung for specific entwicklungsgebiete .
in a country that &apos;s just a blocked crisis behind congress was built in congress to the voice of a voice .
all parties , all the fraktionen of society , supported this .
to become part of the constitution , it needs to be approved by congress by congress .
in february february , it was approved to become a second time with a voice .
according to this choice , between the medium and the ancient february , which is a delegation of about 30 hunduranern in the world that were most interested in the business of the städtebaus .
one place is that &apos;s first .
this is a picture of a large , new delhi , which built in south korea , built , in south african , as the stadtzentrum .
all you can see on this picture was built within four years after it took four years after it was going to get us to preserve the marathon .
the other place that was very interested in the urbanism , singapore .
there were two cities in china and the third is in preparation .
so if you &apos;ve seen it , it &apos;s what we &apos;re today .
they &apos;ve already been a baugrundstück ; and they &apos;ve already already already have this surface for the second city .
it &apos;s already been working on a legal foundation that managern managern allows to allow a two-dimensional legal system .
a country has offered to provide the supreme court to provide the available for the gericht of the dortigen of the dortigen of the dortigen .
also städtedesigner and -bauer are very interested .
they even bring funding with a funding .
one thing you know , as you know , there &apos;s been a lot of mieter .
there are many of these are like , in a place that would love to be in the americas , especially in a place , and there are many people who &apos;d like to live there .
in the world , there are 700 million people who want to live in another place to live in another place .
a million people left every year and migrate into the united states .
many of you are dads , the familien , their families to work in order to get work to work , sometimes the single mothers needed to make food and clothes .
unfortunately , sometimes it sometimes , sometimes the children are trying to find their parents , which they &apos;re in some cases , in some cases , since a decade .
so what is it for a idea of thinking about it in honduras to build a whole new town ?
or even duzende by those cities , or hundreds of millions of all over the world ?
so what is it for a notion that every family has a choice between multiple cities that are in favor of new inhabitants ?
this is a idea that &apos;s worth spreading .
my friends made me asked me to say , thank you .
you know how many decisions they do in a typical day ?
you know how many decisions you meet in a typical week ?
i recently have a poll with about 2,000 americans , and the average number of decisions , who are a typical americans in a day , and it &apos;s a day of a day is 70. .
and then recently , recently , a study was done by ceos , which they were doing a week for the ceos .
and these scientists have the different topics that &apos;s what these things are documented with the ceo of that , and how much time they make decisions with the issues .
and they found that a real ceo was in the week of 139 aufgaben .
each of these topics , of course , of course , many of the smaller decisions .
50 percent of their decisions were hit from nine minutes or less .
for about 12 percent of their decisions they needed an hour or more of their time .
think about your own decisions .
you know how many decisions you meet in the nine minutes of the nine minutes , and meet the stunde of an hour ?
how good , think they &apos;re the decisions of the decisions ?
today i want to talk about one of the biggest entscheidungsprobleme of our modern era , the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem .
i want to talk about the problem and some of the kinds of solutions .
now , if i talk about this problem , i &apos;m going to give you some questions and i want to know their answers .
if i &apos;m going to show you a question , you &apos;re making a blind , because i &apos;m blind , just the hand when they want some calories to burn .
otherwise , i ask you , if i ask you a question , and your answer is , my first question for today is , are you ready to hear something about the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem ?
thank you .
when i was a abschlussstudent at stanford university at stanford university , i went to this very very very very very very supportive of the stanford , at least at least .
it was a store , who was the draeger .
this business , it was almost like a vergnügungspark .
they had 250 different kinds of mustard and essig and over 500 different kinds of fruits and vegetables and more than two dozen different ways of water -- and that was a time when we actually have a leitungswasser drink .
i loved it to this business , but at a moment i &apos;ve asked me , well , what is you can &apos;t do that you &apos;re never going to get a little bit more ?
here &apos;s the olive oil .
they had over 75 diverse different varieties of oil , including those who were in central square , who were kamen by thousands of years .
so i decided to visit a day , and i asked the head , &quot; work , &quot; work , &quot; work , &quot; work , that you really offer people to do all those possibilities ? &quot;
and he showed up the busladungen of tourists that come and get their cameras .
we decided to make a experiment , and we chose to our experiment for our experiment .
here &apos;s your marmeladen gang .
they had 348 different kinds of marmelade .
we have a little verkostungsecke on the front of the concert &apos;s powers .
we have six different geschmacksrichtungen marmelade or 24 different geschmacksrichtungen , and we &apos;ve looked at two different varieties of wood , and we &apos;ve looked at two things : first , i thought , what could be more people and marmelade ?
there are more people standing up , if there were 24 percent , when there were six percent , when six were six , about 40 percent .
and then we saw that in what we looked at the people in which people &apos;s donating a glass of glass .
now we saw the umgekehrten effect .
by the people who were abandoned than it was 24 , just three percent actually actually have a glass of glass .
from the people who were abandoned than there were six , now , now we saw 30 percent of you actually bought a glass of marmelade .
now , if you look at it , the people bought a glass of marmelade , who had six times , they had six of the choice when they had 24 .
now , not to decide to buy a glass of marmelade , probably good for us -- but it turns out that it &apos;s beeinflusst us to make us very konsequenzreichen decisions .
we don &apos;t decide to decide , even though it &apos;s going to be our own best interests .
so , for the theme of the day : save the way .
now i &apos;m going to present to you now a study , which i &apos;ve been talking about gur huberman , emir jang , wei jang , where we &apos;re facing the decisions for retirement , from almost a million americans in the entire u.s.
and what we looked at was whether the number of fondsangebote that were a rentensparplan of fondsangebote , who was able to be able to make the 401 plan that will be more likely to be more for tomorrow .
and we found that it was a connection that was in fact .
so in this plans , we had about 657 plans that people were doing anything between two to the anboten of the u.s. care .
and what we found was that the more money had offered that , in fact , the participation was significantly .
if you look at the extremes , the plans that were the plans that were given two fund , a teilnahmerate in the 1970s -- still not as high as we want .
in the plans that almost 60 fund , i noticed the teilnahmerate on the sechzigsten .
now turns out that even if you feel that even if you were wondering , if you were to know more options , even it has negative consequences .
so the people who decided that the people who decided to know that the more possibilities of the available you were going to have to have the more difficult to vote it , and they choose to vote .
the more possibilities of the available you were , the more they had their entire money in pure geldmarktkonten .
none of these extremes decisions , is to make decisions that would recommend somebody else &apos;s disease , if you &apos;re going to be a future of well-being .
now , in the last 10 years , we &apos;ve observed at people , in humans , we &apos;ve observed at people , and we &apos;ve observed at people that are going to be the most important consequences that are providing the offer of more and more choices with more .
they &apos;re going to move the decision -- they &apos;re going to be , even if it &apos;s going to be their own best best .
they make more optimistic decisions -- social hate and bad medical decisions .
they decide to make things more for things that they make themselves less content , even if you make it better .
the reason that is that we might be able to think of these giant riesigen of mayonaise , mustard , mustard , and marmelade , but we can &apos;t get the comparison and we can pull out and actually pick up some of the fantastic supply .
so what i want to suggest today is to give you four simple techniques -- techniques that we have tested on different species and various forschungsorten forschungsorten -- they just can use them in your business .
first , first , you know .
they &apos;ve heard it before , but it never was true than today , that less is more .
people are always more than i say , &quot; you know . &quot;
they &apos;re always worried that they &apos;re losing regalfläche .
but in fact , we see more and more and more , and more and more , and more , if you &apos;re going to be ready to move , and then there &apos;s a spike of the sales , and there are a spike of the cost of &amp; amp ; and there &apos;s an improvement of the entscheidungswahrnehmung .
and as a proctor and gamble , the different elite and shoulders species of 26 , they have a spike of 10 percent .
when the golden cat corporation was corporation at the time , you know , 10 times the most complete verkauften loswurde , they realized that the profits to 87 percent -- a result of two percent of the population , the increase of cost .
you know , the average supermakrt today , provides them to you today .
a typical amount of walmart is offering today today .
but the neuntgrößte supermarket who &apos;s neuntgrößte in the world today , and they &apos;re offering them to you only a lot of the same products -- a kind of tomato sauce in a vacuum .
now , in the world of the sparens , i think one of the best examples , which is a piece of the most important examples , which is , as you know , the first thing that you do was something very strongly , it &apos;s a program that &apos;s offered to harvard .
every single harvard harvard takes a bit of a lebenszeitfond part .
these are really a choice , 20 of them , they &apos;re not offered , not 300 or more money .
you know how people often say , &quot; i don &apos;t know how i shall just throw it out .
it &apos;s all important possibilities . &quot;
and the first thing i ask the employees , &quot; tell me how the possibilities of each other .
and if your staff can &apos;t be able to auseinanderhalten them , it can &apos;t their customers . &quot;
now before we have lunch today , i had a conversation with gary .
and gary said he would be willing to be a bereit to all people in this audience to the beautiful street in the world .
here &apos;s a description of the street .
and i want to read you to you .
and now i give you a couple of seconds to read them , and then i ask you to clap , if you &apos;re willing to adopt the gary .
okay . everybody &apos;s ready to assume , gary s .
are all that ?
well , let me show you something more about it .
they knew it was a trick to do it , or ?
now , who is ready for this journey .
i think i &apos;ve heard more hands .
good .
the fact that you look at is the objective of the first time , when the second time , when the second time , but i would make it to find it out for the second time .
because the imagery did it for you for you .
what i &apos;m going to bring me to the second technology that helps you with the problem of the entscheidungsüberlastung of the entscheidungsüberlastung , it &apos;s the konkretisierung .
it &apos;s about that people who have to understand the difference between possibilities , understanding the difference between the individual and the konsequenzen and make those consequences and make it more and concrete .
why are people spending a lot of 15 to 30 percent more than 30 percent , if you &apos;re using a ec-karte or a credit as a hug ?
because it doesn &apos;t look at the money .
and it turns out that if you &apos;re making it , it &apos;s a very specific device , it &apos;s a very good tool to save people .
so we made a study that i made with shlomo and alessandro previtero , we &apos;ve done a study with the people who worked on ing -- employees , who were all of the ing who were all for ing -- and those people were all in a gathering of the versammlung of their rentensparplan .
and during this gathering , we &apos;ve looked at these gathering , as she was as divided as she was , only we have a very small set .
the thing that we have done was , we &apos;ve had to have the people , we would have asked people to think of all positive things that would happen in their life , if they would save money .
in which we did this simple thing , there was a spike of 20 percent , and there was a spike of the number of people who were willing to save the people , or a increase in four percent of the amount of the amount of the amount of time they were willing to pay for the sparkonto .
the third technique : kategorisierung .
we can better better with more categories than more of the more choices .
here &apos;s a study for example , which we &apos;ve made in a zeitschriftengang .
it turns out that it &apos;s ripped up in the wegmans supermärkten , and the bottom line , the number of different species of zeitschriften , zeitschriften , zeitschriften .
but you know what ?
if i show you 600 , and i think of the 400 categories , and i think , in 20 categories , and i think that i have a better choice , and then you believe that i had given you more selection , when i have the 400 given of the 400 given , if i had given them the 600 .
because the categories tell me how i can keep them apart .
here are two different schmuckauslagen .
one is called &quot; jazz &quot; and the other is called &quot; swing . &quot;
if you think the left is the left ad , and the ad is jazz , you clap in the hands .
okay , there &apos;s a couple .
if you think that the on the left side is jazz , and the right side is swing , then they clap .
okay , a couple more .
well , it turns out that they &apos;re right .
on the left hand , jazz and the on the right is swing , but you know what ?
this is a hochgradig unnützes .
the categories must say something , not the auswahl of the selection .
and this problem often happens , if you look at the long bullet , all of these particular lists .
who want to do it with it ?
my fourth technique : embrace for complexity .
it turns out that we can deal with more information than we think we &apos;re going to think of them .
we need to increase the complexity slowly .
i &apos;ll show you one example of what i mean .
let &apos;s make a very , very complex decision : the purchase of cars .
here &apos;s a german autohersteller who gives you the ability to konfigurieren your car .
they have to make 62 decisions to design their car .
now , now , these decisions are different in the number of choices that they offer a decision .
autofarben , außenfarbe of the car -- i have 56 possibilities .
motors , gears -- four .
what i &apos;m doing now is , i change the order of the decisions .
half the customers is going to be from the many possibilities , 56 autofarben to the north , four folds .
the other half of the customers goes from the north pole , four folds , to the 56 autofarben , many possibilities .
what i look at ?
how are they interested .
if they &apos;re constantly using the standardauswahl of the decision , which means that they &apos;re overwhelmed , i &apos;m losing them .
what you find is that the people that are going to go from the many of the habitat and over and over and over again .
we &apos;re losing them .
go from the little choices to the many , then they stay .
it &apos;s the same information . it &apos;s the same number of possibilities .
the only thing i did is the order to change the order of this information .
if i start with the simple , i &apos;m learning how i auswähle .
even though the getriebe , nothing to me , i don &apos;t want to tell my preferences on the subject , it still keeps me to buy it .
it also makes me also in excitement about the great product that i &apos;m going to be zusammenstelle , and i &apos;m willing to make me feel interested in interest .
let me wrap up .
i told you about four techniques that &apos;s the problem of the entscheidungsüberlastung -- -- you &apos;ll get real überflüssigen , konkretisieren -- they &apos;ll get real , and we can do better with more categories -- we can get better to more categories , fewer possibility .
every one of these techniques i think i think you can &apos;t help you to do the possibilities -- good for you , you can use them for themselves , good for themselves , good for people who are service .
because i believe that the key to the best choice is that you &apos;re in the selection .
and the more we &apos;re involved in the local rock , the better we will be able to practice the art of decision .
thank you .
hi . i &apos;m kevin allocca , trends-manager at youtube . i &apos;m going to look at me .
that &apos;s true .
today we want to talk about how videos are going to be viral , and then , why , it &apos;s why it &apos;s important .
we all want to be the stars , and he said , &quot; ah , comedians -- when i was young , seemed to be so hard .
but webvideos , that we have all enabled us all of our creative activities , all of our creative activities can be used to be famous in a part of our planet .
every single one of you could be thinking about the internet to the next saturday .
but at the time , more than 48 hours a minute , a minute .
again , it &apos;s only going to be a tiny percentage of prozentsatz , and it &apos;s going to look at thousands and so forth .
so how does this work ?
three things : tastemaker , teilnahmecommunities , and the unexpected .
well , we want to .
oh my god . oh my god .
oh my god !
woah !
ohhhhh , wowwww !
last year , jahr vasquez vasquez , who was shot his house in yosemite national park .
in 2010 , it was 23 million times .
this chart shows how it looked as the video last summer first summer .
actually , wouldn &apos;t really want to make a virales video .
he just wanted to share a rainbow , just sharing a rainbow , just sharing a rainbow , just sharing a rainbow , just sharing a rainbow , just sharing a rainbow , just sharing a rainbow , just sharing a rainbow , just sharing a rainbow , just sharing a rainbow , just sharing a rainbow , just sharing a rainbow , just sharing a rainbow , just sharing
because you &apos;re doing this , if you pump the mountain range .
he had uploaded any amount of naturvideos .
and this video was already already made already in january .
what &apos;s happening here ?
there was jimmy kimmel .
jimmy kimmel sendete sendete , the tweet of the tape , which was so popular .
because tastemaker like jimmy kimmel , and i &apos;ll show you some interesting things and show you a big audience .
it &apos;s friday , friday , friday , friday get . everybody s , weekend s , weekend , weekend , weekend , weekend , weekend , friday , friday , friday , friday , friday , friday , friday , and you didn &apos;t think that we would lead that conversation without talking about this video , i hope .
rebecca blacks , &quot; friday &quot; is one of the most popular videos of the year .
it was almost a year almost 200 million times .
so the graphics looked like .
just like &quot; the &quot; double raindrop &quot; seems to be the nothing .
what &apos;s going on this day ?
well , it was friday , that &apos;s true .
if you want to know , these other peaks are also freitage .
but what about this day , this particular friday ?
now , tosh.0 gabelte it on , many blogs started writing about it .
michael j. nelson nelson asked from the mystery theater was a first of twitter .
and importantly , is a person , a person or group of tastemakers , with a big audience with a big audience .
then , then , these communities of people who shared these large insiderwitz , and to talk about it and to talk about it .
now there &apos;s 10,000 parodien of &quot; friday &quot; to youtube .
already in the first seven days , there was a spoof for every single day .
unlike the most popular entertainment century , the participation of the 20th century is the participation of the community , our way to become part of this phenomenon , either by making it a new or something new .
&quot; nyan cat &quot; is animation and music in endlosschleife .
that &apos;s it , very straightforward .
this year , it was almost 50 million times .
and if you &apos;re mad , you know , you know that there &apos;s a dreistundenversion that &apos;s been a dreistundenversion , which was four million times .
even cats look at this video .
cats cats look at cats that look at this video .
so important is the creativity that in the internetkultur of the techies and geeks .
there were remixes .
somebody did a altmodische version of it .
and then it was internationally .
a whole remix-gemeinde fired out of the ground that made it from a dumb joke that we can all type .
today we don &apos;t find a pleasure of something , we &apos;re doing with .
who could have all the crap ?
who would have had &quot; double raindrop &quot; or rebecca or rebecca or black or &quot; .
what do you have to write the drehbücher thing you can write in which was sowas ?
in a world where every minute is uploaded two , only unique , only unique , and unexpected hervorstechen like that .
i &apos;m not going to give i i &apos;m not interested in , i was not interested in my friend of this great video , over a guy who had a kerl parking over time .
i got a parking ticket because i &apos;m not on the radweg gefahren , but often there &apos;s no way to go to the radweg .
and it was completely surprising and statesmen was , casey niestats witzige , and his argument looked at 5 million times .
this approach is true for anything we &apos;re creative .
and this is all leads us to one of the big question ...
what does that mean ?
ohhhh .
what does that mean ?
tastemaker , creative teilnehmergemeinden , totally unexpected , are the characteristics of media and culture , who &apos;s been determined and in the audience who &apos;s determined to the audience .
as i said , one of the most currently is the most common field -- justin bieber -- made his first at youtube .
no one needs to give the ideas of the ideas .
and today we &apos;re all aware of all the time of our silence .
and these are not the characteristics of the old media and they also make sure that they &apos;re also doing about media from the media , but they will determine the entertainment .
thank you .
how can i talk about 10 minutes about the power of the world , and the astonishing of the erstaunliche of these verbundenheit , in a small boot , and he was welcomed in the life of a professor , and he &apos;s verbundenheit , and he &apos;s verbundenheit , and he &apos;s verbundenheit , and he &apos;s verbundenheit , and he &apos;s never disappeared , and that &apos;s a
the story is not over .
it &apos;s a puzzle that &apos;s going to be made .
i want to tell you some of the puzzlestückchen .
imagine the first piece of a piece : a man who burns his failure .
he &apos;s a poet , a writer , a man whose whole life of the simple hope of the simple hope of unity and freedom of his home was first .
they think it &apos;s a einmarsch of the einmarsch in the kommunisten in saigon , as he has to be aware of his life , that his life was a single waste .
the words , so long , long , his friends , now his friends .
he moved to the silence .
he died , he broke through history .
he &apos;s my grandfather .
i never met it personally .
but our lives are so much more than our memories .
my grandmother never forget his life .
i had to worry that it was not free , and it was my job to learn that the story was trying to learn to us , but we were going to try to get it .
the next puzzleteil , like a boat in the early morgenrot leise on lake ausläuft .
my mother may surprise was 18 than her father died -- already in a arrangierten marriage , already with two girls .
for you , you &apos;ve had a mission , and the escape of your family and a new life in australia .
it was completely excluded that she could fail .
after a coral and filmreifen saga glitt glitt glitt still , a boat still on the lake , as a fischerboot .
all adults were aware of the risks .
the biggest fear of them were scared , rape and death .
like most adults , my mother was wearing a little giftflasche .
in a gefangennahme , my sister , and i , and then you &apos;re getrunken and my grandmother .
my first memories are from this boat -- the stetige of the motors that klatschen a global wave of the box , the vast and empty rays .
i don &apos;t remember the pirates , the many times , which came from the männer , but by the todesmut of the men on our boat , or at the ausfall of the engine , six hours , who didn &apos;t want six hours to start .
but i remember the lights of the coast coast , and i remember the young man who was the end of the reise , and the dawn of the journey was too much for him , and to the taste of the first apfels of the first apfels of the first apfels of the plattform .
no apple has ever been so far .
after three months in a refugee camp , we landed in melbourne .
and the next puzzlestück is about four women in three generations who are struggling to build a new life .
we were going to move into footscray , one of the top bewohnten , whose population is made of immigrantenschichten .
unlike the alteingesessenen mittelklassevororten , whose existence was completely unknown , was not a anspruchsdenken .
the smells out of the world came from the rest of the world .
and the fetzen broken broken englischs were given people who had been a bit of the same thing , they started .
my mother worked on farms , then at a high school , six days , six days , double layers .
it was kind of a time to find the time , and they &apos;re englisch and it-qualifikationen .
we were poor .
everybody was growing up and became a chance to be done in a more education , and i had no idea what we had to do for this . the new stuff that was always coming out of the box .
two strümpfe for school , each other to the holes in the other way .
a schuluniform , to the knöcheln , because they had to pass six years .
and there were the rare , schmerzhaften chöre , and here , and there &apos;s wandmalereien , &quot; that &apos;s going to go home . &quot;
after home ?
something more comfortable in me .
there was a meeting to the reconciliation and a calm voice said , &quot; i &apos;ll go out of the way . &quot;
my mother , my sister and i slept in the same bed .
my mother was every night , but we were told each other day , and heard of the movements of our grandmother &apos;s movements .
my mother suffered from the boat .
and it was my job , every night , until your alpträume , so i could get them to aufwecken .
they &apos;re just a computergeschäft , and then a kosmetikerausbildung and then a store .
and the women came with her stories , who don &apos;t ertrugen the change , angry and unflexibel , and sorgenerfüllte children , and i &apos;ve captured between two worlds .
and the sponsors were reviewed .
now , centers were built .
i lived in parallelwelten .
in one of the classic of the classic war , the unerbittliche anforderungen of themselves .
in other words , i &apos;ve been in love with a collaborative life , the tragic scars of violence and the protein .
but so many of the help over the years .
and because of this aid was i became in my last year as young australierin of the year .
and i was raised by a puzzlestück of the box , and that &apos;s not the way that it does not work .
tan le barón , anonyme bewohnerin , was in le le , refugee and social activist that never had heard of the talks of places that they never heard , and in the case of what they never imagined .
i was not familiar with the etikette .
i didn &apos;t know how to use the besteck .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about wine .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about anything .
i wanted to go into routine and the convenience of the life of a unbekannten vororts , a mother , a mother and two daughters , who had been erzählten each other , by looking for each other , by looking for each other , and we &apos;re looking at three and einschliefen , we still have three bed still in the same bed .
i said my mother , i wouldn &apos;t do that .
they remembered me that i was so old as she was at the time when we had the boat .
no , no one had been a way .
&quot; i just said , &quot; it said , &quot; and not what you &apos;re not . &quot;
so i spoke to jugendarbeitslosigkeit and education , and the troop vernachlässigung of the marginalisierten and entrechteten .
and the more i talked about , the more i should tell .
i met people in all the lebenslagen , so many of you were doing what they were doing , lived in the limits of the bounds .
and although i had my degree , i realized that i couldn &apos;t get to a career with a career in the jura .
it had to be another puzzlestück .
and i realized that it &apos;s okay , it &apos;s a außenseiter , a neuankömmling , neu , and not only , but not only , but something you need to be grateful , maybe a gift of the boots .
because , because the dazuzugehören can lead to the collapse of the world , so easily that you can get the assumptions of the environment .
now i &apos;m a enough point of my bequemlichkeitsbereich , that , that , yes , the world , but not as you can .
possibilities that couldn &apos;t be allowed to be inspired by ausdrücklich .
there was a energy that was a energy , a unerbittlichen optimism , a strange mixtur of humility and the wagnisses .
so i followed my gut .
i collected a little team of people to me , for me , for me , for me , for me , for me , &quot; a unwiderstehliche challenge .
a year , we didn &apos;t have cents a cent .
at the end of a every monday i photographed a huge topf soup , which we shared .
we worked until late in night .
most of our ideas were mad , but it was a few brilliant , and we did the breakthrough .
i met the decision to pull in the united states , to pull the united states , to pull the united states , to pull the united states , to pull the united states .
just after a journey .
my gut , my gut .
three months later , i moved to the adventure , and i went to adventure .
before i abschließe the lecture , i want to tell you about my grandmother .
she grew up to a time , in the konfuzianismus of the social norm , and the local act was the most important person .
life hasn &apos;t been changed for centuries .
her father died after her birth .
her mother moved them on her .
with 17 , they became the second woman , whose mother was calling her .
without the support of your husband , she &apos;s sorgte for a sensation , by using the court to court and anklägerin in your own case , and a still larger sensation than they won .
&quot; not &quot; go to the act .
i &apos;m just stuck in a hotel room when she died . 1,000 miles away from a row .
i looked through the duschtrennwand , and i looked at the other side .
i knew she was coming to remember it .
my mother called me a few minutes .
a couple days later , we went into a buddhist temple in footscray and sat around their coffin .
we told her stories and versicherten her , we still have the stories .
and to come back to midnight , the monk and said , he &apos;d have to close the scene .
my mother asked us , their hand .
she asked the monk , &quot; why is your hand so warm and the rest of her is so cold ? &quot;
&quot; because they &apos;ve been keeping them for tomorrow , &quot; he said .
&quot; they don &apos;t have them . &quot;
if it &apos;s a band , there &apos;s a band , then it &apos;s going through the women .
and you see , you know , who we were , and how life has us , we can see the men who were going to be able to come into the quere .
the defeat was just too easy .
now i &apos;d like to do my own children , and i think the boat .
who would ever ever ever ever ever get ?
yeah , i &apos;ve got scared of privilege , leichtigkeit , leichtigkeit , vor .
can i give you a bug in your life , who is courageous every wave of every wave , the unbeirrte , the unbeirrte , the long horizon who doesn &apos;t even have anything ?
i don &apos;t know .
but if i could give this , and you could make sure it would do .
and also , tans is a mutter today here today in the fourth or fifth .
i &apos;m here to share with you with them .
is it all over photography ?
because , of course , that &apos;s a picture you can &apos;t take with your camera .
but my interest in photography , when i got my first bono , at age 15 years .
i combined with my earlier school , but it was a little different , because the camera was using the camera in the planning of planning .
and if you put a picture with a camera , ends of the process , if you &apos;re on the trigger .
so for me , it seemed to be more likely to go to the right to go to the right place at the right time .
i believed everybody could .
so i wanted to create something else , something that &apos;s going to start when the triggers gets to the end .
images like this : a construction one is a much lower road .
but it &apos;s got a unexpected twist .
and yet , a realistic level .
or photographs like this -- dark and farbenfroh at the same time , but everybody with the collective goal .
if i say i say , i &apos;m going to foto-realität .
because , of course , you &apos;re not something that you can really choose , but i want to look like that , as if you could have this photo on a photo .
photographs photographs where you have to think about a moment to try to figure out the trick .
so it &apos;s more likely to get a idea of a idea of a moment .
but what &apos;s the trick that it would look like ?
is it about the detail or the colors ?
is it about the light ?
what do you create the illusion ?
sometimes the perspective is the illusion .
but the final thing is , it &apos;s about how we interpret the world , and how they can be made on a two-dimensional surface .
it &apos;s not about what realistic is , but what we &apos;re doing .
so i think the basics are very simple .
i see it as a puzzle of reality where you can take different pieces of pieces and comfortable to create an alternative reality .
and let me show you a simple example .
we have three perfectly perfectly vorstellbare objects that we all have to identify us all in a three-dimensional world .
but in a certain way , you can combine something , you can create something that &apos;s still looks like it might exist .
but at the same time , we know that that &apos;s not possible .
so we actually do our brains , because our brain doesn &apos;t just don &apos;t really make sense .
and i see the same process in the combine of photographs .
it &apos;s really just about making different realities .
so the things that &apos;s a picture is going to look at a picture , i think it &apos;s the things we don &apos;t think about , the things around us .
but if we combine photographs , it really matters , because otherwise you can &apos;t look at it wrong .
so i would say that there are three simple rules to follow a realistisches outcome .
as you can see , these are not three special pictures .
but you can get something like this .
so the first rule is that there should have been photographs of the same perspective .
secondly , there should be the same thing to have pictures .
and these two images are fulfill these two and the same height , and the same thing .
and third is to make it possible to make the individual pictures start and end by making them physically .
it &apos;s impossible to say how this photo was actually been taken .
so by taking color , contrast and helligkeit on the edge of the rändern , fotografische , fotografische , entsättigte , entsättigte , entsättigte , entsättigte colors , and let &apos;s see the limit between the different images , and let &apos;s look at the boundaries between the different images , even though a picture of the planes can contain hundreds of thousands of planes .
here &apos;s another example .
you might think that it &apos;s only a material , and the bottom part was charged .
so this picture is completely completely different from different places .
personally , i personally , personally , it &apos;s easier to create a place to find a place , because you don &apos;t have to have a compromise with the ideas in its head .
but it &apos;s a lot of planning .
and when i had this idea in winter , i knew i had a couple months to plan to plan you to find different places for the higgs field .
for instance , the fish was taken on a anglerausflug .
the bank of the bank comes from one another place .
the unterwasser-teil comes from a quarry .
and i , i even have the house on the island of red , to make it look complicated .
to reach a realistisches outcome , it &apos;s going to be from my planning .
i always start with a sketch , one idea .
and after that , it &apos;s about the combination of different images .
and here &apos;s a piece of a very good job .
and if you make good footage , the result of the outcome , and also pretty realistic .
so , it &apos;s all tools that are there , and the only thing that we &apos;re going to be is , our imagination is .
thank you .
i &apos;d like to talk to you about why so many electronic gesundheits-projekte fail .
and i think that the most important point is that we stopped talking to our patients .
and one of the things we &apos;ve launched at the radboud-universität , was to get a haupt-zuhörer .
they don &apos;t really besonders scientifically -- they put a cup of coffee , and asks the patients , families , , and , &quot; how do it &apos;s like ?
how can we help you ? &quot;
and we think that this is one of the main characteristics of the main characteristics of why all of the things -- perhaps most of the electronic gesundheits-projekte fehlschlagen , because we stopped listening .
this is my favorite scenario . a very simple thing .
she &apos;s button , / / / / / .
and every morning i &apos;ve got to this .
and i , i have a job , as you might recognize .
i have my job at 95 pounds .
it works very simple : every time i put on the balloon , you send my data in google health .
and they also get from my allgemeinarzt , so it can see that , so he can see where my gewichtsproblem , and it &apos;s not just the moment where i can support kardiologische or so , but also , with a look at the past .
but there &apos;s something else .
maybe you know , i &apos;ve been familiar with you , i &apos;ve been over 4,000 follower on twitter .
so every morning i &apos;m talking about my wlan-waage , and people who talk to me , until i &apos;m going to sit in the car , &quot; for lunch , i &apos;m just going to be a little lettuce today , lucien . &quot;
but this is the netteste , which can happen because this is the gruppenzwang of the brain , to help patients , because that could be literally obesity , or it could be patient &apos;s smoking abgewöhnen .
it could also be used to get people to get people from their chairs , and they tend to play the same way to play their health .
so , the next week comes on the market .
it will be that little chirp that you &apos;re giving you to a iphone or so anschließt .
and it will allow people to measure their blood pressure , to send it to their doctor , and to share it with others , for something like 100 dollars .
so on this point , the patients come to the game , you can &apos;t be able to take the control of your own , but can help us help us in your own own , but in the face of the challenges that are facing us , and that &apos;s twice , twice , twice , and so on .
make them make the techniques that are easily using to the leicht , patients to hug patients in the team .
and that can be able to reach through these techniques but also by himself .
and one of the things we &apos;ve made , i want to share with you with a short video .
we &apos;ve all got all the navigationssysteme in our cars .
maybe even in our cell phones .
we know exactly where all the atms are all atm around .
we know one of the things that are all stations .
and we can see we can find fastfood-ketten .
but where would be the next aed to help this patient ?
we have herumgefragt , and no one knew it knew .
nobody knew where the next country was going to find the next year in this moment .
so what did we do ? we &apos;ve done in the netherlands .
we &apos;ve got a website , and we asked a menschenmasse , &quot; if you see a aed , please , please , please , please , please , if he &apos;s lying , &quot; because it &apos;s during the geschäftszeiten , of course .
and over 10,000 aeds were already in the netherlands .
the next step was to find apps .
and we have designed a ipad-app .
we &apos;ve developed a app for layar , augmented reality to find this aeds .
and if you &apos;re in a city like maastricht , and someone can sit in the next few weeks , and within the next weeks , the next weeks , to find the next aed of the next quarter of the life , life can save life .
and today we don &apos;t want to just not only do this as a aed4u , as the product is called aed4us .
and we want to bring this on a global level .
and we ask our colleagues on the planet , from other universities , to help us help us to help us make these aeds of the world .
and if they &apos;re in vacation and someone who &apos;s zusammenbricht , it &apos;s your own verwandtschaft or somebody , you can find a aed .
the other thing we want to ask is that companies are helping us all over the world at all of the world &apos;s most important .
these could be kurierdienste , or a technician , just to make sure that the gemeldete is still still in its place .
please , please help us , and try to do it not only to improve the health , but to take the hand .
thank you .
today i &apos;m going to report by the unexpected discoveries .
i work in the solartechnologie-branche .
and my little startup wants to do that we &apos;re forcing us to protecting the systems by making it ...
... it &apos;s going to be done .
here &apos;s a short video about what we do .
oh . a moment .
it might be , until it &apos;s under .
now -- we can just cover that -- i &apos;m going to just throw it up to the video of the video .
no .
that &apos;s not ... -- not ... ...
okay .
solartechnologie is ... ... ...
oh , my time is over ?
okay . thank you .
so a couple of years ago , i started to take a program to get a program to take the stars of the world in technology and design to work on a place that &apos;s so much , which they &apos;re actually hate , we have them to work in government .
the program is called &quot; code for america , &quot; and it &apos;s a little bit like the friedenscorps .
we &apos;re going to vote every year and we &apos;re going to work with them with stadtverwaltungen .
instead of sending them in the third world , we send them in rathäuser .
and there were a great deal with the new mitarbeitern .
but what you really do is to show what &apos;s possible with technology today .
so you meet al .
al &apos;s al qaeda is a hydrant in the city .
here it looks like he &apos;s looking for a date , but what he really addiction is , someone who &apos;s eingeschneit , because he knows it &apos;s not very good at the brandbekämpfung of a foot , when he &apos;s zugedeckt .
how did he get to look for this particular way ?
we had a team of a team of the fellows in boston , the code for america .
they were there in february , and it &apos;s a lot of february februar .
and they realized that the city never reaches the hydranten free free .
but a certain fellow fellow , a guy named erik michaels-ober , and that was something else , and that was that the residents were free , right before these parts .
so he did what every good engineers would do , he wrote a app .
it &apos;s a nice little app where you can touch a fire hydrant .
you stimmst to him , if it &apos;s a million .
if you &apos;re doing this , you can give you a name , and he called the first al qaeda .
if you don &apos;t do that , it can take somebody else .
so there &apos;s a nice little spieldynamik .
this is a modest app .
it &apos;s probably the smallest apps that have written the fellows in the last year .
but it does something that does not do any other hydrostatic .
they &apos;re spreading .
there &apos;s this guy in the i.t. in the i.t. in the city of the city , who may have seen that app , not for snow , but to make the citizens of tsunami-sirenen .
it &apos;s very important that these tsunami-sirenen work , but people steal the batteries .
so he got to check the citizens to check them .
and then finally decided to use the app to clean the citizens to clean the citizens .
and chicago , she has just introduced to the people who were schneit the buergersteige freischaufeln , when it was .
we now know nine cities , the planning of using this app .
and she &apos;s verbreitet , organic , of course , of course .
if you know something about regierungstechnologie , you know , it doesn &apos;t go away .
the beschaffung of software takes a few years .
we had a team that was working last year in boston , for three people for three people .
it was to find a method with the parents , which is the right public school for their children .
and we &apos;ve been told that if it would go over the normal canals , it would have been taken over two million dollars .
and that &apos;s not even anything .
there &apos;s a project in the california that &apos;s the taxpayer for two billion dollars , and it doesn &apos;t work .
and there are projects like this on every level of government .
so a app that &apos;s written in a few days , and then , from selbt , is a sort of a sound in the institution of the government .
it shows how the government could work better -- not more like a private company , how many people think they should be .
and not even like a technik-unternehmen , but rather than the internet itself .
and that means free access to access to open and productive .
and that &apos;s important .
but more importantly , in this app , that they &apos;re a new generation of the government -- not as the problem of the government -- not as a problem of the collective energy .
and this is a very good news , because it turns out that we &apos;re very good at the collective act of digital technology .
now there &apos;s a great community of people who make the tools that we need to make things together .
it &apos;s not just &quot; code for america , &quot; you are hundreds of people in the country , and write a lot of people who write up and write a day in their own communities .
they don &apos;t have the government to be given .
they &apos;re very frustrated with her , but they don &apos;t complain them .
and these guys are actually knowing what we &apos;ve lost from the eyes .
and that &apos;s when you all share your emotions , and the snake line in the arbeitsamt , and all the other things that we really are really afraid of , in the heart of tim , in the words of tim o o , &quot; what we &apos;re doing in the words of the words of &quot; what we can do . &quot;
today , a lot of people have given government .
and if you &apos;re one of the people , i ask you , you know , you &apos;re going to change things .
politics changes not change ; the government is in change .
and because the government finally came from us -- erinner you : &quot; we &apos;re going to be people ? &quot; -- how we think about how this change happens .
i didn &apos;t know much about government than i started to do this program .
and how many people , i thought it was mainly for a lot of the government to vote .
now after two years , i &apos;m to the conclusion that it &apos;s particularly about to kommunen .
that &apos;s the world &apos;s precursor for service and information .
you get out there , if you anrufst in your city .
if you &apos;ve got to work in your mind , in your städtisches , in your städtisches , as our fellow scott , as our fellow scott , as we &apos;re all -- you know , you &apos;re going to see that the people are calling for many different problems , including a beutelratte in your house .
so scott is this anfruf .
he &apos;s called &quot; beutelratte &quot; in the official database .
and he &apos;s not really a idea . he begins with the tierfänger .
and finally , he says , &quot; look , you can just open all the doors in your house and see how that &apos;s the tiniest of the vieh ? &quot;
and that worked . applause for scott .
but that wasn &apos;t the end of the beutelratten .
boston didn &apos;t just have a call .
it has a app , a web- and handy-app , called &quot; citizens connect . &quot;
we don &apos;t have this app .
this is very clever people in the office of new delhi .
one day -- this is a single report -- this is what i call this : &quot; beutelratte in my mülltonne , &quot; can &apos;t tell you if they &apos;re dead .
how do i get them away ? &quot;
but what happened with &quot; citizens connect &quot; is different .
scott unterhielt itself from human being human .
but in &quot; citizens connect , &quot; all of it is , so everybody can see it .
and in this case , it saw a neighbor .
and the next one , the next thing we &apos;ve got , &quot; i went there , i found the mülltonne behind the house .
beutelratte ? yes . alive ? yap .
turned the mülltonne on the side . went home .
the good night , sweetheart beutelratte . &quot;
pretty straightforward .
that &apos;s great . here &apos;s what the digital is .
and it &apos;s also a good example of how the government is to get into the frontal lobe .
but it &apos;s also a great example of the government .
and i don &apos;t necessarily think of a technological definition of platform .
i &apos;m talking about a platform for people to help themselves and help others .
a single citizen helped a other citizens , but the government played a central role .
they were just making these two people .
and you would have to connect them with government electronically if they were needed to have a nachbar , but a neighbor is a far better way to make alternative services .
if a neighbor of the other helps , we &apos;re going to strengthen our communities .
we call the tierfänger , costs a lot of money .
one of the most important things is that we must think that government is not the same thing as politics .
and most people understand that , but they think that one of the input of the other .
that our contribution to the system is .
how many of us have a political guide , and sometimes we have a lot of energy to choose a new political leaders -- and then we then expect to come back and we expect to be able to make our values and our needs , and then it hasn &apos;t changed much more changing ?
that &apos;s because the government is the government of ocean , and politics are the top .
and what underneath it is , is what we call the bureaucracy .
and we &apos;re using this word with such a way .
but it &apos;s this kind of thing that we have , which we have , and for the we can pay for us to do something about us , something else , and then we entmachten ourselves .
people seem to think politics is sexy .
if we want this institution for us , we need to do a bureaucracy .
because that &apos;s where the actual regierungsarbeit is happening .
we need to take us on the verge of government .
so the occupythesec-bewegung has done it .
have you seen these guys ?
it &apos;s a group of a group of the gruppe of the bürger , who wrote a very detailed 325-seitigen report who &apos;s a response to the sec-memo of the finanz-reform .
that &apos;s not politically active , that &apos;s active active .
now , for those of us who have given the government , it &apos;s time that we think about the world that we want to leave our children .
you &apos;ve got to imagine the enormous challenges you have to imagine .
believe we really believe that we &apos;re going to reach , without improving the one of the institution that can act in the name of us ?
a government is absolutely vital , but it needs to be efficient .
the good news is that technology is able to do that in the government of government in a way that actually can reach the society by society .
and there &apos;s a generation of the internet , and the weiß internet is that it &apos;s not so hard to do things , you have to build the only systems .
now the average age of our dna is 28 , so i &apos;m , unfortunately , almost a generation than most of you .
this is a generation that grew up with the aufgewachsen , your voice as a result .
they don &apos;t fight this fight , which we all fight , who are speaking , you &apos;re all speaking to all .
you can also move your mind on every channel , and they do it .
so if you &apos;re faced with the problem of government , they don &apos;t care about it , they don &apos;t use their voices .
they use your hands .
they use your hands to write applications that work is the work of the government .
and these apps are using our hands to enhance our communities .
that could be a fire , unkraut , a trash with a trash with a beutelratte .
and sure , we would have this fire , all the time , and many people do .
but these apps are like little digital memories , that we &apos;re not only consumers , and we &apos;re not only the only of government , the taxes and receive government .
we are more than that , we are citizens .
and we will not improve the government to improve the benefits .
so the question i &apos;ve got to you for you , if it &apos;s about the big , important things that we need to do together , all together , we &apos;re going to be a lot of voices , or we will also be a lot of the hands ?
thank you .
what &apos;s my role is to explain the people who are going to be the new technologies , and i thought i &apos;m going to look at what i really think about . and i thought i &apos;m going to look at what i really want to look at , and i &apos;m going to try to look at this incredible sprüngen , which is what we can do with
i &apos;m going to start with you a second to show you a single slide .
... could you show you the slide .
this is a slide that i &apos;ve chosen to get out of my head .
it &apos;s not about the detail of the slide , but it &apos;s actually about the generelle form .
this slide is a analyse of a analysis of us from the power of risc , compared to the power of a local increase .
the interesting thing here is that these slide , like the other way , which is how we often find a lot of view in our field , a kind of a semi-logarithmischen curve .
with other words , everybody &apos;s here &apos;s equivalent to a potency of the leistungsskala .
and that &apos;s a story that we have to have this guy in the field of semi-logarithmischen curves in the field of technology .
something very strange here .
this is what i &apos;m going to be speaking about here .
so if you can shine the lights back .
something more disturbing because i &apos;m going to draw something about the paper here .
well why do we draw on the graph in the technology of semi-logarithmischen curves ?
the reason for this is , if i would draw it on a normal curve , where we &apos;re going to be the years , so that &apos;s a universal tree , which is a universal range of technology that i want to be with a graph , which is the graph .
so the look look like this .
and that doesn &apos;t tell us much .
now if i want to take another technology , we &apos;ll say , &quot; we would say , that would be very unvernünftig , very unvernünftig , in form , a flat line .
but if something like this , then it changes the qualitativen circumstance .
so if the transporttechnologie of the transporttechnologie as the transporttechnologie of the mikroprozessor-technologie of the mikroprozessor-technologie , we could put a übermorgen in a taxi and in 30 seconds we were in tokyo .
but that &apos;s not going to go .
that never happened before the history of the technologie-entwicklung , these kind of rekursivem growth , which is the number of years .
now the question i want to ask you now is , if you look at these exponential curves , you can &apos;t go to always forever .
it &apos;s not possible that everything is forever all for us and how fast now .
there are two options : there are two options : two options : two options : two options : two options : two options : there are two options : two options : two options : two options : two options : two options : two options : there are two options : two options : two options : two options : two options : two options : two options
it &apos;s going to be a classic s-kurve like this , until something completely new , or it will happen here .
that &apos;s about it .
well , i &apos;m a optimist , so i think so something like this .
is that really , that &apos;s what we &apos;re here in the middle of a transition .
we &apos;re on this line in a transition of a transition of the world in the world of the world in the world of a new kind of world .
so the question i want to ask , and i also often ask myself , is how this new world will be ?
what about this new state , the world ?
because the transition seems very , very confusing , if you &apos;re in the middle of the middle .
when i was a kid , there was the future where the future was going to be a year somewhere in 2000 , and people often wondered what would happen to the year 2000 .
now we have a conference here , where people are talking about the future , and you realize that the future still is still in 2000 .
so on , we don &apos;t go .
so in other words , the future of every year i &apos;ve been a year for the last year .
i think the reason for this is that we &apos;re talking about that anything is in the heart .
the transition is going to happen . we can all feel all .
and we know that it &apos;s not going to be able to try and see 50 years into the future , because everything will be so different , because it &apos;s going to be different , that a simple hochrechnung of what we &apos;re doing now is not making any meaning .
now i want to talk about what this might be that is that we &apos;re going to be in this place where we are right now .
to do this , i &apos;ll talk about some other things that really don &apos;t have anything to do with technology or computers .
because i really think that &apos;s really , to get this , we need to go back and look at the thing to a longer längeren .
and that &apos;s what i want to look at this on the edge of life on earth .
i think that &apos;s what makes sense of this , if you put it in some milliarden-schritte .
so we go back , and it &apos;s the way that we &apos;ve been doing , the earth was a big , steriler steinklumpen with many chemicals with many chemicals .
now if you look at the way that these chemicals were organized , then we have a pretty good picture about how they anstellten it .
i also think there are theories that &apos;s beginning to understand how everything begins with rna , but i &apos;m going to tell you a little story about this , which is that at that time , at that time , little öltröpfchen herumschwebten , which are different kinds of rezepten for chemicals .
some of these öltröpfchen are actually a special combination of chemicals which allowed them to integrate other chemicals from the sequence of the sequence .
everybody was so aufzuteilen , started .
these little öltröpfchen were in the sense of the sinne .
but these aren &apos;t that öltröpfchen , these don &apos;t have about existing sense , because every single one of those was just a small , zufälliges recipe of chemicals .
and every time there were shared , they have the same chemicals in the same way .
so , every tröpfchen was a bit different .
in fact , the tröpfchen , which is a tröpfchen , which one of the growth of growth was faster than others and the integrated , and more and more chemicals of the items and shared .
so these are the very beginning to survive , and they &apos;re vermehrten in grösserem .
so that &apos;s only a very simple chemical form of life , but more interesting , if this is a trick to a trick .
in a way that we don &apos;t understand very much , these tröpfchen , the ability to perform information .
they &apos;ve learned the recipe that the recipe of the cell , and it &apos;s in a certain chemical shape which we call dna .
in other words , they have in this kind of geistlosen , evolutionary kind of a way of making them niederzuschreiben , which they were allowed to do , so that these information can be stored and copied .
the amazing thing is that this kind of information is able to store information over time , and in the era of 2.5 billion years , which is remained .
in fact , the recipe for us , which is our genes , from exactly the same code and the same notation .
and that &apos;s the importance of that creatures used the exact same letter and the same code .
we &apos;re so far , we only have to write the vergnügungszweck , and you can write anything in this code .
and i have 100 mikrogramm of a white pulvers , which i try to keep in airports from sicherheitspersonal .
it &apos;s what i did -- i &apos;ve taken this code -- the code is made of normal letter , which is what we &apos;re using to symbolisieren , and i &apos;ve written my gnarly dna , and i &apos;ve spent 10 ^ 22 22 times .
so if someone wants to do a hundred million copies of my visitenkarte , i have enough for everybody in this room and for everybody in the world , and it &apos;s right here .
if i was a egoist , i would have been written on a virus , and i had a virus , and in the room .
so what is the next step ?
the niederschreiben of dna was a interesting step .
and the veranlagten of these cells -- that made them happy for another billion years .
but then another , very interesting step at the things that things were completely different . and that &apos;s where these cells were going to communicate and information that communities created by the way that communities evolved .
i don &apos;t know if they knew it , but bacteria can actually make your dna .
that &apos;s why the public &apos;s consistency is growing up to antibiotics .
some bacteria have found how you can take a lot of different bacteria , and you have these information with other bacteria , and now we have lots of bacteria , which are the resistant of the penicillin , because the bacteria communicate .
now , this communication is allowed to the reasons of communities that were in a certain sense of the same boat ; they were synergetisch .
so they were able to survive , or they were going to move together , and that meant that if a community was successful , all individuals , all individuals have been repeated and wiederholt from evolution .
now the übergangsstelle is where these communities are so close to the whole range of nahe that they &apos;re determined to write the recipe for the whole community in a zeichenkette .
and the next interesting thing about another billion years .
at this point , we have mehrzellige communities , communities of lots of verschiedlichen zellentypen , which together as individual organism .
in fact , we &apos;re also a solche community .
we have a lot of cells that are not going to be on itself .
your skin cells are useless , more sophisticated , muscle , efficient and so forth .
so these communities started weiterzuentwickeln , so that the level of evolution was happening , not longer the single cell , but the whole zellengemeinschaft , which we call the organism .
now the next step now is within this communities .
the zellengemeinschaften started to formulate information .
and they developed special structures which doesn &apos;t have anything else to process information within the organism .
and these are the neural structures .
so the neurons are the informationsverarbeitungsapparat that have built these zellengemeinschaften .
they started to specialists in specialists in the community , special structures , which were responsible for learning , understanding and the festhalten .
and this was the brain and the nervous system of these communities .
this gave you a evolutionary advantage .
because at this point , a individual -- learning is actually within the period of the time of the average organism , instead of having this evolutionary amount of time .
so for example , a organism , for example , a particular story , not to eat a particular story because she had bad , and he made sick , the last time he ate it .
now , this was going to happen within the lifetime of a single organism , whereas hundreds of thousands of years ago , because these information had to learn from the individuals , which is not in the individuals , which is not there .
so the nervous system has the evolutionsprozess of this particular informationsstrukturen , because evolution could be able to create evolution within a individual .
she could make a zeitlichen in a zeitlichen .
what happened after that after that , the individual organisms found a way to communicate .
for example , the raffinierteste raffinierteste of us is probably the bekannte of this kommunikationsart version of human language .
it &apos;s a pretty amazing invention when you think about it .
i have a very complex , unordentliche and puzzled idea in my head .
i &apos;m sitting here , and i give a grunzende töne , in the hope , in the hope , in the hope , to create a similar way to create a certain resemblance with my original idea .
so we take something very complicated , and we take it into sound , a sequence of sound , and produce something very complicated in the head of others .
so this allows us to work as a community of organism .
and what we did in , we &apos;ve made , we started to have mankind .
we &apos;re starting to take the same stages , which mehrzellerorganismen have been durchgemacht -- the abstraction of our methods , as we &apos;re using data , water .
the invention of language was a little step in this direction .
telefonie , computers , videobänder , cd-roms , cd-roms , and so forth , all of our spezialisierten mechanisms that we built in our community to get this information .
and it &apos;s all together to something that &apos;s much bigger , and also , it &apos;s going to be more faster than we were before .
so nowadays , evolution can happen in the time of microseconds .
you &apos;ve seen a tys little evolutionsbeispiel , kleines evolutionsbeispiel , where he showed a little evolution in the &quot; convolution &quot; to the eyes .
so we have the zeitskalen again again .
the first steps of history , which i told you , a billion years a piece .
the next steps , like the nervous system and the brain , a hundred million years .
then the nächstens steps , how language and so forth , less than a million years .
and these next steps , like electronics , seem to take a few decades .
the process of self , i think , i think , is the word for the word -- when something seine .
the more it changes , the faster changes it .
and i think that &apos;s what we see here in this explosionsartigen curve .
we see the process that &apos;s feeding themselves from themselves .
i live for example , i live for a lot of computing from computers , and i know that i use using computers to build computers , not using the recently of the computer science .
my recent activity is , objects with such a kind of a kind of a lot of complexity that it &apos;s impossible to design this in the traditional sense .
i don &apos;t know what every single transistor is in the verbindungsmaschine .
it has billions of those .
what i do instead , and what the designers of the thinking machines , we think of a certain amount of abstraktionsebene , and the machine does that machine , and the machine does that we do , and it &apos;s better than we could ever do it .
and they make it a part of the techniques that we don &apos;t even understand right now .
one way that &apos;s particularly interesting , and i &apos;ve been used in lately , and that &apos;s how evolution is evolution .
and we put a evolutionsprozess in the machine which is in the mikrosekunden-bereich .
to call an example , in the extreme cases , we can create a program that &apos;s made out of random acts of random acts .
we say , &quot; computers , generiere , generiere million people have to go to instructions .
now , now , all of these random pathways are made of the instruktionen , which is all the programs , and the wähle , the ones that are the closest . &quot;
so in other words , i first define what i want .
let &apos;s say , let &apos;s say , i want to make numbers , which would be a simple example that i &apos;ve been used for it .
so , in fact , the programs that can pick up the edges of paper .
and of course , is the chance of random elected elected students that they &apos;re going to move away from accident , so they &apos;re not going to be able to make a lot of the instructions that they &apos;re doing this .
but one of those things like this is something that &apos;s good luck with something two numbers in the right order .
now i say , &quot; computers , take the 10 percent of the sequence , which is the closest .
so , this is a turn , lösche , lösche .
now , all the übriggebliebenen , the numbers that have the numbers on the best .
and with a method of the rekombinierens , analog to reproduction . &quot;
take two programs , and they produce children through the exchange of their subroutinen , and the children were vererben the characteristics of the subroutinen of the two programs .
so i have a new generation of programs that occurred by combinations of programs that are closer to the skin .
say , &quot; please repeat this process . &quot;
bewerte them again .
maybe some mutations a couple of mutations .
and try to try to do all of the whole generation .
all these generations , need to have a few people to get a few people to get a few people to get a few milliseconds of science , and i only need few milliseconds of science , and i only need few milliseconds of science , and i only need a few milliseconds of science fiction .
and so i can undergo a evolution of millions of years in the computer in the computer , and in a way , in a way , or in a way , a few hours .
finally , i got to programme , the numbers can pick up the numbers .
and the fact is that the programs are so much more efficient than any program i could have had ever had .
if i look at this kind of thing , i can &apos;t tell you how they work .
i tried to understand them .
it &apos;s 0.5 and strange programs .
but they &apos;re going to do the job .
i know , i &apos;m sure you &apos;re going to do it because they get the job because they come from a series of hunderttausenden programs that have the job .
because your life depended out of it , whether you &apos;re doing the job .
i was in a 747 zusammen with marvin minsky , he ale a card , and says , &quot; oh look . look at what you &apos;re looking at .
that &apos;s where this airplane is made of hunderttausenden kleinteilen , which together work together to make their flight safe , and do you not zuversichtlicher that ? &quot;
we know that a entwicklungsprozess is not going to be a moment when he &apos;s going to be too complicated .
so we start to leave on computers , which is a process of the classic ingenieurswesen , which is greatly different .
he allows us to give things with a much higher complexity than it would allow to produce normal methods .
and yet , we don &apos;t understand the possibilities of it .
so , gewissermassen überflügelt is the technology .
we use this programs to make the computer much faster , so that we can make these processes , and make these processes to make it faster .
so it &apos;s a rückkopplung .
it will evaporate faster and faster and i think that &apos;s why it seems to be confusing .
because all these new technologies are coming from itself from itself .
we &apos;re going to run .
we are at a point , the analog is to be developed as being developed as being developed .
so we are the amöben and we can &apos;t really make sure that we &apos;re actually going to be the kind of thing on the table .
we &apos;re in the middle of this .
but i really think that &apos;s something that &apos;s coming .
i think it &apos;s very hochmütig of us , we &apos;re going to be the funding of evolution .
and i think we all are part of what &apos;s going on , whatever you &apos;re next .
well , the lunch is before and i &apos;m listening to me now , before i &apos;m going to go .
my story starts to start here in rajasthan , about two years ago .
i was under the sternenhimmel in the desert , with sufi-sänger mukhtiar ali .
we talked about it &apos;s nothing changed since the time of the ancient indian indian . &quot;
if we wanted to go back to indian back , we were put in a car and schwirrten over the sky .
now we do that with airplanes .
back in the back of the great indian durst durst , he took a bow , fired into the soil and water .
now we &apos;re doing that with bohrern and machines .
we came to the conclusion that magic and magic by machines .
that &apos;s really really sad .
i got a bit of fear .
it was afraid i &apos;m afraid i could lose the ability to enjoy the sunset without a camera and without having a tweet of my friends .
i found technology can make magic magic , and not kill .
when i was a little girl , my grandfather gave me his little silberne .
this piece of 50 years of technology became the magischste thing for me .
she was a goldener relationship with a world full of pirates and verunglückter ships and verunglückter and forth in my imagination .
so , it came up with , when we put our schicken clocks and cameras to dreams .
they were inspired by being inspired by it .
and so i &apos;m going to take a place in the world of technology to see how i can use to make magic .
with 16 , i started to illustrate books .
when i saw the ipad , i saw it as a device to storytelling that &apos;s readers to connect the whole world .
it can know how we keep it .
it can know where we are .
it &apos;s the same time , and text and text together , and animation , sounds and touch .
the storytelling always needed more .
but what do we do ?
i just go to khoya , a interactive drop .
here : &quot; your fingers on each light . &quot;
and so -- here , &quot; this box , i write my name .
and it &apos;s going to be a character in the book .
and again , it &apos;s going to be a letter for me -- and the ipad knows through gps where i live in the middle of gps where i live -- it &apos;s right to me .
the kid in me is really excites me .
i &apos;ve talked a lot about magic .
i don &apos;t mean zauberer and dragons , but the magic of childhood , those of those who were all children .
fireflies in a glass i found a lot .
so you have to get the ipad and the fireflies .
and the beleuchten one of the way the way the way through the rest of the book .
another idea that i &apos;m a child , that a whole galaxy can manifest a single galaxy in a single pit .
and so here &apos;s every book , and every world , a little murmel that i &apos;m going to go to the device .
and this opens up a map .
fantasybücher had always maps , but these maps were static .
this map grows and leuchtet and dient to the rest of the book .
they also show other places of the book .
i go here .
it &apos;s also important to me , for me , something that &apos;s indisch , but also very zeitgemäß .
these are the apsaras .
we &apos;ve all heard of feen and nymphen , but how many people are familiar with india , who are all heard their indian colleagues , who apsaras ?
the poor apsaras were stuck in indras , gefangen in a old book in a old book book .
and we bring them back to the children in a great story for children .
a story that &apos;s going to be with new issues , like the umweltkrise .
for the theme of the theme , a big problem of the last 10 years is that kids are sitting in their dorm room , to their computers .
but now , with mobile technology , we can take our children into the natural world with their technology .
in a interaction of the book , you &apos;re going to get a search for a search . you have to get out of the camera of the top of the noise of the most natural objects .
as a child , i had collections of stöckern , stones , steinen , kieseln .
somehow , the children are not doing anymore .
this is kindheitsritual . you have to get out of a chapter to make a picture of a flower and tag .
in another chapter , you have to highlight a piece of baumrinde and tag .
so , you know , you can actually start a digital collection of photographs that you can give online .
a kid in london shows the picture of a fuchses , and says , &quot; oh , i &apos;ve seen a fox . &quot;
a kid in india says , &quot; i &apos;ve seen a monkey . &quot;
this is a kind of social network around a digital collection of photographs that you actually actually actually actually .
there &apos;s a variety of possibilities of ways to connect the world and technology .
in the next book , we &apos;re planning to do a interaction where you use the video of the ipads , and through a augmented of the elfen , the animation that appear on a plant of the house .
at one point , the screen is filling with leaves .
you have to make the sound of the winds , you &apos;re going to read them and the rest of the rest .
we all move us to a world where the other is closer to the technology and move into the magic and technology .
we use the energy of sun .
we bring our children and closer to the natural world , and at the magic , fun and love of our childhood through the simple medium of a story .
thank you .
this is really a commitment to me .
i spend most of my time with people in untersuchungshaft , prisons or todeszellen .
i spend most of my time with the social mountain in the sozialbausiedlungen and places where there &apos;s very diverse with a lot of hopelessness .
here &apos;s where to be at ted , and to hear how stimulating this is , i have a lot of power .
in short , i was given one obvious thing : ted has a identity .
you can say things like the world &apos;s influence .
and sometimes , if something comes from ted , it gets a meaning and strength that otherwise otherwise otherwise otherwise otherwise otherwise otherwise otherwise otherwise otherwise otherwise otherwise otherwise otherwise .
i say that because i believe that identity is very important .
we &apos;ve seen some amazing presentations .
i think we &apos;ve learned that the words of a teacher , but that &apos;s the words of a dedicated to the engagierten of a dedicated to the engagierten .
as a physician , you can do good . but you can still do more .
and so i want to talk about the power of identity .
i didn &apos;t have the same way in my work as a lawyer .
i learned this from my grandmother .
i was raised in a family , a traditional afroamerikanischen household who was dominated by a matriarchin dominiert , and this was my grandmother .
she was a taffe , strong woman , she had effect .
she had the last word in every familienstreit .
she was also the biggest of many disputes in our family .
she was the daughter of a sklavenfamilie .
their parents were born in the 1840ern in virginia as slaves .
she was born around 1880 and the experience of slavery , and the experience of slavery , and the experience of slavery .
my grandmother was strong , but she was also loving .
if i met them as a little boy , she came to me and blow me .
she &apos;s so stuck that i could barely breathe . then let me go .
one or two hours later , if i came up with her , she came up to me and said , &quot; bryan , you know , you know ? &quot;
and if i said , &quot; no , she said , &quot; if i said , &quot; if i said , &quot; let me go back to me .
her was something that was going to be always in their proximity .
the only problem was that they had 10 children .
my mother was the youngest of their 10 children .
sometimes , if i wanted to spend time with her , it was hard to get their attention .
my cousins , everywhere there .
i remember , i have to be eight or nine , i was going to go to the morning and the living room . all my cousins were around .
my grandmother was sitting at the end of the zimmers , and i &apos;ll just look at me .
first , i thought that was a game .
i saw her and smiled , but she looked very seriously .
and that was so 15 or 20 minutes . then she went to me and came me on my hand and said , &quot; come , bryan , and i have to talk . &quot;
i remember that remember , i remember it .
i never forget it .
she was going to go out and said , &quot; bryan , i &apos;m going to tell you something , but you &apos;ve got to promise you not weitersagst . &quot;
i said , &quot; i said , &quot; i said , &quot; i said , &quot; i said , &quot; i said . &quot;
she said , &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
she sat down and she looked at me . she said , &quot; i want you to know that i &apos;ve seen you . &quot;
i said , &quot; i think you &apos;re something special . &quot;
i think , &quot; i think you can do anything you want to do . &quot;
i never forget that .
and she said , &quot; you &apos;ve got to have three things , bryan . &quot;
i said , &quot; ok , grandma . &quot;
&quot; you know , first of all , you always love your mom to love your mom . &quot;
she said , your baby is my baby , and you &apos;ve got to have to promise you &apos;re always caring . &quot;
i &apos;m going to be my mother , so i said , &quot; yes , i &apos;m going to do that . &quot;
and she said , &quot; next to me , you know , you &apos;re always going to do the right thing to do . &quot;
i thought , &quot; yes , i said , &quot; yes . i promise it . &quot;
and finally , she said , &quot; the last thing you have to have to have to have to do is that you &apos;re never going to drink alcohol . &quot;
now , i was nine years old , and i said , &quot; yes , granny . i promise it . &quot;
i grew up on the land , rural south , and i have a brother who &apos;s a year and a year &apos;s a year .
when i was about 14 or 15 , one day my brother came home and brought this sixpack beer with my sister and me and me with us in the forest .
we only have the alberten there as else .
then he took a drink of my sister and my sister &apos;s sister , and they started to get them , and then she offered me .
i said , &quot; no , no . do you , i &apos;m ok . i &apos;m not going to do it . i don &apos;t want beer . &quot;
my brother said , &quot; well , let &apos;s do that . now we do that , you know , you can do anything else .
i had a little sister , what was a beer . &quot;
i said , &quot; i don &apos;t want . do you . do you just do it . &quot;
my brother look at me .
he said , &quot; well , what &apos;s you ? well , what &apos;s the trink . &quot;
he looked at the face , and he said , &quot; oh no , you don &apos;t always have anything about the entertainment with the conversation ? &quot;
i said , &quot; what are you talking about ? &quot;
he said , &quot; grandma told everybody in the moment they &apos;re special . &quot;
i was devastated .
i &apos;m going to give you something .
i didn &apos;t want to do that .
this is going to be called publicly .
i &apos;m 52 years old , and i gestehe that i never have a drop of alcohol .
i don &apos;t say that because i believe it &apos;s tugendhaft . i say that because identity is power .
if we create the right kind of identity , we can tell people around us , and they can say , well , they don &apos;t believe you .
we can get them to do things , which they thought they couldn &apos;t .
of course , my grandmother would say all her grandchildren say , they &apos;re something special .
my grandfather was during the prison prison .
my uncle died of alkoholinduzierten diseases .
and she believed that this is the issues that we &apos;re going to be .
i tried to say something about our simplicity .
this country is different than 40 years ago .
and in 1972 , 300,000 people were in haftanstalten and prison .
today , it &apos;s 2.3 million .
the united states today have the highest incarceration of the world .
seven million people are on the surface or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
my opinion is , in my opinion , we have changed our world .
in socially and black parts of the population and hopelessness , because of this change .
one of three male black black black hole between 18 and 30 is in custody , in prison , in prison , or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
in urban communities everywhere in the country -- from los angeles , up to 60 , 50 to 60 percent of all the young young men are either lived in custody , in custody , in prison , or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
our system will not only be shaped by questioning with the rassenzugehörigkeit that &apos;s going to be with the poverty , it will also be by poverty .
we have a justizsystem that &apos;s a justizsystem that they &apos;re much better to treat a lot better than they &apos;re rich and guilty .
assets , not verschulden , which affects the result .
but still , we seem to be satisfied with it .
a politics of fear and anger has convinced us that these problems are not our problems .
we &apos;ve lost the contact .
i think that &apos;s interesting .
there &apos;s a bunch of hochinteressante developments .
my home alabama gave you dauerhaft , you know , you can take the wahlrecht , if you &apos;re going to be convicted .
here today , today , in alabama , 34 percent of the male population is lost their wahlrecht .
we prognostizieren that in 10 years of the bürgerlichen of the civic ehrenrechte , the bürgerlichen of the bürgerlichen ehrenrechte will be like the verabschiedung of the wahlrechtsgesetzes .
the silence is ohrenbetäubend .
i vertrete children .
many of my clients are very young .
the united states of america are the only country in the world , the dreizehnjährige children in prison for death .
in this country , there are no children ohne haftstrafen ohne .
we &apos;ve already run a lot of way .
the only country of the world .
i vertrete people in todeszellen .
the question of death is a very interesting question .
we believe that , because you &apos;ve taught us that the real question is , has a human being , for a human being , for a ihm of him ?
that &apos;s a very cheap question .
but you can also think differently about how we see our identity .
the other way is not a crime for a crime on death , but , but we &apos;ve earned it to kill ?
i find that fascinating .
the death penalty in america is defined by error .
on nine people we &apos;ve executed executed , one of the things we &apos;ve got to do with innocent , who was discharged from death .
a amazing fehlerquote . one of the nine .
i find that fascinating .
we would never leave somebody with a plane , if for nine planes , the way that we &apos;d like to do .
but somehow we kind of do it , we &apos;re going to get from this problem .
it &apos;s not our problem .
it &apos;s not our strategic burden .
it &apos;s not our fight .
i &apos;m talking about this question about these questions .
i &apos;m talking about race and the question we &apos;re going to kill the right .
and it &apos;s exciting because i &apos;m going to my students , i &apos;m talking to my students . i &apos;m talking about slavery .
i &apos;m talking about terrorism , the time against the end of the permian , until the beginning of the second .
we don &apos;t really know very much about it .
but for the mark in this country , it was a time of terrorism .
in many areas , fear had been afraid of lynchmobs , fear of lynchmobs , fear of lynchmobs , fear of lynchmobs , fear of lynchmobs , fear of lynchmobs , fear of lynchmobs , fear of lynchmobs , fear of lynchmobs , fear of lynchmobs , fear of lynchmobs , fear of lynchmobs , fear .
or before bombs .
it was the fear of terror , terror , who shaped their lives .
now these older people come to me and say , &quot; mr , you know , &quot; i said , &quot; well , you know , you &apos;re talking to say that we should stop saying that we &apos;re going to have the first time in the history of our nation : after 9 / 11 . &quot;
they say , &quot; no -- say , &quot; you &apos;re going to be the people that we grew up . &quot;
and after terrorism , of course , the rassentrennung and decades of the rassistisch motivierten unterwerfung and apartheid .
and yet , there are a dynamic in our country , we don &apos;t like to talk about our problems .
we don &apos;t like to talk about our story .
and so we don &apos;t really understand what meaning our actions in our context .
we &apos;re all aufeinander .
we &apos;re always making new tensions and conflicts .
it &apos;s going to be hard to talk about race , and i think that &apos;s because we &apos;re not willing to get to the truth and reconciliation .
in south africa , people who don &apos;t understand that the rassentrennung isn &apos;t overcome the rassentrennung without truth and reconciliation .
even after the genocide in rwanda , it was this willingness to be , but not in this country .
i &apos;ve got some talks in germany in germany .
it was fascinating , because one of the scientists stood up to my talk , and said , &quot; you know , it &apos;s deeply troubling , you &apos;re talking to hear . &quot;
he said , &quot; there &apos;s no death penalty .
and of course , it can never give them . &quot;
it was silence . then one woman said , &quot; well , with our story , it &apos;s impossible to be that we &apos;ve ever had to kill the systematic killing of people .
it would be gewissenlos of us , consciously consciously hinzurichten . &quot;
i thought about it .
how it would feel like it was going to live in a world where german state had made hinrichten people , especially when amongst the unverhältnismäßig jews were .
it would be .
it would be gewissenlos .
and yet , in this country , in the states of the old , we &apos;re going to get human beings -- and there &apos;s the risk of death , and there &apos;s the risk of death row , when the angeklagte is the same , when the angeklagte is the same , and the victims -- in the same states , in their earth , in their earth ,
and yet there &apos;s this mental abkopplung .
i think our identity is threatened .
if we don &apos;t deal with this kind of hard issues , then the positive and wonderful things are also affected .
we love innovation .
we love technology and creativity .
we love entertainment .
but eventually , these realities are überschattet , missbrauch , abuse , abuse , herabsetzung , ausgrenzung .
i think it seems to be important to unite both .
because we &apos;re talking about more hope , more engagement , more engagement , to have more powerful to get in a complex world .
for me , the time , the time , and talking about the poor , the benachteiligten , who never will be at ted .
but in thinking of a way that &apos;s in our own lives .
we all have to think of the last thing that we can &apos;t see .
we do that . so we also appreciate that , so we &apos;re going to appreciate it .
innovation , creativity , and development isn &apos;t just out of our minds .
they come from ideas that are driven by the belief in our hearts .
it &apos;s this kopf-herz-verbindung , from the i think that you &apos;re not just open to all the time and begeisternden things , but also for the dark and problematischen .
vaclav havel , who was great tschechische politician , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once said , once
&quot; when we fought in eastern europe , we wanted to go to the oppression , but what we needed to do is we needed to be a mental orientation , to be a mental guidance , sometimes , to be hoffnungslosen , sometimes , to be hoffnungslosen . &quot;
so this mental orientation is the core of what i think is also going to be the ted-gemeinschaften of that .
there &apos;s no one of technology and design that allows us to be human , and even human , as we also have eyes and ears , and drive poverty , ausgrenzung .
i want to warn you . this kind of identity , much more than us , when we don &apos;t really care about it .
they will touch it .
so , as a young lawyer , i was a great privilege of meeting pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks , pink parks
and over the course of the time , the women came back to the montgomery , where she was two of her oldest women , who had two friends who had met the montgomery-busboykott organisiert , and virginia durr , a white afroamerikanerin , a white durr , clifford durr , dr. king vertrat .
so these women are just going to just be .
occasionally , and then called me and said , &quot; bryan , &quot; bryan , &quot; frau parks , and we want to talk .
want to do dazukommen and listen ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; yes , i love . &quot;
she said , &quot; and what are you going to do when you &apos;re here ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m going to listen . &quot;
and i went to over and just sat down .
it was always so inspiring , so beflügelnd .
one day i was sitting there , and after a couple of hours , i went to a couple of hours , and i said , &quot; well , well , let me tell me what the heck was for me .
what are you trying to do ? &quot;
i started my usual talk .
i said , &quot; we &apos;re trying to see injustice .
wr , want to help people who were innocent .
we want to fight and discrimination in the strafvollzugssystem .
we want to lebenslängliche lebenslängliche haftstrafen without bedingte strafaussetzung .
we want to do something about the death companies .
we want to leave the number of prisoners in the american industry .
we want to highlight . &quot;
i gave my usual talk , and then i looked at me and said , &quot; mhmm . &quot;
she said , &quot; that &apos;s going to make it very , very tired . &quot;
then he was lehnte , and he was lehnte , i put a finger on my face , and he said , &quot; and therefore , you have to be very , very tapfer . &quot;
and so i think that the ted should be tapferer .
we need to confront our vulnerability to these challenges : these issues , this suffering .
because ultimately , we get our humanity from our humanity .
in my work i learned very simple things .
i &apos;ve learned a bunch of simple things .
we all are more than the worst thing we &apos;ve ever done .
i think that &apos;s true for every people on the planet .
if someone lying is it &apos;s not just a liar .
if someone takes something that doesn &apos;t hear it , it &apos;s not just a rule .
even if anybody kills somebody , isn &apos;t just a killer .
and because that &apos;s so a fundamental human dignity that has to respect the law .
i also believe that in many parts of this country , and with security in many parts of the earth , the opposite of poverty .
i don &apos;t think that &apos;s not .
i think that many places are the opposite of poverty .
and finally , i think , though , though , i think it &apos;s so dramatic , so beautiful and so , we &apos;re not going to be applied to the end of the things that we develop to our intellect and mind .
finally , a society is not measured how they are ihre their rich and powerful and privilegierten , but how they interacted with the poor , the easiest to the poor , the verurteilten .
because in this context , we begin to understand the marvelous amazing things that we &apos;re doing .
sometimes i miss the equilibrium . a story is to end .
sometimes i &apos;m going to do too .
i &apos;m going to fight as we all .
sometimes the ideas of thinking is thinking about thinking of all the way to very important .
i vertrete these children who were convicted of very hard to very hard .
i go to the untersuchungsgefängnis and a client , and i &apos;m going to get a client who &apos;s been 13 , and the one of the adult is supposed to be a writer .
then i ask myself , how could this happen ?
how can a judge someone can transform a man who doesn &apos;t it &apos;s ?
the judge looked like adults , but i see a child .
at night , i stayed at a long time , and my gosh , my gosh , my gosh , if a judge can convert us to something else , he must have zauberkräfte .
right , bryan , who had zauberkräfte .
you want to do you want to do .
and because it was late , and i couldn &apos;t think more and work really thinking , i started working on a box .
i had a 14jährigen , poor young young boys than she .
and i started with this . the headline was , &quot; antrag , &quot; antrag , 14jährigen , 14jährigen black , 14jährigen schwarzen , weißen topmanager .
in my office , i explained that if the majority of the staatsanwaltschaft and the police are being applied to the police .
there was a crazy line about that in this country , nothing more rechtens is that there &apos;s only even more misconduct .
the next morning i woke up and i didn &apos;t know if i had this crazy division of only , or actually written him .
and i had a horror of horror i didn &apos;t write it , but also the court .
a couple of months went and i had forgotten everything .
but finally , i decided , my god , i need to be in the dish and this crazy case .
i went to the car , and i was really overwhelmed .
so i went to court .
and i thought , that &apos;s how hard , so painful .
after all , i went out from my car and went to court .
when i was the staircase to the court , there was a student , black man , the janitors who are the janitors in the dish .
he saw me , he came to me and said , &quot; who are you ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i said , &quot; you know , &quot; you &apos;re lawyer ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
he came to me and umarmte me .
then he &apos;s carrying me to the ear .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m so proud of them . &quot;
and i have to say , there was power .
it was something very deep in me , identity , the ability to make each individual , something really contribute to a community , to hope .
well , i went to the gerichtssaal .
once the judge saw me , the judge saw me , the judge saw me , the judge saw me , the judge saw me , the judge saw me , the judge saw me , the judge saw me , the judge saw me , the judge saw me , the judge saw me , the judge saw me , the judge saw me , the judge saw me
he said , &quot; mr. stevenson , you &apos;ve got this crazy box ? &quot;
i said , &quot; yeah . &quot; and then we started to discuss .
more people came in , just because they were mad , they were mad , because they were mad , they were mad , because they were mad .
that i had written this crazy stuff .
polizeibeamte came in and büroangestellte staatsanwälte and büroangestellte .
in the handumdrehen , the most amazing of people who were angry , that we were angry about the value of the value , about poverty .
my favorite i saw the janitors on and go to the janitors .
he looked over again and then the window and hear the whole tohuwabohu .
he went down .
finally , this older man came up with a very senior gesichtsausruck in the gerichtssaal and sat behind me , almost to the verteidigungsbank .
ten minutes later , after 10 minutes , i think , kündigte .
during the break , a polizeibeamter came out of the pause , which was the janitors in the gerichtssaal .
this deputy ran at the older black cloth .
he said , &quot; jimmy , what do they do in the gerichtssaal ? &quot;
the older black man was looking at the deputy , and he said , &quot; i went to the deputy , and he said , &quot; i &apos;m like , &quot; i &apos;m like , to say , you know , they don &apos;t lose the destination .
i &apos;m a ted i come to ted because i believe that many of you have understood that moral of the universe &apos;s pendel , but it &apos;s the justice .
that we &apos;re not fully designed to develop a human being completely , unless we &apos;re not caring about human rights and grundwerte .
that our survival survival associated with survival to survival every single associated with survival .
we have our visions of technology and design , from entertainment and creativity , and of creativity , compassion and justice .
and especially , i want to leave you , i want to see that , just to see , just simply , you know , you don &apos;t want to go out of the eyes . don &apos;t give them .
they have seen this audience , this community , and heard of them to help them and do something .
so what can we do ?
bryan stevenson : well , there &apos;s all possibilities .
if you live in california , there &apos;s a volksentscheid in this spring , where it &apos;s about , actually , actually , in fact , is a anstrengung , something about the geldstrom umzuleiten , who flows into the politics of punishment .
here , in california , in california , you will be in the next five years , a billion dollars for the death sentence for a billion dollars .
and yet , it &apos;s not end percent of all the tötungsdelikte of all the tötungsdelikte of all the tötungsdelikte .
56 percent of all the vergewaltigungsfälle isn &apos;t come to trial .
there &apos;s a chance to do something .
this is a referendum that &apos;s going to suggest that money into more meaningful and safety .
i think there &apos;s all possibilities .
during the last three decades , the verbrechensrate of the americas are cut in america .
this is a lot of the fact that &apos;s often asked to a wider field .
what would you say somebody who believes that ?
well , in fact , the number of gewaltverbrechen doesn &apos;t really change .
most of the masseninhaftierungen in this country was not really in the class of the class .
it was the fehlgeleitete kreuzzug kreuzzug against drugs .
so the calving kommen pay for the prison .
we &apos;ve got hinreißen from the rhetoric of the rhetoric .
now we have said , &quot; we have drei-verstöße -gesetze , who are people for bars for the theft of the theft , for the theft of the theft , instead of measuring them , the things that were going to give you .
i think we need to do more to help people who have been more victims of a straftat , not less .
and i think that our favorite jetzige don &apos;t help .
i think that &apos;s what we need to change .
bryan , you really have a string of a string to the vibrating .
they &apos;re a inspiring personality .
thank you that you were at ted . thank you .
and a death rate is a erhöhtes gefahrenrisiko with themselves .
two : famine in somalia .
4 : the bösartige kartelle .
six : social mind . speaker : 65 dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead dead
eight : tsunamiwarnung . speaker , sprecher 9 : cyber-attacken .
different speakers : drogenkrieg . weapons .
recession : so , and so , stillstand . egypt . syria .
crisis . death .
oh my god .
so these are just a couple of the clips that i &apos;ve been collected over the last six months -- it would have been the last six days , but the last six days .
the fact that the media is that the media tells us to show us negative subjects because our minds are just about this stuff .
and there &apos;s also a very good reason for it .
every second every day , our senses will start to get more than our brain can process as our brain .
and because we &apos;re not more important than our survival , the first igbo is the first resort to all the information that the amygdala of our temporallappens , the amygdala .
so the amygdala is our frühwarnsystem , our gefahrendetektor .
it &apos;s sortiert and durchkämmt the whole information on the search for the gefahr of danger in our environment .
so if we see the news , we prefer to think about negative news .
and the old adage , &quot; if it &apos;s blutet , it &apos;s a very true .
now , with all our digital tools that the week , the week , 24 hours of all the time , all of those bad news , it &apos;s not a miracle that we are .
it &apos;s not a miracle that everybody thinks it &apos;s always going to be worse .
but maybe it &apos;s not the case .
maybe the reality is the reality .
maybe the tremendous progress is going to be made by a series of forces that are made of the last three decades , so that it will be possible to create the next three decades , to create a world of the way .
now , i don &apos;t say we don &apos;t have a big problems -- climate change , artensterben , water and energieprobleme -- that we &apos;ve already already .
and as humans are much better at all in a lot of long time , but they eventually agreed to overcome .
but let &apos;s see what we &apos;ve done in the last century , so we can predict the development .
over the last hundred years , the average life expectancy has been more than doubled the production of the world &apos;s population has tripled .
child mortality has a tenth of a verringert .
and that &apos;s the ernährungs- , elektrizitäts- , elektrizitäts- transport- and kommunikationskosten kommunikationskosten around a long .
and steve pinker , showed us that we &apos;re currently in a very peaceful time of life .
and according to charles kenny , the alphabetisierungsquote of the last 130 years , from 25 percent of 80 years .
we live in a very extraordinary time .
and many people forget this .
and we &apos;re going to increase our expectations .
in fact , we have redefined poverty .
remember , a big percentage of americans who live under the poverty , access to electricity , water , kühlschränken , mobiltelefonen , klimaanlagen , klimaanlagen .
the richest , the imperatoren of the last century , the imperatoren of earth , never could be able to have a erträumen .
the basis of a lot of it , and these are growing technologies .
my dear friend kurzweil showed us that each tool that &apos;s going to be , in the information , on the curve , on the curve of moore &apos;s law , and the preis-performance-quotient of the preis-performance-quotient alle , all 12 , all 12 , all 12 , all 12 , all 12 .
that &apos;s why the costs costs in their bag , and over a million times more than a million times faster than a supercomputer from the &apos; 70s .
now look at this curve .
that &apos;s moore &apos;s law of the last hundred years .
notice two things about this curve .
first , how do they feel -- in good times , war , war or peace , depression and hochkonjunktur .
this is the result of the great computers , the cube to make it .
they &apos;re slowed for any of our big problems .
and also , despite your logarithmic verlaufs on the left side , it &apos;s evolving .
so the rate of the growth itself is converging .
and on this curve , on moore &apos;s law , we find a series of extraordinary technologies that are all available .
&quot; cloud-computing , &quot; something that my friends , and the sensors , &quot; and scientists , 3d , 3d , 3d , 3d , 3d-drucker , to democratize , synthetische , synthetische , impfungen , digitale , nano-materialien , nano-materialien , nano-materialien , nano-materialien , nano-materialien , nano-materialien , nano-materialien , nano-materialien , nano-materialien and artificial intelligence .
how many of you have seen the victory by ibms watson , &quot; jeopardy ? &quot;
that was very big .
i &apos;ve got the papers , and after the best headlines i could find out .
i love this : &quot; watson bezwingt of human enemies . &quot;
&quot; jeopardy &quot; is not a simple game .
it &apos;s about understanding the nuances of language .
imagine that these artificial intelligence of each other is to have the verfügung of a mobiltelefones .
four years ago , ray kurzweil , and i &apos;m here at ted , and i &apos;m here at ted university . &quot;
we bring our students all these technologies , with strange focus on how these used to solve the great challenges of humanity .
and every year we ask the students , businesses , products and services , the lives of a decade , which can undermine life from people .
think about that a group of students can influence the lives of billions of people .
thirty years ago , it would have been lächerlich .
today we can be able to have dozens of companies that have been done .
if i think of the surplus , i don &apos;t mean a life of luxury for everybody on this planet ; it &apos;s about to create a life of possibilities .
it &apos;s about making a long time from the knappen abundance .
and the brevity is kontextbezogen , and technology is a resources of power .
here &apos;s an example .
this is the story of napoleon iii. in the middle of the 18th century .
he &apos;s the guy left .
he &apos;s got the king of siam to dinner .
napoleons soldiers had been silber-besteck , napoleon himself got gold-besteck .
the king of siam jedoch got aluminium-besteck .
aluminum was to this time , the most valuable metal , the most valuable metal , on the planet , valuable than gold and platin .
this is why the dome of the washington-monuments was made from the same .
although the aluminium 8,3 percent of the erdmasse , it &apos;s not a purely metal .
it will be by oxygen and silikate .
but then the technology of the elektrolyse , and made the technologie of elektrolyse , so that we &apos;re using it with our wegwerf-mentalität .
then let &apos;s get these analogy in the future .
we think today about energieknappheit .
ladies and gentlemen , we live on a planet with the planet of the brain than we &apos;re using .
16 terawatt energy generates all over the surface of the earth &apos;s surface .
it &apos;s not a knappheit , the problem is .
and there &apos;s good news .
in this year , you &apos;ve got to reduce the cost of the time , the cost of 50 percent of the diesel-stroms -- 8.8 rupees in comparison to 17 rupees .
the cost of solar energy dropped over the last year .
last month , this was published with a study that shows that until the end of the united states in the united states , 6 cent per year , compared to 15 cents a year in the national average .
and if we have a energieüberschuss , we &apos;ll also have water in the surplus .
let &apos;s talk about wasser-kriege .
remember , when carl sagan , the voyager-raumfahrzeug sagan , when it was on saturn , it was going to be the saturn of earth ?
he took a famous photo . how did it be ?
&quot; a pale blue blue . &quot;
because we live on a living life .
we live on a planet that &apos;s 70 percent with water .
yes , it &apos;s 97,5 percent , two percent are vereist , two percent are vereist , and we &apos;re grappling to fight the population of the water on the planet , but there are hope .
and there are new technologies , not in 10 or 20 years , but now .
it &apos;s new nanotechnologien on the way , nano-materialien .
and from a conversation with dean kamen , one of the innovators of the puzzle , i want to share with you a little bit with you -- he &apos;d have to tell you the permission , and he had the permission of the slingshot , and from you to the many of you , and it &apos;s got the size of a kühlschranks .
it can be a thousand liters of clean drinking water , and the saltwater salzwasser , if the saltwater , polluted water , latrine , and all that &apos;s less than two cents per liter .
the vorsitzende of coca-cola has just eingewilligt , a great test-projekt with a hundred units in developing world .
and if everything is going well , and i &apos;m very confident , and i &apos;m going to be a very confident , and then the technology will be the technology globally in 206 countries in the entire planet .
this is technologieunterstützte innovation that are today .
and we &apos;ve seen this in places .
you &apos;re talking about my goodness , we &apos;re going to be able to get 70 percent of mobile phones in the developing world .
just think that a massai-krieger with a mobile phone with a mobile phone in kenya has a better mobil-kommunikation than president years ago .
and if you look at your smartphone on google , you have more access to knowledge and information than president clinton 15 years ago .
they live in a world that &apos;s information and communication in abundance like nobody could have predicted .
and it &apos;s even better , for the things that you and i spent several dollars -- gps , hd-video , hd-video and music , technology , technology , technology , and i &apos;m literally buchstäblich , and now , cheap , and cheaper in your cellphone .
and the best part is what we expect to be in the realm of health .
in the last month , i had the pleasure with the qualcomm-stiftung that &apos;s called the so-called 10 million qualcomm prize prize winner .
we &apos;re using teams on the world , all these technologies to connect with the cell to connect with the device , because it &apos;s riddled with ai , you can test it , you can test it or your blutwerte .
and to win , it needs to be a better diagnosis , to have a better diagnosis than a team .
imagine this device , in a developing world where there &apos;s no doctors , but , 25 percent of the krankheitslast and 1.3 percent of the staff of the healthcare .
if this device is a rna- or dna-virus , who isn &apos;t familiar , and it &apos;s ruft the cane of the brain .
but now , the biggest force that will lead to us to a world of the disease .
i call them &quot; the the world &apos;s the way . &quot;
the white lines are related to population .
we &apos;ve just got the 7-milliarden-marke .
and only by the way , the largest absicherung against a population is a better upbringing and nutrition in the world .
in 2010 , we had just two billion people online .
until 2020 , we &apos;re going to steigen from two billion dollars .
three billion of new minds we never heard before , are going to be moving across the global communication .
what need these people ?
what will they consume ? what will you get ?
and instead of the same gridlock , i see a great economic economic story of history .
these people represent multiple trillion dollars that flow in global economy .
and they become a healthier deal of the tricoders , and they &apos;re going to be trained by the khan-akademie , and they &apos;re going to be able to have the possibility of 3d-drucker , 3d and so much more productive than ever before .
so what can be three billion dollars , healthy , and , gebildete , productive members of the menschengemeinde ?
how about a sentence of new new voices , never before .
how would it be that the oppressed , wherever you are , to give a voice to make a voice to make them go to the way to make the first time ?
what will those three billion people are going to bring people ?
how about beiträgen that we can &apos;t even predict ?
one of the things i &apos;ve learned about the x prize is that little teams , is that small teams that are through passion and focus , things that could create great companies and governments could create the big companies .
i want to close with a story that really excites me .
there &apos;s a program that may have some people who know .
it &apos;s a game that &apos;s called the phone .
it was developed at the university of washington in seattle .
and it &apos;s a game , in the people of the people who can take a sequence of amino acids , how that &apos;s mimicked .
je , the way that we can do the behavior , we can predict the structure and function .
and this is very important in the medizinforschung .
so this was a problem for supercomputers .
and this game was played by university .
and there are hundreds of thousands of people who played the game online .
and it showed that the human pattern is better to make proteins the best supercomputer .
and as these people , who was the best protein-ordner of the world , not a mit-professor , and it was not a caltech-student , and it was a mit-professor , a woman who was a assistentin , a woman who was assistant at the school of the geschäftsleitung in a reha-klinik and night at night , the best protein-ordnerin of the world .
ladies and gentlemen , what i &apos;ve got to do is to trust what i &apos;ve got to be trusted in our future is that we have more power than individuals to ask us the great challenges of our planet .
we have access to tools with exponential technology .
we have the passion of a diy-innovatoren .
we have the capital of the capital of techno-philanthropen .
and we &apos;ve got three billion people in which we can work online to master the new challenges and to do that , which is needed .
we &apos;re just going to be a few extraordinary decades .
thank you .
i think we have to have something more versus a verändernswertes piece of culture .
and i think it starts with a lighter and i &apos;m a lie .
and maybe i &apos;m a long enough in business , when i can allow it to allow me to allow a piece of my own special prestiges , to allow this .
but before i get to the actual theme of my talk , let &apos;s start with a little bit of a baseball .
hey , why not ?
we are the saisonende and moving towards the world .
we all love baseball , right ?
baseball baseball is full of amazing statistics .
and there are hundreds of them .
&quot; moneyball , &quot; and turns around statistics and to use this , and to use this great baseball team .
i &apos;m going to be on a statistic that i hope you &apos;ve heard about , most of you have heard .
it &apos;s the durchschnittsleistung of the schlägers .
we &apos;re talking about a 300 300 , if a bat schlägt .
that means that the players is certainly , three of 10 .
that &apos;s called the ball into the außenfeld , he &apos;s not going to be stuck , and who &apos;s trying to take the ball , it &apos;s not going to be a rechtzeitig and the poetry .
three from 10 to 10 .
do you know how you put a 300ter in major baseball baseball ?
well , really well , maybe a all-star .
you know how you call a 400ter ?
that &apos;s somebody &apos;s in the rest of 10 .
legendär -- like ted williams -- the last major league was spieler , the last baseball of a regulären saison of 400 times over 400 times .
let me back back into my world of medicine , which i &apos;m asking myself to talk about a lot of a few more comfortable or maybe a little less about what i &apos;ve been talking about .
you have to have a blinddarmentzündung , and they &apos;ll be a operateur überwiesen , whose durchschnittsleistung 400 400 is 400 in terms of blinddarmentzündungen .
somehow it doesn &apos;t work , right ?
suppose you live in a particular remote area , and they have a beloved people with verstopften herzkranzgefäßen , and their hausarzt überweist , whose durchschnittsleistung überweist , in 200 of 200 .
but , but you know what ?
it &apos;s a lot better . she &apos;s ast .
and they &apos;re beating a 257 .
somehow it doesn &apos;t work .
but i &apos;m going to ask you a question .
what do you believe like the durchschnittsleistung for a kardiologen or a orthopäden , a geburtshelfer , a geburtshelfer , a rettungsassistenten ?
1,000 , very good .
the truth is that nobody knows in the entire medicine , which is a good surgeon or or should be a good or rettungsassistent .
so what we do is we &apos;re going to be , every one of them , including me , in the world , to be the way to be perfectly perfect .
never make a mistake , but no one makes the details of the details , how this should be used .
and that &apos;s the message that i &apos;m in the medical school .
i was a zwanghaft student .
in high school , it was a mitschüler , that brian brian would learn a bluttest for a bluttest .
and so it was also .
and i studied in my little dachstube in the house in the toronto , unweit hospital , unweit from here .
i learned anything .
in my anatomievorlesung , i learned the origins and ausläufer , every student , every branch of every branch , which is from the aorta , which is from the ascending wegführt , obskure and ordinary differentialdiagnosen .
i knew the differentialdiagnose to classify renale tubuläre azidose .
and the time i collected , i &apos;m going to know more and more knowledge .
and i was good , i took a schloss with cum laude .
and i left the medical perspective , i had the medical i knew i knew all i knew anything , or anything like possible , as usual as possible , as possible , as i can do that i can do the whole thing to do not be a immun .
and it &apos;s for a time , until i met woman .
i &apos;m going to be a lehrkrankenhaus in toronto in toronto as a woman in the notfallabteilung of the hospital .
at this point , i was the kardiologischen layer in the kardiologischen .
and it was my assignment to be considered the notfallpersonal advice for studying the notfallpatienten .
and i &apos;ll give my oberarzt to my simplicity .
i examined the frau printer and she was in atemnot .
and when i was doing her , she made them keuchende sound .
and when i was her breast , i could go to the stethoskope of the stethoskope , i could listen to a knackendes sound on both sides , which told me that they were under kongestiver .
this is a condition in the heart , instead of pumps , instead of pumps , instead of pumps , and they &apos;re going to get a part of the moon in the lung and filling those of that , so the kurzatmigkeit came .
and that was not hard to stellenden .
i assembled them and made me the treatment .
i gave her aspirin . i gave her medicine to take the pressure from the heart .
i gave her medicine that we call diuretics , water , so that they ausschied the liquid .
and over a period of a year , a period of a year , and they started feeling better .
i felt very good .
and i made my first mistake ; i sent them home .
actually , i made two mistakes .
i sent them to speak home without talking to my oberarzt .
i didn &apos;t take the up on the turn and i did what i &apos;d have to be a call to my phone , which was a anruf to make it a chance to make a chance to make a chance .
and he knew it , he was able to have additional information in the beizusteuern .
maybe i did it with good reason .
maybe i didn &apos;t want to be the hilfsbedürftige doctor .
so i may be so successful , and so i could have to take his responsibility that i was so so able to make it to my patients without having to write him .
my second mistake was worse .
so i &apos;m going to take you home , i was going to send you home , i was trying to tell me , &quot; ah , &quot; no good , no good idea . do not do that . &quot;
so , in fact , it really was very much to me , i was going to ask the nurse , which is the frau printer , &quot; believe it in order when you go home ? &quot;
and the nurse thought about it and said , &quot; yeah , i think it will go well . &quot;
i remember that yesterday .
so i unterzeichnete the entlassungspapiere and a ambulance and rettungsassistenten and they were going home .
and i went back to work .
the remaining day , the night i had this nagende feeling in my stomach .
but i continued to continue .
and at the end of the day i grabbed my stuff , i would go to the hospital , and went to the car to drive home , when i did something i couldn &apos;t .
i went to the notfallabteilung on my way to my journey .
and there was another one , not the sister , not the sister who had seen the drucker , but another three words , and those three words are the three words of the most notfallärzte .
other people fear that , but the notfallmedizin is particularly particularly , because we only see patients just as just fleeting .
the three words of words : remember ?
&quot; remember , you know , the patient you &apos;re going home ? &quot;
asked the nurse .
&quot; she &apos;s back , &quot; she said she said in this particular tonlage .
so she was back .
she was back and dying .
about a half after you went home after you , after she had home , after she had home , they phoned her , and the family brought them back to the notfallstation , the rettungsassistenten , the blutdruck , that &apos;s a dangerous schockzustand .
they were barely barely and was blue .
the notfallpersonal zog was all stränge .
they gave her her blutdruckerhöher .
they were schlossen to the beatmungsmaschine .
i was shocked and to the inner zerrüttet .
and i went to this rollercoaster because they came to the stabilisation on the intensive care school , and i hoped that they would recover .
and after two , three days realized that they never would get a trade-off .
she didn &apos;t have a behandelbaren gehirnschaden .
her family &apos;s family .
and over the course of the next eight days , or nine days , they get the geschehenen .
on friday day , they liesen them -- mrs. printer , a woman , a woman , a mother and grandmother .
you say that you never have the names of the names of the names .
and that was the first time i learned this .
the next weeks i took me , i was driving , and i learned the ungesunde of the time , and i learned the special of the ungesunde shame that was alone , and i felt , not the kind of healthy shame , because you &apos;re not going to talk to the colleagues about the colleagues .
you know , all the healthy shame , if you &apos;re a secret to the best price , if you &apos;re going to be a secret to the best freundes , and then you get a schrecklich and the best friend , but the best friend is going to be a terrible discussion , and you &apos;re going to get the bad news that you never get a mistake .
if you do wiedergutmachung and the mistakes never do .
that &apos;s the kind of lehrreicher shame .
the real way i talk about is that &apos;s going to make a specific ill .
it &apos;s the one that tells you that &apos;s not what you &apos;ve done , but you &apos;re not bad .
and that was what i felt .
and it wasn &apos;t really on my oberarztes , he was very dear .
he spoke to the family , and i &apos;m sure he was going to be the wogen and safe and safe that i didn &apos;t get sued .
but i asked myself to ask these questions .
why didn &apos;t i ask the oberarzt ? why i am i going to go home ?
and then in my worst moments : how could i make such a dumb mistake ?
why am i going to the medicine in medicine ?
but slowly , but surely it &apos;s going to be a bit different .
i started feeling better .
and then a day day , there was a hole in the clouds and the sun broke and i might feel i can feel better .
and i was obsessed with me that if i gave my efforts to perfection , and never a mistake , that the voice could be verstummen .
and she did it .
and i continued to work .
and then it happened again .
two years later , i had been dienst in a kommunalen hospital in a kommunalen hospital in the notfallstation hospital , and i begutachtete a 25 year-old man with gereiztem rachen .
it was a lot of and i in a hurry .
he always showed up here .
i looked in the rachen , and it was a little bit of pink .
and i gave him a prescription for penicillin and sent him .
and even when he went out of the door , he showed up on his rachen .
two days later , i came to my next notfalldienst , and my chefärztin asked me to me on a conversation in her office .
and she said the three words : remember ?
&quot; you start to put you on the patient with the patient &apos;s gereizten ? &quot;
it turns out he was a streptokokken-infektion .
he had a potentially lebensgefährliche disease called epiglottitis .
you can be the ham , but it &apos;s not a infection of the rachens , but the top of the top of the atemwege .
and fortunately , he doesn &apos;t .
he got intravenöse antibotica and erholte , and they recovered .
and i went through the same tortur of poetry and self-doubt , and went to züruck , and then went back to work and again .
in a notfallschicht , i have two times a blinddarmentzündung .
there &apos;s a lot of things that you &apos;ve been doing , especially if you &apos;re working in a hospital that &apos;s only 14 patients per night .
in both cases , i didn &apos;t have to go home and there was no one of the time in your treatment .
in a one i thought he was nierensteine .
i was ordnete on the edge of the kidneys , and when that was a befund , my colleague , my colleague , my colleague , in the lower right , and called the operateure .
the other way of diarrhea .
i ordnete fluide to him to rehydrieren him and asked my colleagues to make it .
and it did , and he was talking to a verhärtung in the right sector , he phoned the operateure .
in both cases , operierte , and it was fine .
both of the cases of the cases of mine , fraßen me .
and i would be happy to tell you that my worst mistake only happened to be a lot of my colleagues , but what many of my colleagues are , but total nonsense .
some of my klöpse were in the last five years .
alone , and no support .
here &apos;s the problem : if i can &apos;t finish with my mistakes , and you can talk about you , if i can tell the silent voice , which is what really does not find what i can do with my colleague ?
how can i teach you to teach my fault , so that they don &apos;t have the same thing ?
if i had a room in a room -- how now i have no idea what you &apos;re thinking about me .
when you &apos;ve heard the last time from someone talking about fehlschlag about fehlschlag talking about fehlschlag ?
oh , you know , you go to a cocktail party party and there you go over to any other doctor , but you &apos;re not going to hear somebody who are hearing hearing about their own mistakes .
if i was full of a space with colleagues and to tell you what i &apos;d like to tell you , i would have been told you , i would like to do not be a joke until it would be a joke , until it would be a joke , and they would do the topic behind the rest of the rest and the rest .
and in fact , if i knew or my colleagues , i &apos;d have a orthopäde in my hospital , that a orthopäde had seen the wrong leg , then you believe me , i believe i &apos;d have been going to look at him .
that &apos;s the system where we live .
it &apos;s a totally verleugnung of mistakes .
it &apos;s a system where there are two basic positions -- those who are doing mistakes and those who are doing not make the schlafmangel , and those who are using the schlafmangel , and the einschränkung , which with good results and the good outcomes .
it &apos;s almost a kind of a series of how antibodies that you get a man .
and there &apos;s the idea that if we are doing those who make mistakes from medicine , that &apos;s going to be a secure system .
but there are two problems .
in my about 20 years of medical care and journalism , i &apos;ve been involved in a personal study of medical research and the wrong breakthrough for me to give me so much of my first article , which i was for my show in my show , &quot; white coat , who write .
and what i learned is that mistakes are absolutely unumgänglich .
we &apos;re going to be able to do in a system where every day , in a system , in which one of 10 medikationen either is , in the krankenhausinfektionen , and it &apos;s always going to get older and more and dead .
in this state , about 24,000 canadians , etwa fehlern .
in the united states , the institute of the institute for medicine is the number of 100,000 .
both are strong , because we don &apos;t think the problem , how we should .
and it &apos;s the crux .
in a krankenhaussystem in which the medical care system , all of three years , we can &apos;t get to three or three years .
schlafmangel is ubiquitous .
we can &apos;t get rid of it .
we have a cognitive error that we can take a perfect amount of krankheitsverlauf for a patient with a patient .
then i then take the same patients with brustschmerz , making it verschwitzt and geschwätzig and give a slightly more easily alkoholisierten breath , and all of the story is to communicate with contempt .
i don &apos;t take the same cadence .
i &apos;m not a robot ; i don &apos;t always get things .
and my patients are not cars ; they don &apos;t tell me their symptoms in the same way .
all this is the summarized fehler .
so if you take the system so , how i taught it , and all the fehlerbehafteten gesundheitsexperten , then it &apos;s not going to be left .
and you know the leier of people who don &apos;t want to talk about their worst cases ?
in my show , the white of white coat , &quot; i would say , &quot; this is my worst mistake , &quot; i would say , &quot; this is my worst mistake , &quot; this is my worst mistake , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah ? &quot;
and then , your pupils , they &apos;re going to be a little bit of the head , and then you look at the head , and i &apos;ll start to tell their stories .
they want their stories . they want their stories .
you want to be able to say , &quot; look , do not make the same mistakes i &apos;m wearing . &quot;
what you need is a environment that you &apos;re able to make it happen .
what you need is a new medical culture .
and it starts with a physician .
the new physician is a man , a man , who knows , for his humanity , they &apos;re not proud of it , but they all had to learn anything from them to learn how to get it out .
they share their experiences with others .
she supports if others talk to their mistakes .
and it shows other mistakes , not to be bloßzustellen , but in a dead , the way that everybody benefit benefit .
and they &apos;re working in a medical culture that recognizes that people will fill the system with life and that &apos;s how that &apos;s the way that we &apos;re doing time to time .
so that &apos;s the system that the system is going to make a simpler , which is making people living , and it also allows to create the people who are going to be able to create the health care system , and that &apos;s what it &apos;s going to be , and that &apos;s what it &apos;s going to be belohnt , and that &apos;s what they &apos;re doing
my name is brian brian .
i &apos;m a new scientific doctor .
i &apos;m a man . i make mistakes .
i &apos;m bedaure das. , but i &apos;m trying to learn to learn to learn it to others .
i don &apos;t know what you &apos;re thinking about , but it can live .
let me close with three words : i remember .
i &apos;m going to talk about a tiny , little idea .
it &apos;s about veränderbare normwerte .
and because you can explain this idea in a minute , i will tell you about three stories to use the time .
the first story is about charles darwin , one of my heroes .
you know , you know , he was 1835 here .
they like , you think he &apos;s going to be jagte , but that &apos;s not true .
actually , he &apos;s actually crying fish .
he described one of it as a very very . &quot;
it was a zackenbarsch .
until the &apos; 80s in &apos; 80s , he was buried in a great style .
now it &apos;s on the red list .
so , we have a lot of times of the galapagos or other places , it &apos;s not very special .
yet we still come on the galapagos .
we still think they were originally .
the broschüren , you &apos;re still describe as a pristine .
what &apos;s happening here ?
the second story is a different concept , the veränderbare taillenweite , verdeutlichen .
because i experienced it when i was a lagune in west-afrika .
i went there because i grew up in europe and wanted to work in africa .
i thought i could integrate myself .
and i got a bad press , and i realized that i really wasn &apos;t really from there .
it was my first sonnenbrand .
as you see , the lagoon of palmen and a few mangroves .
there was buntbarsche of about 20 , schwarzkinnmaulbrüter , schwarzkinnmaulbrüter , a unterart of the buntbarsche .
the fischgründe of these buntbarsche were very ertragreich and the fishermen lived well and verdienten in ghana .
when i was 27 years later , the fish was on the side of his size .
and you have a number of things you have five centimeters .
they were been genetically modified genetically engineered .
it &apos;s still fish .
people were still happy .
and the fish also had luck to be there .
so it &apos;s nothing changed , and yet everything changes .
my third story tells me from my mittäterschaft in the audience who einführung in southeast asia .
in &apos; 70s -- rather than the beginning of the &apos; 60s -- förderte europe .
bedeutete countries who &apos;ve been given to the 100 fish , the industrial consumer , the industrial , ziemlich fishing , to this kind of ugly , hässliche 4. .
i went to mit , and we were going to be in the whole world bank , and especially in the javasee .
we didn &apos;t have words for what we started .
i know that it &apos;s the reason for the ocean .
90 percent of our fangs were sponges , other animals that are associated with the reason .
the biggest part of the fish that little dots on the rubble , the trümmerhaufen , the trümmerhaufen , were korallenriff-fische .
essentially , the reason of the ocean was on the deck and then subsequently became zurückgeworfen .
these images are extraordinary , because the transition is very fast .
within a year , you get a chance through and then begins with the commercial fishing .
the reason is going to happen -- in this case -- in this case -- a hard reason , or a hard , korallen .
this is a dead turtle .
they didn &apos;t eat , you threw them away , because they were dead .
so , we started a living .
she wasn &apos;t ertrunken .
they wanted to kill them , because you could eat them well .
in fact , this mountain of all the number of data is , if you &apos;re in areas , if you &apos;ve got to the areas where they &apos;ve never been shot .
it won &apos;t be documented .
we change the world , but we don &apos;t remember it .
we &apos;re taking our normwerte of the new level and we don &apos;t call us in memories what there was .
if you verallgemeinert it , it &apos;s happening .
on the y-axis , some good things are a bunch of good things : biodiversity , the green of the country , the green land .
with time . it changes . it &apos;s changing because for people , for people , and they are their actions .
every generation , the images that you see in the beginning of your lifetime , and it &apos;s going to be used by the standard of it .
the difference will be considered a loss .
but they don &apos;t take the previous losses .
it can be a order of changes .
and at the end , they only want to get the erbärmlichen remains .
now , that &apos;s now our destination .
we want to get things that are disappeared , or things that are not so much as they were .
you might think that the problem is that the problem of the problem , which is certainly when they lived in räuberischen societies , animals , and they only have a few generations what they had done .
because obviously , a way , that &apos;s a very interesting that was very often , once , once , once , before it ausstirbt .
so you don &apos;t even have a lot of things that are tiere .
you always get rare animals .
and that &apos;s why it &apos;s not going to be a huge loss .
we &apos;re focusing on the time to focus on the big animals and the sea , the big fish .
they &apos;re going to get less , because we &apos;re catching them .
and over time , there &apos;s a little fish and we think that &apos;s the normwert .
the question is , why people accept this .
well , because they don &apos;t know it was different .
of course , many people , scientists , confirm , confirm , it really was different .
they &apos;ll get it , because the evidence , as you can be trained in the previous form , not as the evidence to be told .
for example , for example , the anecdote that the report that the report in this area was in this area , which can &apos;t be used in this area , or not be used by fischereiwissenschaftlern , or not gewertet , because it &apos;s not &quot; scientific . &quot;
so we have the situation that the people don &apos;t know the past , though we live in 1990 , because they don &apos;t trust the sources of the past .
this shows the enormous big role that can play a little bit .
because we &apos;re basically going to get past the past .
we &apos;re going to move the past , which people can &apos;t grasp , because the normwerte changes and very low .
so that &apos;s the people who see a marine debt and the einblick of the most valuable benefit , which enables it to be their normwerte .
what is with the people that &apos;s not possible because they have no access to the middle of the west ?
here , i think , i think art and the film may fill the gap , and it &apos;s simulations .
this is the simulation of chesapeake bay .
a long time ago , there was a long time ago -- 500 years ago .
and the farbtöne and -schattierungen , you may remember &quot; avatar . &quot;
if they think about &quot; avatar &quot; when you think about why people were getting so touched by the way , except for the pocahontas-geschichte , why were they so touched ?
because it &apos;s a little bit more wachruft that &apos;s lost in a way .
so my favorite thing that i &apos;m going to be , the only thing i &apos;m going to be , and it &apos;s going to be cameron , so he &apos;s going to go out .
thank you .
in the &apos; 80s , in the &apos; 80s , you had to have a typewriter , and you have a typewriter , that at the government .
they also had to have a leaf with the blatt of this typewriter .
the reason for this : the government could go to the government where a text .
and they found a paper with falschem gedankengut , could they try to track the creator of this thought .
and we couldn &apos;t understand how anyone could do something , and how much the people would do .
in our own countries , we would never do something .
but if you have a new farblaserdrucker in 2011 , and a page , and then a page , then this page is helle , and then this page is aufgedruckt on every side , which is eindeutig , which is eindeutig , and your printer lässt .
that &apos;s what we have today .
and it seems no one sided .
and this was an example of what our own governments are doing our own governments against us , the citizens , to use .
and that &apos;s one of the three hauptquellen of today today .
let &apos;s see what really is what really happens to the world : we can split the attacks in categories .
we have three hauptgruppen .
there are online-kriminelle .
for example , this is mr. dimitry golubow golubow in ukraine in ukraine .
and the motives of online-kriminellen are very easily .
these guys deserve money .
they use online-angriffe to make a lot of money , a huge amount of money .
there are multiple instances of online-millionären , multimillionären , who have their money through attacks .
this is wladimir tsastsin from tartu in estonia .
that &apos;s alfred hitchcock .
stephen watts .
björn sundin .
these are matthew anderson , tariq al-daour , and so forth .
these guys are online , but they &apos;ve been trained to get it up by klauen , by using the geld of our bankkonten , as we &apos;ve collected our online-banking , or also keylogger , who had our kredikarteninformationen , or also , our kredikarteninformationen of the input , as we &apos;ve got to have a infected computer , as we &apos;ve been online about a infected computer .
the u.s. intelligence was fror fror , two months ago , two months ago , the swiss black hole of mr. jain , and on this account , were 14,9 million dollars .
mr. jain &apos;s selbst , the aufenthaltsort , the aufenthaltsort .
and i &apos;m claiming that it &apos;s more likely to be more likely that we will be victims of a online-verbrechens than a great world .
and it &apos;s very obvious that this is going to be worse .
in the future , most crime are going to play online .
the second angreifergruppe that we can see today is not driven by money .
they &apos;re through something else -- proteste -- a little bit about , or through your audience .
groups are like anonymous are over the last 12 months and they have become a hauptspieler of the field of the field of the field .
so these are the three hauptangriffsgruppen : criminals , the kriminelle of the money , as anonymous , but the last group is nations , but the last group is nations , governments that are hungry .
there are cases of us , like the von .
it shows a piece of what happens when governments are going to attack their own citizens .
diginotar is a vollmachtszertifikat from the netherlands -- was it .
in the last fall , it had to be insolvenz , because diginotar was hacked .
somebody was hacked and had the system .
and last week , in a meeting meeting , i asked a group of this group of this group , if he was a question of that , whether it was possible for me to get it for the diginotar-hacks of the diginotar-hacks people .
and his answer was &quot; yes . &quot;
well , how do people die in a row of such a typical ?
diginotar is a zertifizierungsstelle .
they sell zertifikate .
what do you do with zertifikaten ?
now , you know , you need a certificate , if you have a website with https , for instance , for instance .
now we all use , or many of us , or a lot of the konkurrenten , but these are the dienste of the iran , where the iran is , in the iran , where the iran , you know , as a iran , as you know , they know more , and they &apos;re aware of the lokalen , so that the local government can &apos;t go
but if you can imagine in a foreign foreign foreign foreign policy .
zertifizierungsbehörde hacken and gefälschte ausstellen .
and that &apos;s what &apos;s happened in the event of diginotar .
how does it behaves with the arab spring and the things that happened in egypt ?
well , in egypt , the u.s. government was the headquarters of the egyptian geheimpolizei , and they found a lot of files .
in this records , a ordner called &quot; finfisher . &quot;
and in this folder , notes in germany , in germany , the egyptian government , the egyptian government had sold a few programs -- in very very very complex frame -- jegliche communication in the egyptian citizens .
they had this program for 280.000 euro to the egyptian government .
the firmenhauptquartier is exactly here .
so , the power of western governments are versorgen governments with hilfsmitteln , so that the against their own citizens can do .
but western governments also help themselves .
for example , in germany , a couple of weeks ago , and that was a trojaner , which was a trojaner that was used by german regierungsvertretern to bespitzeln their own citizens .
if you become a kriminalfall verdächtigt , then you will be angezapft with your phone .
but today we are far beyond what we are .
they tap your vote .
they use resources to bespielen their computer with a trojaner , which allows you to monitor their communication , their communication , their online-diskussionen , their online-diskussionen abzuhören , their passwörter .
so if we continue to think about things like this , the obvious answer is , &quot; ok , that sounds bad , but it doesn &apos;t matter because i &apos;m a braver citizen .
i don &apos;t have to worry about it !
i &apos;ve got nothing to hide . &quot;
and that doesn &apos;t make any sense .
privacy must be .
privacy doesn &apos;t go to debate .
it &apos;s not a decision between privacy and security .
it &apos;s a decision between freedom and control .
and as we like to , in 2011 , in 2011 , our governments are like , but every right we &apos;re going to be .
and we trust , we trust the blind government , a government , government , which we might have been going to have been going to be in the age of years ?
these are the questions that we have to engage with the next 50 years .
it may seem odd , but i &apos;m a big fan of betonblocksteinen .
the first betonblocksteine were made , hergestellt hergestellt , and entstammten entstammten , module , module from cement with various things that fit .
betonbausteine were very quick , very quickly , the meistgenutzte baueinheit in the world .
they made us into the position of things that were bigger than we were , building buildings , bridges , a rock after another .
essentially , the betonbaustein was going to be the betonbaustein of our time .
almost a hundred years later , in 1947 , came out of legos .
it was called the &quot; automatically rock rock . &quot;
and within a few years , the world bank in every household .
it &apos;s estimated that over 400 billion students were produced by 400 rocks -- or 75 rocks for each person on this planet .
they don &apos;t have to be an engineer to make beautiful houses , beautiful bridges or nice building buildings .
lego , it made it possible for everybody .
lego , essentially the betonbaustein , the u.n. , the building of the world , and it made a building for our imagination .
in the meanwhile , in the middle of the bell year , the next revolution , the next one .
the transistor was a small plastikeinheit that was us from a world of the statischen of the sequence , aufeinandergestapelten building blocks in the world in the world .
like the betonblock , allows us to build a lot larger , complex building , building a stone , a stone .
but there &apos;s a hauptunterschied : the transistor was only for experts .
personally , i personally don &apos;t accept that the building of our time , and therefore i decided to change that .
eight years ago , i was on the media lab , and i started studying this idea of exploring how to make the power of engineers in the hand of the hand and designers .
a few years ago , i started to develop a few years ago .
let me show you how they work .
littlebits are electronic modules that have a specific function .
they are vorgefertigt , light , sound , sound , engine and sensor .
and the best part is that they connect with magnets .
so they can &apos;t go wrong .
the stones are farbcodiert .
green is a little , blue is electricity , is a eingabe , and orange is wires .
so all you have to do is , you have to do a blue and a green interconnected and you can build very quickly .
they put a blue dot on a green , and you can make light .
you can take a switch between and so you have a little dimmer .
take the switch out of a pulsmodul , which is , einzufügen , and they made a little blinker .
add this buzzer for a more participatory effect , and they made a lärmmaschine .
i &apos;ll stop that .
so over the simple play , is actually a powerful .
instead of programming , you can program programming , verdrahten or löten , allows you to perform with simple , intuitive gestures .
so to accelerate the amount of oil or slow , you just turn it up and make it down the impulse faster or slower .
the idea behind the idea is that it &apos;s a growing library .
we want every single interaction in this world in a gebrauchsfertigen rock .
lights , sound , solarelemente , motors -- everything should be available .
we have littlebits in children , and they &apos;re playing with play .
and it was an incredible experience .
the most beautiful thing is how they start to understand the electronics that they &apos;re in the everyday surrounds in the everyday world , and they don &apos;t learn to school .
like a nachtlicht , like a nachtlicht , or why the doors of the aufzugs offenbleiben , or as a ipod on your touch .
we also have littlebits littlebits .
so , for example , designers , with no sophistication in electronic things that started to play with littlebits as a material .
here , we see , with filz , paper and hearts how to compose geordie ...
a couple of weeks ago , we took littlebits to risd , and they gave them some designers that had no designern experience , and they just said , &quot; -- and said , &quot; what . &quot;
here &apos;s a example of a project that they made , a bewegungsgesteuerte konfetti-kanone .
but wait for this , this is really my favorite .
it &apos;s a hummer from the play-doh that has fear in the darkness .
for those nicht-ingenieure , littlebits was a different material , electronics , electronics , has just been a more different material .
and we want to make this material for all of all available .
so , is littlebits open source .
they can go to the website , all designvorlagen accountability and they make themselves .
we want the world of the creators , the inventor , the inventor , the mitwirkenden , because this world , in which we live , these interactive world , is ours .
so , let &apos;s go up and start to invent them .
thank you .
