you know , one of the great vernügen of the travel and the joys of the forschung is to remember the people who are still remember the old days , and they &apos;re still going to be on the wind , they &apos;re going to be on the wind , they &apos;re going to touch on the back of the plants , they &apos;re going to stick the bitter leaves
and just knowing that the jaguar-schamanen is still beyond the milky way to keep the mythen of the oldest of the oldest of the fittest or the himalaya of the anthropologie , which is the most powerful of the realität of the anthropologie , but that &apos;s the most powerful of the way that the zentrale revelation to the anpassung , as a result of the adaptation , the most
and of course , we all share the same anpassungsnotwendigkeiten .
we &apos;re all born . we &apos;re going to bring children to the world .
we &apos;re going to go through .
we need to go through the unaufhaltsamen separation through death and so it should not surprise us that we all sing and dance and art .
but interesting is the unique inflection of the liedes , the rhythm of the dance in every culture .
and it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s a role to be the penan of borneo , or the voodoo-akolythen in haiti , or the warrior in the kaisut-wüste of nordkenia , or a karawanserei in the kaisut-wüste , which i &apos;m going to traveled in the middle of the country , or even a month in the desert , or even a yak-hirte on the side of the qomolangma
all these people teach us that there &apos;s other existenzmöglichkeiten , other forms of other ways to be on the earth .
and this is a sense that when you think about it , one of hope .
together , the myriad cultures of the world is a web of spirituellem and kulturellem life that the earth is umhüllt and for the most important thing that the biological lebensnetz is that you know as a biosphere .
you can imagine this cultural lebensnetz as a ethnosphäre , and the most complex idea of all the thoughts and dreams , myths and intuitionen , that have been to be the anfängen of human imagination , and the anfängen of the conscious of consciousness .
the ethnosphäre is the great legacy of humanity .
it &apos;s the symbol of what we are and what we &apos;re capable of as a wondrous species of species .
and as the biosphere , the biosphere was assassinated , this was happening with the ethnosphäre -- just with more größerer speed .
no biologist would argue for example , 50 percent or more of all species are in front of the extinction , because it &apos;s just not true , and yet this -- the most salient szenarium in the field of biological diversity -- doesn &apos;t predict what we &apos;ve known as a optimistischstes szenarium on the field of cultural diversity .
and the key budget is that the extinct &apos;s extinction .
when each of you was born in this room , were spoken on earth .
now , a language is not just the gesamtheit of the vokabulars or a series of grammatikregeln .
a language is expression of human mind .
it &apos;s a means that the soul of a particular culture of culture , in the material world .
each language is like a altbestehender forest of the mind , a turning thought , a ökosystem of historical possibilities .
and from this 6,000 languages , as we &apos;re sitting in monterey , they &apos;re not going to be able to do it in the ears of children .
they won &apos;t be taught , and that means if nothing is being done , they &apos;re actually dead .
what might be lonely when the silence were to be the final of the people who have to speak the language of language , who have no opportunity to have the wisdom of the ancestors , or hope to expect to expect ?
and yet , this horrible fortune of all the schreckliche sitting on earth , about two weeks , and about two weeks , a elderly , a elderly and takes the last silben of a old language with a old language .
and i know that some of you say , &quot; isn &apos;t it not better to be better than that , if we all have a better talk to you , and i say , &quot; well , let &apos;s be a language , &quot; let &apos;s be kantonesisch . &quot;
let &apos;s get it to be kogi . &quot;
and then you would see suddenly what it would be if you could not speak your own language .
so i want to take you today in a trip to a trip to a trip to a trip , a quick journey through the ethnosphäre to try to make them , to give you what actually lost .
now there &apos;s some among us that &apos;s forgotten , that i forgot when i say different ways of the self , &quot; really different ways of my own .
so for example , for example , this kid in the northwest of the sun , the people of the anakonda , believe that they were mythologisch the milchfluss from the east of saint schlangen .
this is a people that doesn &apos;t involve the colors between the colors and green , because the himmelszelt of the people , the people depend on , gleichgestellt .
they have a physical language and a heiratsvorschrift of the linguistische exogamie , you have to marry someone who &apos;s talking about another language .
all of this stuff in the mythologischen past , and this is the amazing thing that in these big houses , in which the mischehen six or seven languages , is that you never hear somebody who learns a language .
you &apos;re listening to and start talking .
or , one of the most intriguing tribes that i ever lived with , the waorani waorani in the northeast of ecuador , a erstaunliches people who was being developed in 1958 .
in 1957 , five missionare kontakt went to kontakt and made a schwerwiegenden mistake .
it was warfen from the air from the air , which we would be as an amazing gesture of what we were doing as a smart gesture . so , forgot that these people had never seen anything in their lives .
they took this photographs from the forest , trying to see the face or the character , found nothing and schlussfolgerten that this was the business of the devil and killed the five missionare with the speer .
but the waorani killed not only have to außenstehende with the spear .
they &apos;re going to durchbohrten each other .
54 percent of the deaths were caused by durchbohrungen .
we went back to the geneaologie generations and found two instances of a natural death and when we were doing a little bit of a little bit about it , and when we were to be so old that he was so old that he was so old , and we killed him with the speer .
but at the same time , they had a clear note of the forests that was amazing .
their hunters could smell the urine of the animal from 40 steps , and determine what the tierart of these are .
in the early 1990s , i got a really amazing job when my professor was interested in the harvard , whether i was interested in the harvard and the secret societies that were macoutes and tonton macoutes , and the poison that used to make it happen to make a difference .
so to give you a sense of this sensation , i had to be a little bit of a remarkable faith of the knowledge of knowledge knowledge and voodoo , and i don &apos;t know that the black magic is magic .
in the opposite , it &apos;s a complex &apos;s artery .
it &apos;s interesting .
if i would ask you , the big weltreligionen , what would you say ?
christianity , islam , buddhism , judaismus or whatever .
a continent is going to be going to be , because the guess that there was no religious faith , of course , and it &apos;s just a voodoo that &apos;s just a very popular religious thought that during the tragic diaspora of the sklavereizeit .
but what makes interesting power is that this is the living relationship between the living and the dead .
the living is going to be able to get the spirits .
the spirits of the great water will be heraufbeschwört , answers to the rhythm of the dance to be able to be the soul of the living , so that the akolyth for a brief moment is going to be god .
deshab sagen , &quot; her white go in church and dance over god .
we dance to the temple and god . &quot;
and because you &apos;re obsessed , you &apos;re going to have to get from the mind . how can you be damage ?
and see this amazing demonstrationen : voodoo-akolythen in a trancezustand , die charcoal without verbrennung anfassend , a surprising of the ability to influence the body that it &apos;s aushält when it &apos;s going to be described in a state of extreme arousal .
now , all of the people i met with the kogi , the kogi of nevada nevada de santa , santa marta marta .
so , the old tyrannischen civilization that showed the karibische küstenebene of colombia and the conquest in the conquest , the conquest had been proven to the volk of the karibischen world that would be used over the karibischen .
in a blutbefleckten continent , these people were the only ones who were never lost from the spaniern .
until today , they &apos;re going to be priesterschaft by a ritual priesthood . the education is very extraordinary .
the young akolythen are separated from three and four years of the age of the glaciers in the finsternis , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , the nine months of the gletscher , they were elected , to be the nine months of pregnancy , they spent the nine months of pregnancy , they spend now metamorphorisch at the lap of the great mother .
and while this whole time , they &apos;re going to be culturally in the values of their society , and values that the claim and their prayers , the cosmic and your prayers , the cosmic -- or we might say that ecological -- balance .
and at the end of this amazing initiation , you &apos;ll see a day and the first time in the age of the first time , when the sun starts to be a sunrise , and in this kristallklaren , the sun starts to be in the old beautiful landscape , and the priest is going to learn to the abstrakten of the amazing beautiful landscape , and the priest
it &apos;s so wonderful . you have to protect it . &quot;
they call the older brothers and say that we were the younger brothers , for the destruction of the world .
now this level of intuition is very important .
and whenever we think about the age and landscape , we &apos;re either rousseau and the old gerücht of the most beautiful wilden , which is in his simplification , or other people &apos;s thought , or other people are connected to nature than we are .
so , the number of eingeborene are neither , nor are you going to be geschwächt .
it &apos;s not much space in the malariaverseuchten sümpfen of asmat , or the cold winden of tibet , and yet , in the cold winds of tibet , they have been in the idea of the earth , not to be close to the earth , but on a far more complex intuition , the idea that the earth is only can only be in the human consciousness .
now , what does that mean ?
it means that a little child in the andes , which is a apu-geist person , and a different kind of mensch is going to be a apu-geist , and a different kind of relationship with this resource , and a little bit of a child in the world that &apos;s been used a pile of a pile that a pile is a bunch of stones that can be suspended
whether he &apos;s a aufenthaltsort of a mind or a bunch of erz , is irrelevant .
the interesting thing is the metaphor that the relationship between the individual and nature &apos;s defined .
i grew up in the forests of britisch colombia and believed that these forests are being gerodet .
this made me a different person among the kwakiutl , who believe that these forests of hukuk and gebogenen himmelsschnabel and the gebogenen geister , and the kannibalischen , the most nordende of the world , they were going to be in the world they would participate on their hamatsa-initiation .
now , if you start looking at the idea that these cultures can create different cultures , you can understand some of their extraordinary discoveries . so that &apos;s what this plant plant .
it &apos;s a photograph that i only should take last april of the amazon .
this is ayahuasca , from many of you , the most primitive psychoaktive of the repertoire of the schamanen .
what ayahuasca does that makes this pharmakologische potential of this präparats , but it &apos;s really about two different sources , which is actually a series of different sources , harmin , leicht , leicht , leicht , leicht rauch , and it &apos;s a blauer allein in the bewusstsein , but it &apos;s going to be a blauer of a strauchs rauch , it &apos;s going to be a
this plant contains some very strong tryptamine that the serotonin , dimethyltryptamin-5 and methoxydimethyltryptamin .
if you &apos;ve seen the yanomami , how you see this stuff , these substance that they &apos;re making out of different kinds of plants .
this kind of puder is about as a gewehrlauf beschossen , gesäumt of barocken , and the landing on a sea of electricity .
it &apos;s not going to create a distortion of reality , but the resolution of reality .
i even have a professor , richard evan shultes , who was the psychedelische ärea , the man who was initiated with the entdeckung ärea in the 30iger years of mexico , and i &apos;ve been able to see that the psychedelische pilze was not going to be able to be able to do that , because you &apos;re going to be able to do the impact that you &apos;re
but the thing about tryptaminen is that they can &apos;t be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be through a human gut of course , of course , denaturiert enzym with names .
you can only get some other chemicals with some other chemicals that are mao denaturieren .
now the amazing thing is that the betakarboline that are in the liane , mao-inhibitoren of the kind of kind of the way that is necessary to potenzieren the tryptamine , so you &apos;re asking yourself .
how can these people are arten from a flora of 80,000 plants that are not able to find a related plants that are combined by the way that the whole thing is , so that the whole thing is that the sum of its parts is ?
we use this great euphemism , trying to try and error , which is as meaningless .
but you ask the question , &quot; the plant speaks to us . &quot;
so what does that mean ?
this tribe , the cofan , the cofan of ayahuasca , they all recognize all the distance in the woods that are being able to do for our eyes as a kind of form .
and then you ask them how they take their taxonomie and they say , &quot; i thought you &apos;re doing something of plants .
i mean , you know anything about all of it ? &quot; and i said , &quot; no . &quot;
so it turns out that you have each 17 of 17 to learn from vollmond to vollmond and they &apos;re singing in a different tonlage .
well , this is not going to be a ph.d. in harvard , but it &apos;s much more interesting than counting .
now , the problem of the problem is that even those of us , the sympathy for the hard time , they &apos;ve been able to look at the hard of the native , and they &apos;re kind of like to be able to do the past , while the real world , and the real world , the way it &apos;s .
so , in fact , the fact is that you &apos;re going to remember the 20th century , in 300 years , in 300 years , it &apos;s not to be a era , but the massive destruction of the biological and cultural diversity of the earth and cultural diversity of the earth and cultural diversity , that &apos;s not the change .
all cultures have always involved in the dance with new lebenmöglichkeiten .
and the problem is not the technology .
the sioux-indianer didn &apos;t have less to be less than when they bow and arrow tasks when americans stopped the american american people as they were and pferdewagen .
not change and technology threaten the integrity of the ethnosphäre . it &apos;s power . the ugly face of the regime .
and wherever you are in the world , you &apos;re going to be able to be the ungeheuerliche of the schlamm , which is the most powerful abholzung of sarawak , which is the most powerful abholzung of sarawak , which is the most likely to be erniedrigt by the schlamm , and the japanese frachter of the horizont , the most dynamisch frachter of the anpassung , which is
or if we go into the mountains of tibet , where i &apos;m going to go to neuerlich , you &apos;re going to see a lot of the face of the political dominanz .
you know , the genocide , the phyische extinction of people &apos;s allgemein , but the ethnozid , the destruction of the people , not only not least not least , but generally and vielerorts as part of a entwicklungsstrategie .
and you can &apos;t understand the suffering unless you have not experienced it on the unterster plane .
i went to a young colleagues of chengdu meilen from westchina überland , and i just saw the statistics of the statistics of the statistiken in westchina , and i was looking at the statistics of the statistics of the statistics that were submitted to the rubble and ashes , and 1.2 million people who were murdered in the cultural of the kadern .
the father &apos;s father was being used as a anhänger of the panchen .
that meant that he was instantly killed during chinese invasion .
his uncle had to be floh with their holiness , people brought to nepal .
his mother was locked for punishment for the crime .
he was in the age of two years in prison to hide herself under her rockzipfel , because she couldn &apos;t live without him .
the sister who did this brave did , was brought into a erziehungslager .
one day you came from a armband maos and for those übertretung , for the übertretung , they had to be a set for seven years .
the suffering is unerträglich , but the most delicious minds is something more unvergessliches .
and at the end , we really want to get a choice , and we want to live in a monochromatischen world of the world &apos;s surface or in a world world of diversity ?
margaret mead , the great anthropologist told us that it &apos;s a big idea , gestaltlosen , generischen worldview , we &apos;re not just going to see the entire bandwidth of human imagination , but we &apos;re going to see one day from human imagination , but we &apos;ve got to wake up one day from a dream , and forgotten that there &apos;s ever been other choices .
and it &apos;s critical to think that our species may have existed for 600,000 years .
the most neolithische revolution that brought us to agriculture , and we &apos;re in this moment of the kult of the schamanen , the poetry of priesterschaft ersetzte and hierarchy , specialization and überschuss , and it was just 10,000 years ago .
the modern industrial world as we know it is barely 300 years old .
now , this shallow story doesn &apos;t tell me that we all have answers to the challenges we are facing in the ensuing millennia .
if we ask these myriad weltkulturen after the meaning of the human , you &apos;re going to be able to vote with 10,000 different voices .
and in this song , we &apos;re going to be the possibility of what we are : people with the full consciousness that are aware of the centrality that all humans have to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be
here &apos;s a photograph that i took at the northern end of the baffin-inseln , when i went to inuits on the narwhal-jagd , and this man , olaya , told me a wonderful story of his grandfather .
the canadian government is not always very good with the inuit and during the 50iger years of our domination , they were forced to pull in settlements .
the grandfather &apos;s the grandfather &apos;s old man refused to .
the family that fear to be his life , all of all the guns and all the tools .
now you have to know that the economic production is not afraid of the cold . they use them to their advantage .
the gleitschienen of her sled were originally made of fish that was used in karibu-haut .
the grandfather &apos;s the grandfather &apos;s not to be before the arctic night or the wehenden storm .
he schlüpfte out out of the outside , and he made his pants from seehundsfell and defäkierte in his hand , and when the feces started to make his frieren , he would teach them into the shape of a messers .
he sprühte speichel on the sides of the fäkalien-messers and when it was fully frozen , he was a dog to do it .
he enthäutete the dog and the improvisierte , the skeleton of the dog and the improvisierte , a sled , spannte one dog , and entschwand over the eisschollen on the front of the road .
so you can &apos;t do anything from anything .
and this is a symbol of a symbol of the world trade and all of the world in the world .
the canadian government gave the inuit in april 1999 , the complete control over a field of a field that &apos;s bigger than the california and texas .
it &apos;s our new country and called nunavut .
it &apos;s a kind of a field . they all control the mineralvorkommen .
a amazing example of how a nation , a state that can be looking for his head and reach out of his head .
and finally , i think it &apos;s pretty obvious , at least for us , at least for us that are the distant goals of the earth , to realize that they &apos;re not at all .
they are the heimatländer of somebody .
they represent parts of human imagination that are in the past times , and for all of us , the dreams of these children are going to be the dreams of the children of our own children .
what we ultimately ultimately trying to do is that we believe that politicians never achieve anything .
we believe that polemik -- we think that polemik is not überzeugend , but we think that storytelling can change the world and so we &apos;re probably the best institution for storytelling in the world , and our website is going to give 35 million hits every month .
and the 156 nations send our fernsehkanal .
our magazines read from millions .
and we &apos;re going to take a series of traveling into the ethnosphäre , which we have to be geblendet from such beautiful wonders , and hopefully , you &apos;re going to be a nach of the zentrale revelation to the other , that we can find a lebensmöglichkeit in a really broader world where wisdom can contribute wisdom to our common well-being .
thank you .
what i first first is to show you how possible , a new technology that we have to do with this is a new technology that we have to be a year in a year ago , and it &apos;s a umgebung , and it &apos;s a environment where they either either locally or from the vast amounts of visual data .
we see lots of lots of digital pictures here , which you seamlessly and fortwährend heranholen , and it &apos;s neu to a new way .
and it doesn &apos;t matter how many information we look at how big these collections are or how big these are images .
most of you are digital , digital city of a camera , but this one is a scan of the kongressbibliothek and it &apos;s in a domain of 300 megapixeln .
it doesn &apos;t matter , because the only thing that the performance of a system like this is , is the number of light on the screen in your screen , it has a very flexible architecture .
this is a whole book , an example of nichtbild-daten .
this is bleak house from dickens . every column is a chapter .
to prove that it &apos;s really about a text and not a picture , we can actually show something like this , to show that this one is a real representation of the texts and no image .
maybe this is a kind of artificial way to read a e-buch .
i wouldn &apos;t recommend .
this is a realistischerer case . this is a copy of the guardian .
every big picture is the beginning of a abschnitts .
and this gives you the pleasure and the good experience of a magazine or a newspaper , which is a kind of a kind of a kind of medium .
we also have something about the corner of this particular copy of the guardian .
we have a false ad with very high resolution , which is much higher than a normal display and we added them .
if you want to see the functions of this car , you can see them here .
or other models , or even spezifikationen .
and this really is really , really , really , really these ideas for the available space on the screen .
we hope that that no pop-ups and other baloney more , that should not be necessary .
of course , the prime one is a really obvious application for a technology like this .
and i really want to spend a lot of time to say that we &apos;re going to contribute to this realm .
but these are all roads in the &apos; 80s .
übereinandergelagert &apos;s on the front image of nasa .
let &apos;s now look at something else .
this is even live in the internet . you can nachprüfen it .
this is a project with the name of the photosynth , which really connects two different technologies .
one is a very good research of computervision , which is a very good research of noah snavely , a universitätsstudenten universitätsstudenten of college , under the advice of steve seitz at the uw seitz .
and rick szeliski was done by microsoft research . a very good collaboration .
so this is live in the internet . it &apos;s powered by seadragon .
you can see that if we can create these kinds of views , we can go through pictures and these experiences of the mehrfachen .
but the spatial anordnung is actually in the fact that you &apos;re in .
the computervision-algorithmen haben have been given these pictures together in the real space where these footage , in the grassi lakes , all the aufnahmen lakes in the canadian rockies , are there are elements of stabilisierten slides or panoramischer bildverarbeitung , and these things were all in the relationship to each other .
i don &apos;t know if i have time to show you another environments .
there are a lot of räumlicher .
i would like to show you a little bit of the most originalen web of the noah and this is from a early prototype of photosynth to the summer , to show you that it really is the punchline behind this technology , which is not necessarily the pointe of this technology , and this is not necessarily so obvious when you have the environments that we have on the
we had to be able to do because of the lawyers .
this is a rekonstruktion of the cathedral of the cathedral , which is a rekonstruktion of the kathedrale notre dame , and they just give them notre dame , and they &apos;re going to get images from men and on the universitätsgelände , and each of this gives one key to the universitätsgelände of the kegel is a picture that was discovered as a model that was discovered .
so this is all of these things , and they all are all in the way in this way in relation to the relationship .
and we can navigate this very simple way .
and you know , i &apos;ve never believed that i &apos;m going to end up with microsoft .
i &apos;m very thankful for the reception .
and i suspect you can see that many different types of cameras are : all of the handy-kamera is about to professional slrs , a pretty big number of them that were all in the environment .
and if possible , i &apos;m going to find some of the weird .
many of them are from faces to be the same thing , and so on , you &apos;ve got to be seen .
somewhere here are a bunch of photographs -- here .
this is actually a poster of notre dame lady that was recorded .
we can change the poster of the physical view of this environment .
the point is that we can do things with social environment -- it &apos;s now data from all the rest -- from all the collective memory of all of the things that &apos;s going on , like , visual , visual , and it &apos;s interconnected .
all of these pictures are connected to each other , and it creates something that is bigger than the sum of parts .
you get a model that comes from the entire earth .
look at this as the sequel of the work of stephen lawlers .
and this is something that through complexity , with the people use it , it grows and use it to the user interface .
your own pictures will be eingegeben with metadata that has a different person .
if someone has done the effort and all of these sacred , and you see , you can use it to all of these heiligen and i can use them to put them as a ausgangspunkt of the notre , and i can use them to put them into this room , and they &apos;re using a kind of übergreifender modaler of sozialer experience with the use of other anbietern
and of course , there are all of the rich models of any interesting models of any interesting part of the earth that not only have been just by überflüge or satellite and so on , but by collective memory .
thank you .
so i understand them right ? their software enabled that to a certain period , within the next years , all the pictures that are used in the world in the world , are being used in the world ?
yes . they don &apos;t seem to be .
if you want to make them erstellt between the pictures .
and she does this because of the west .
and this is really exciting when you think of the most fundamental information that we have a lot of these pictures .
as you &apos;re going to take a websuche for pictures , where you &apos;re looking at sentences and the text of the website , many information about it , which is .
but how would it be when the image you use with all of your pictures ?
then the most important querverbindung querverbindung and the fülle that comes out of it , really enormous . it &apos;s an classic netzwerkeffekt .
blaise , this is really incredible . so it &apos;s fine .
thank you very much .
i &apos;m going to tell you some things from my book , like i &apos;ve heard , in the way that you &apos;ve heard of , and i &apos;m going to try to make a few connections , if you &apos;re not noticed .
i want to start with what i call &quot; offizielles dogma . &quot;
the official dogma of what ?
the official glaubenssatz of all of the western industrialized societies .
the official dogma works : if our goal of the test is the beginning of our citizen , this is about all the maximierung of the freedom of the individual .
the reason this is that freedom is good , valuable , valuable , meaningful , a unverzichtbare premise of human human .
if people have freedom , each of us is about to do the things that our communities do and no one has to decide for us .
the way freedom to maximize freedom is to maximize choice .
the more choices people have , the more freedom you have , and the more freedom you have , the more hiv have you have .
this is , i think , so deep in our water , that it would not be to be a question .
and it &apos;s also deeply deep in our lives .
i &apos;m going to give you some examples of what makes us progress .
this is my supermarket . no big . no big .
i just want to say briefly about salatdressing .
there &apos;s 175 dressings in my supermarkets , if you don &apos;t buy the 10 different extra , and 12 balsamico-essig , they could buy a large number of salat dessings , in the unlikely unlikely , in the unlikely case , that no one is right in the store .
so this is how the supermarket is .
and then they go to the verbraucher-elektronik business to a stereo -- speaker , cd-player , a kassetten-player , radio , verstärker , and in this country , there &apos;s so many stereo facilities .
we can use 6.5 million different kinds of models that are being offered in the components that are going to be offered in this one .
you have to admit that this is a big choice .
in other areas -- the world of communication .
there was a time when i was a boy , because i was able to have to weigh every telephone , you &apos;d have to have been speaking by the courts of lawrence .
they rented their phone . they didn &apos;t bought it .
one episode of that was that the telephone was never broke .
these days are over .
we have almost a infinite choice of telephones , especially in the world .
these are the mobile phones of the future .
my favorite is the one in the middle -- mp3-player- , nasen-haar-trimmer and crème brûlée .
and should you should not see that until you &apos;ve seen in your business , you can make sure that you will soon be soon .
and what it does is it &apos;s imperative to make people to go and ask this question .
you know what the answer to this question is ?
the answer is no . &quot;
it &apos;s not possible to buy a mobile phone that doesn &apos;t do it too much .
in other aspects of life , which are very much more spherical than the purchase of the choices that are the same explosion of choice .
health health -- it &apos;s not longer the case in the united states , and the doctor tells you what to do .
instead , you go to the doctor and the doctor says , we could make a difference or we could do b .
and a story has these benefits and risks .
b has these benefits and risks . what do you want to do ?
and they say , &quot; doctor , &quot; i should do ? &quot;
the doctor says , a story has this benefits and risk and b has to be benefits and risk .
what do you want to do ?
and if you say , &quot; if you were , doctor , what would you do ? &quot;
the doctor says , &quot; but i &apos;m not . &quot;
the result is -- we call it &quot; patient autonomy , &quot; that &apos;s a very much more important thing to do the people of the subject of the people -- namentlich of the people who know the doctor &apos;s own choice -- to someone who &apos;s not to know the most important thing to do -- and so , &quot; not the most beautiful ill is to make a
there &apos;s a tremendous marketing for verschreibungspflichtige drugs for people like you and me , and i think if you think about it , no sense , because we don &apos;t buy it .
why are they going to advertise us if we can &apos;t buy ?
the answer is : they expect us to ask the doctor on the next morning and ask a change of the prescription .
something like our identity is like our identity is now a question of choice like this slide .
we don &apos;t have identity , we invent it .
and we &apos;re just going to reinvent ourselves as much as we want .
that means that every day , if you wake up on the morning , you decide to decide what to be a kind of person you want .
in terms of marriage and family , there was a time in the standard-annahme , where almost every one had had a one and that they could get so quickly as they could , and then quickly got so quickly as they could .
the only choice was &quot; who &quot; who &quot; not when they did .
now , it &apos;s all easy to have .
i teach beautiful smart students , and i &apos;ll give you 20 percent less than i did .
and it &apos;s not because they &apos;re less smart , and not because they &apos;re less carefully .
it &apos;s because they &apos;re preoccupied with other things , you ask yourself , &quot; should i marry ? &quot; should i marry ?
should i marry ? should i just have children to do , or just a career ? &quot;
these are all einnehmende questions .
and you &apos;re going to answer these questions , whether that means all the tasks i &apos;m going to do with them and not get a good grade in my class .
and in fact , they should do this . these are important questions .
work -- we &apos;re blessed as carl has to be the amount of the amount of the amount of the way that gives us each minute every day from each other every day to the planet -- to the randolph hotel .
there &apos;s a corner of the corner that i &apos;m not going to tell you about , in the wirelesslan .
i &apos;m not going to tell you because i want to use it .
so what it means is that this incredible freedom of choice we have to make decisions and again and again , whether we should work or should work .
we can roll our children in the football , and we have our mobile phone on a hip , and our blackberry on other hip , and our laptop probably probably on our lap .
and even if you &apos;re all the time , every minute in which we ask our child in a fußballspiels of a fußballspiels , we ask ourselves , &quot; should i suppose that call ?
should i get to this email ? should i write this letter ? &quot;
and even though the answer to the question , &quot; no , it &apos;s certainly your experience of your child &apos;s experience , very different as it would be .
everywhere we look , big things and small things , material things and lifestyle , life is a question of choice .
and the world was like that , that was like that .
so i want to say , there were some choices , but not all the question was a question of choice .
and the world in which we live in now .
and the question is , is the good or bad news ?
the answer is &quot; yes . &quot;
we all know what good is about , so i &apos;ll just talk about it .
all of these choices have two effects , two negative effects on people .
a effect , paradoxer , is that it &apos;s going to make it flow .
with so many options that you can choose , it &apos;s not very hard to choose to choose to all .
i &apos;m going to give you another drastisches example of this , a study of investment in volunteers .
one of me had access to me to zugriff access to investitions-akten , the giant fondgesellschaft of about a million collaborators and about 2,000 different forms .
and what she found was a 10 times the employers who were anbot , they took two percent .
they offer 50 times more than -- 10 percent less employees than if they just offer five . why ?
because it &apos;s 50 investmentfonds that are facing choice , it &apos;s so hard to decide that it &apos;s going to be a hard to go to tomorrow .
and then tomorrow , and then tomorrow , and tomorrow , and tomorrow , of course , salvaged .
you understand that this isn &apos;t just to be just the people , the people who are going to go into the position because they don &apos;t have enough money to have to make the decisions that it &apos;s difficult to be so hard that they &apos;re going to be große in their own arbeitgeber .
they &apos;re not going to be the participation to be the same way to 5,000 dollars a year on the arbeitsgeber , the happy would have been to be their contributions .
so paralysis is a series of choices .
and i think it &apos;s a sense of that the world looks like .
you want to really meet the decision if it &apos;s all eternity , right ?
they don &apos;t want to choose the wrong investment , or even the wrong salatdressing .
so this is a effect . the other effect is that even if we make the paralysis and make a decision , we end up with the outcome of choice than we would have had to decide between us to decide between fewer possibilities .
and there are several reasons for this .
one of them is a bit of the big choice of unterschiedlicher unterschiedlicher , and it &apos;s not perfect , and what &apos;s happening is that , it &apos;s just a different choice , and what happens is that they have to be a different choice , and what happens is that they &apos;re going to be able to make the choice , and this is the bereuen wirkt ,
the more ways there &apos;s more than the more easy to do anything , it &apos;s not to regret that is the wahl for the choice .
secondly , what economists call economists .
dan gilbert has a big point today by telling him how much the way we assign to do things about what we compare it .
well , if there &apos;s lots of alternative alternatives , it &apos;s just a very nice properties of alternative , which they &apos;re doing , they &apos;re doing less happy with the alternatives that they chose .
here &apos;s an example . for you who are no new yorkers , i apologize .
but here is what you should have thought .
here &apos;s a couple of on the hamptons .
very expensive .
wunderschöner strand . awesome day . they have it all for themselves .
what could be better ? &quot; damn man thinks . &quot;
every single neighborhood in my neighborhood neighborhood .
i could put directly in front of my house . &quot;
and he &apos;s just two weeks from the thought he has missed the opportunity to have a day , day , a fantastic parking lot .
oppertunitätskosten senken the happiness that we get through our choice , even if we &apos;ve been seeing .
and the more ways of the choices , the more attractive qualities of these choices are going to be in the oppertunitätskosten .
here &apos;s another example .
now , this cartoon makes some statements .
it makes a statement about it and maybe about it , and maybe about it about things about it .
but a more important thing that he &apos;s is : always who you decide to do for one thing , you decide to do other things .
and these other things like many attractive qualities , and it &apos;s going to do less likely to do less .
third : eskalation of expectations .
this has been struck me when i wanted my jeans .
i &apos;m wearing jeans , almost all the time .
and there was a time in the way it was just a kind of kind of kind of kind of kind of kind of kind of time , and they bought them , they were unglaublich unkomfortabel and when they were getragen enough enough to and often enough enough to have a lot of time .
so to buy new jeans , after many years of the old age , and i said , &quot; i &apos;d like to have a few jeans , here &apos;s my greatness . &quot;
and the merchant said , &quot; want to be schlanke , leicht or air ?
do you want to be buttons or reißverschluss ? rock or acid ?
do you want to be able to do it with holes ?
you want to be far away , kegelig , blah blah blah , and so on .
my jaws was down and after i was blown up , i said , &quot; i &apos;d like to have the way that used to be the only way . &quot;
he had no idea what was that , so i spent an hour with this bloody jeans , and he was the business of business -- and i say the truth -- with the best kind of the audience i ever ever .
i had better . all these choice would have to have it better .
but i felt worse .
why ? i wrote a whole book to try to explain myself .
the reason i felt was worse , with all these devices , with all these devices , my expectations of what a good couple of different points is going to be .
i had very low expectations . i had no idea when it was just in a kind of kind of kind of a kind .
when you came in 100 species , it was a one of them to be perfect , and they should be perfect , they should be perfect .
and what i got was good , but it wasn &apos;t perfect .
and so i got to what i had gotten to what i was expected , and what i had was in comparison with what i expected .
the adding of the possibilities in the lives of people are increasing the expectations of people how good that are going to be in the same opportunity .
and this leads to fewer happiness with the results , even if the results are good .
no one in the world of the marketings knows that , because if you would , you don &apos;t know what it would be .
the truth is more like this .
the reason is all of it was better than anything was worse than anything was worse , it was for people to make the people experience , to make a pleasant .
today , in the world we live -- we &apos;re wealthy , older citizens , with perfection -- the best for you ever hope is that things are so good as you expect .
they &apos;re never going to show you angenehm because their expectations , my expectations , haushoch .
the secret to glücklichkeit -- that &apos;s what they &apos;ve been all came to -- the secret to the glücklichkeit are low expectations .
i want to say -- a short autobiographischer moment -- i &apos;m married with a woman , and it &apos;s really wonderful .
i couldn &apos;t do it better . i don &apos;t have to be scared .
but niederlassen is not always a bad thing .
finally , one of the kaufens of the kaufens is a kind of bad time , if you &apos;re dissatisfied , and you wonder why , who &apos;s the answer , the world is clear . what would you have to do ? what would you do ?
if hundreds of different species are available , and they buy one of the enttäuschend , and they ask why , who &apos;s responsible ?
it &apos;s also clear that the answer is : you &apos;re .
they would have better do it .
with 100 different types of jeans , there &apos;s no excuse for mistakes .
and so if people make decisions , and even if the results of decisions are good , they feel about it , they &apos;re accusing themselves .
clinical depression in the industrial generation in the last generation .
i think a signifikanter -- not the only beiträger to this explosion of depression , and also , as a selbstmord , is that people are erfahren , because if you have to explain these experiences yourself , you think it &apos;s would be their blame .
and so the bilanzergebnis is that it &apos;s going to be generell better , and we feel bad .
so let me remember .
this is the official dogma that we all think of right , completely wrong . it &apos;s not true .
there &apos;s no question that something better than no better than not , but it doesn &apos;t follow any choice than anything selection .
there &apos;s a magic amount of information . i don &apos;t know what it is .
i &apos;m pretty sure that we &apos;ve missed this point in the long term where we have our bodies .
now , as a single question -- i &apos;m almost done -- as a single question , the thing that is about thinking about the subject , which is all these choices in the industrialized societies , is the material of the material .
there are lots of places in the world , and we &apos;ve heard of many of you , whose problem is not to be big selection .
you know , your problem is that they have too little .
so the things i &apos;m talking about is a curious problem of modern , rich societies .
and what &apos;s so frustrating and the final thing is : steve levitt has told them yesterday about how these expensive and hard work is not helping to installierenden car seats . it &apos;s a waste of money .
what i tell you about is that these expensive choices , complicated decisions -- it &apos;s not easy that they don &apos;t help .
it even hurts .
and they &apos;re concerned about that .
if something of the people that makes people to make decisions so choices in the societies in which people would have shifted , wouldn &apos;t only improve the lives of people , but our dignity will improve .
economists call this a pareto-verbesserungs application .
einkommensumverteilung is going to be concerned about all the better -- not only the poor -- because all these big choice of us .
finally , read you this cartoon , and i &apos;m going to say , a great person , says , &quot; ah ! what does this fish ?
you know nothing possible in this goldfischglas . &quot;
verarmten phantasie , a kurzsichtige view of the world -- and that &apos;s the way i read it first .
and the more i thought about that , the more i came to the view of the fish that &apos;s white .
because the truth is that if you break the dopamine receptor , so that all possible is , they don &apos;t have freedom . they have paralysis .
if you break the goldfischglas , so that everything is possible , it &apos;s going to be the happiness .
it &apos;s increasing the paralysis and the senken satisfaction .
everybody needs a goldfischglas .
this is almost almost to be limited to the vollkommener , possibly for the fish , definitely for us .
but the abhanden is a metaphorischen goldfischglas , a recipe for misery , and i guess , disaster .
thank you very much .
you know , i &apos;ve talked about some of these projects already talked about earlier about human genome and what might mean that , and over the discovery of genes .
in fact , we start from a new point : we &apos;ve got biology , and now we &apos;re trying to do from digital code in a new phase of biology to the new way .
we always have to ask ourselves significant questions .
what &apos;s life ? it &apos;s something i think that many biologists are trying to understand and that it &apos;s on different levels .
we tried to be able to simplify it up to the minimum components .
we &apos;ve been going to have 20 years of years of light , and when we &apos;ve been doing the humangenom , we have the change in the world of the analog world of biology to the computer world .
now we try to ask whether we can live life or whether we can make new life , from this digital universe ?
this is the map of a little organism , the mycoplasma geitalium , which is the smallest genome of a species that can replicate itself in the lab , and we &apos;ve tried to do it with a smaller genome .
we &apos;ve done it on about a hundred genes of the 500 or so , that are here .
but if we look at this metabolic map , which is very simple , in our comparison , and trust me that &apos;s simple . but if we &apos;re all of these genes that we &apos;re seeing in the other , it &apos;s very unlikely to lead to a living cell .
so we decided that it &apos;s the only way to see this chromosome , actually , to what we &apos;re allowed to do is to take the individual components and to ask some of these fundamental questions .
and so we started with the question , we can play a chromosome ?
it allows you to make the chemistry that really has to make a big molecule , which has never been before ?
and if we can do that , we can start to make the chromosome ?
a chromosome is just a piece of inertes material .
our steps in the digitalisierung of life were exponentially .
our ability to write the ability to write very slowly , but we have a very slowly , and our last point now , now we &apos;re going to put on a exponential curve .
we started to start 15 years ago .
it took several years before several years , with a bioethischen review before we did the first experiments .
as it turns out , it &apos;s very difficult .
there are tens of thousands of machines around the world , the little pieces of dna can be 30 , 30 years ago , but it &apos;s a degenerativer process , so the longer you make a piece of power , more than you will make a piece of failure .
so we had to develop a new method we have to develop these little pieces of water and error .
this was our first attempt to try to work with digital information , the genome of x 174 .
it &apos;s a little bit of the bacteria in bacteria .
we took little pieces , made a fehlerkorrektur and had a dna molecule from about 5,000 letters .
the exciting phase came back when we took this piece of inerte chemical and a bacteria , and the bacteria started to read the genetic code , and made a viral particles .
the viral particles then became the cells and came back and forth and killed .
recently , i talked to the oil industry , and they said that they &apos;re doing this model right .
they laughed more than you .
so we think that this is a situation that a situation is actually in software to build your own hardware , in a biological system .
but we wanted to go back to a lot of bakterielles . we &apos;ve got more than 580.000 letters in the virus code , so we &apos;re able to figure out it in cassette buchstaben , we could build the size of the virus , we could vary the size of the kassetten , and how to understand what the individual is going to be the components of a living
design is the key , and if you want to launch with digital information in the computer , you have to be really fehlerfrei that digital information .
when we first saw the genome first 1995 , the fehlerrate was the fehlerrate in a mistake of a mistake .
we found at the resequenzieren of 30 mistake , if we could use the original sequence , it would never be possible .
part of the design is it , it &apos;s a stücke , the 50 letters long , and with other 50-buchstaben , stücken , to build smaller sub-einheiten , to build these cells .
we have unique elements here .
you may have heard that we have waterzeichen .
think about this : we have a 4-buchstaben code : a , c , g and t. and t. .
triplets of this letters -- these letters encode 8,000 amino acids , and there &apos;s a single purpose for each of these amino acids .
so we can use the genetic code to write our words , phrases .
so we just did only signed .
some people were disappointed that it was not poetry .
we &apos;ve been so constructed that we could use it with enzymes . there are enzymes that are fixing and back .
and we started making pieces , starting with the stücken bis , the fünf- buchstaben , fügten these guys to make these together to 72.000 this again .
in every step , we &apos;ve got this pieces in the surplus creek , because we tried to create a very robust process , what they &apos;re going to see in a minute .
we tried to get to the point of the automation .
so , this looks like a basketball-playoff .
if we &apos;re going to get these right stücken , you &apos;re talking about 100,000 basenpaaren -- then they &apos;re not just going to grow in e. coli , and it &apos;s the same opportunities of modern molecular biology . and so we &apos;ve got to use other mechanisms .
we knew from a mechanism called homologe rekombination , which is using biology to repair dna that can only happen to the pieces .
here &apos;s an example of this . there &apos;s a organism called deinococcus radiodurans in the three million rads of radiation .
you see in the upper field that his chromosome is just falling apart .
12 to 24 hours later , everything was going to be as much as it was .
we have thousands of organisms that can do that .
these organisms can be compiled , they can actually live in the vacuum .
i &apos;m absolutely sure that life in space and moves on the search for self-reflection .
in fact , nasa has shown that there &apos;s a lot of it out there .
here &apos;s a gefügeaufnahme from the molecule we &apos;ve created this processes -- actually we just use hefe-mechanismen , we &apos;ve only using hefe-mechanismen design , we have it sie , and yeast use it to automatically .
this is not a elektronenmikroskopaufnahme mikroskopaufnahme .
it &apos;s so large molecule that we can actually see it with the lichtmikroskop .
these are footage over a year of six seconds .
that &apos;s the most popular we &apos;ve done recently .
these are over 580.000 letters of genetischem code , and it &apos;s the largest molecule with definierter structure that ever created .
it has a molekulargewicht from 300 million .
if we were dealing with a schriftgröße of 10 and without any law , it would be umfassen seiten sides , just to auszudrucken these genetic code .
now , how do we start a chromosome ? how do we activate ?
clearly , it &apos;s very much , it &apos;s very simple . it &apos;s a lot of complicated with bacteria .
it &apos;s also easy to be more important when you &apos;re doing it in eukaryonten like we &apos;re doing it : you &apos;re just going to get the nucleus and there &apos;s another one , and that &apos;s exactly what you &apos;ve all heard about earlier .
in archaebakterien , the chromosome is the chromosome in the cell , but we &apos;ve shown that you can have a complete transplant of one of a chromosome of a cell to the other and that can activate that .
we &apos;re reinigten the chromosome of a mikrobenspezies , and we &apos;ve been able to choose some of the chromosom from people and mice . we were making it a few of the proteine and mice , and it was very amazing when we put it into a cell -- and they &apos;re going to be very ausgereiften in a cell -- and they &apos;re going to be very much
the new chromosome was going into the cell .
in fact , we thought that this is the end , but we &apos;ve tried to get the process to get a little bit .
this is the most hauptmechanismus of evolution here .
we find all sorts of species here in the second chromosome or a third of irgendwoher , every time , every time , thousands of time , in just a single species of a species .
so people who think evolution as a gene that has been going to be a moment , and it &apos;s missed a lot of biology .
there &apos;s the restriktionsenzyme called the restriktionsenzyme , actually dna .
the chromosome that was in the cell , has none of the cell ; the chromosomes we have .
it was taken in the cell phone and the other chromosome of the chromosom and so we had just a cell with a new chromosome .
it &apos;s the verfärbte of the genes that we had .
and after a very short time , all of the characteristics of species lost and konvertierte completely completely in a new species based on the new software that we gave in the cell .
all the proteins changed the membranes -- when we cut the genetic code , it was exactly what we have .
it may sound like genomische alchimie , but we can change the software-dna , things quite dramatic .
now , i &apos;ve got a argues that this is not the genesis -- that &apos;s based on 3.5 billion years ago .
and i have a argumentiert that we might be able to create a new form of the cambrian explosion in which massive new forms of design in this digital design .
why should we do that ?
i think it &apos;s pretty obvious in terms of what we need .
we &apos;re about nine billion people in the next 40 years .
in order to reframe it , i was born in the year .
today , three people on this planet has been estimated for everybody in the year , in the year , within 40 years , it will be four .
we have problems with food , with social and water water , medicine , fuel for civic billion people .
it &apos;s going to offer a challenge for nine .
we need over five billion tons of coal , 30-plus billion oil . that &apos;s a hundred million of the day .
if we think about biological processes or any process to replace it , it becomes a huge challenge .
then , of course , there &apos;s all the co2 that in the atmosphere .
we &apos;ve now have our discoveries from the world , a database of 20 million genes , and i want to believe that these are the most designkomponenten of the future .
the elektronikindustrie had a dozen components and see the diversity of that .
we &apos;re going to put in the first line at the limits of the biological reality and the most of our imagination .
we have technologies today because of this rapid synthesemethoden , to do that , what we call kombinatorische genetics .
we now have the opportunity to build a big robot to build the millions of chromosomes .
if you imagine these 20 million different different gene or these processes to optimize or medicine or medicine new vaccines , we can change a little more small more than just a small group of the last 20 years .
and it &apos;s just nurmale selection . we can go after lebensfähigkeit selektieren , production of chemicals or treibstoffproduktion impfstoffproduktion and so on .
this is a photograph of the wirklicher design-software in which we &apos;re actually going to sit and actually sit and new species of the computer is going to be the computer .
you know , we don &apos;t know how it &apos;s going to look like it &apos;s going to look like this . we know exactly how their genetic code will look like .
we &apos;re now focused on the fourth generation .
they &apos;ve seen corn corn , just recently what was a bad experiment .
we have the treibstoffe of the zweiten- and third generation that are going to be very much higher than oktan or different kinds of butanol .
but as we think , the only way that the cost of biology is to be more likely to be in food or the limitation of your availability , and so we &apos;re working on the cells that are going to go to the cells that are going to go to the road that are going to go to the road .
and we think we &apos;re going to be the first generation of the fourth generation , and that &apos;s in about 18 months .
sunlight and co2 are a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method -- a method --
but in our discovery , we have all sorts of different ways .
this is a organism that we &apos;ve described .
he lives in deep deep sea , about ein-einhalb miles , to almost kochenden wassertemperaturen .
it &apos;s co2 in methane to get from hydrogen from hydrogen .
we investigate whether we can use gespeichertes co2 that could be made by produktionsplätzen , konvertieren co2 in the fuel to provide this process .
within a brief time we believe we could be able to solve one of the fundamental questions of life .
you know , we really have -- technological goals like the ersatz of the entire petrochemischen industry . right . if you don &apos;t do that at ted , where otherwise ? one of the energy will be .
but equally , we &apos;re working on the same way that the same tendency for development .
you &apos;ve seen this year with flu , we &apos;re always a year back and a dollar , if it &apos;s going to go to the right vaccine .
i think that that &apos;s the way that you can create rekombinante vaccines in the vorhinein .
this is what the future might look like to be with changes today , today , today , today , today , is to be beschleunigt with synthetic bacteria , archaen , and perhaps more eukaryonten .
we are light from the people to improve people . our goal is that we have a chance to survive for a long time to survive . thank you .
last ted conference , i gave a introduction to the lhc .
and i promised to come back to you to explain how the machine works .
so it &apos;s so far . and for all those who were not there , the lhc is the greatest scientific experiment that ever attempted -- 27 miles in diameter .
his job is to create the conditions that less than a milliardstel second to the beginning of the universe -- and that &apos;s to 600 million times in a second .
it &apos;s just breathtaking .
this is the machine below the machine .
we take pictures of this mini-urknalle in detectors .
i &apos;m working on this work . he calls a atlas -- 44 meters in the width , 22 meters in diameter .
here &apos;s a spectacular picture of the atlas in the construction and you see the scale .
on september september 11th , the machine was going to be the first time to the first time .
and this image was taken from atlas .
it &apos;s an enormous immensen in the state of the state .
it &apos;s a picture of the first strahlenpartikels that the entire route to zurücklegte the lhc , then , using the lhc , then , with a part of the lhc , to make a rain from particles to make a rain of particles .
in other words , when we saw this image at the 10th of september , we knew that the machine works , which is a big triumph .
i don &apos;t know whether this is the biggest jubel display , or this one person to the google side , and the startseite .
it means that we have a cultural impact on the scientific .
in a week later , there was a problem with the machine that was doing with this drähten here -- this golden wires here , this golden blob here .
these wires leiten leiten ampere when the machine is going on on hochleistung .
now , the engineers among you are looking at and say , &quot; no , no , they &apos;re not . &quot; that &apos;s little wires . &quot;
you can afford to do that because if you &apos;re going to be very far , they &apos;re going to be sogenannten .
so at minus minus 271 degrees , as the space between the stars , these wires can withstand the tension .
in one of the connections , between neuntausend magnets in the lhc , there was a manufakturdefekt .
so the wires &apos;s wires and 13-tausend ampere of the sudden .
this was the result .
now , this is still even more powerful , if you think that magnets of the 20 tons , and it &apos;s about about 30 inches .
so we &apos;re going to take about 50 percent of the magnet that we &apos;re going to do about is 50 of the magnet .
and had to remove what we did .
we &apos;re going to reinvent them , reparierten .
they &apos;re all back to their path .
at the end of march , the lhc will be called funktionsfähig .
we &apos;re going to turn it to the top , and expect to be able to collect data in june or july , and our journey to find out what the building blocks are .
now , of course , in a kind of property , the debate that are the value of science and ingenieurskunst on borders that are , and it &apos;s easy to be able to get it so quickly .
i think the fact that it &apos;s so hard that we move beyond our limitations , we can move beyond our limitations , is the value of things like that .
i &apos;m going to leave my abschließenden scientist with a english scientist , humphrey davy , who said , &quot; nothing is so dangerous to the evolution of the human mind , the lehrling of the human mind , &quot; and that &apos;s not the way that our scientific endgültig are not endgültig in nature that our triumphe are vollzählig , and that there are no new worlds . &quot;
thank you .
i &apos;m a writer .
books is my profession , but it &apos;s more than that .
it &apos;s also my big , loving love and fascination .
and i don &apos;t expect that to change .
but it &apos;s a little bit of a living in my life and my career , which has been to be completely completely to my work .
this amazing event was that i wrote a book called „ eat , pray eat , pray eat , love , love , decided to be used to the world , and a big bücher of the world , and a big mega-ereignis , international bestseller-ding .
the result is that i &apos;m going to get to where i come from , i &apos;m going to be treated as i &apos;m going to be the doom .
seriously -- the untergang geweiht !
for example , you get concerned about me and say , &quot; you don &apos;t say that they &apos;re never going to be going to be happy to them ?
don &apos;t have afraid that they &apos;re going to be weiterschreiben their entire lives and never a book , which is the invention in the world ?
okay , that &apos;s really empowering .
it would be worse , if i wasn &apos;t remember , i was going to remember that i was a teenager about 20 years ago , when i was a teenager , the first time i told the first time that i was being challenged with the same kind of angstbesetzter response .
people said , &quot; „ did you not have afraid to have no success ?
did you not fear that you &apos;re going to be a absage of a absage ?
did you not have afraid that you &apos;re going to be nachgehst in this case for the craft of life and never get a schrotthaufen person , and you &apos;re going to get a schrotthaufen person with the bitter ashes of the water ?
so about that , you know .
the answer -- the short answer to all of these questions is : „ .
yes , i &apos;ve been afraid of all these things .
and i had always been .
and i &apos;ve been more more things about that no longer would be going to go .
like algae -- and other things things .
but when it comes to writing , i think about it , and ask me about this and ask me ? why ?
is that the sensible ?
is it logically that by somebody should expect to be expected that he was afraid to do that work ?
and what is the creative contribution to the creative people that they &apos;re asking us about the interconnectedness of the state -- in a way that it doesn &apos;t do other jobs ?
my father , for example , was chemists , and i can &apos;t remember any of the situation in his 40 years as a chemist , he asked , if he was afraid to be chemists .
with your chemiker-blockade , john -- how about it ?
it just did not just before you know ?
but to be fair -- the group of chemists have not given the ruf of alkoholsüchtigen people .
we seem to be the kind of call , but not only the writers , but the creative of all the genres , seem to have this reputation , really felt .
all you need to do is , the bitter todeszahlen of really großartigen the 20. of the 20th century alone , and the young ones , and they &apos;re often used by the young hand .
and even the ones that didn &apos;t actually have suizid begingen , seemed to be really heard of her .
norman mailer said to his death in his last interview : „ every books that has a little bit further .
a very good statement that you can do about your own .
but we don &apos;t even know if we &apos;re going to hear somebody like somebody , because we &apos;ve been familiar with this kind of thing , because we &apos;ve been thinking about this kind of time , and collective , of course , creativity and suffering and art , of course , art -- always leads to the end .
the question i want to ask today is this is this idea to be completely fine ?
so , you &apos;re comfortable with it ? because with just a centimeter of distance , i feel like that notion of all at all .
i find it out of this .
and i find her dangerous . and i don &apos;t want to see how she was going to put next to the next century .
i find it better if we live our great creative .
and i know that it was for me -- in my situation -- very dangerous , i would like to make this dark path of the performance -- especially in the case where i &apos;m in my career in my career .
this is called -- you see , i &apos;m pretty young . i &apos;m just about 40 years old .
i &apos;ve got another 40 40 in me .
and it &apos;s probably probably that everything i &apos;m going to write from now from the world as the work is going to be the work of my last book , right ?
i &apos;m going to say it &apos;s geradeheraus , because we &apos;re all of the friends -- it &apos;s probably probably probably that my greatest success behind me .
oh , jesus , what a thought !
these are the kind of thought that someone can get someone to drink 9 a.m. in the morning , gin , and i don &apos;t want .
i would like to do this work that i love .
so the question is : how ?
after some time , i think , i think , i think , to write , to try to write a kind of schützendem psychological .
and somehow i have to find a way to make a safe distance between me and my very natural beklemmung about how the reaction will be in the process .
and while i was looking at this last year , i &apos;ve been looking for this in the past year , i &apos;ve been looking at other societies , and i &apos;ve tried to see if you could have better ideas , and we can help how to help how to deal with the emotional risks that are connected to creativity .
this quest led me to old greece and old .
please follow me because the circle will end again .
but in the old greece , and rome have not believed that creativity is that creativity , ok ?
they thought that creativity was a kind of göttlicher diener-geist , which was from a distant , unknown source of the people -- from unerklärlichen , unknown .
the greek called these divine diener-geister of creativity dämonen “ .
from socrates , he knows that he believed he had a dämon , who would have weisheiten out of the weiter .
the roman had the same idea , called this kind of körperlosem creative mind a „ genius .
this is great . the roman thought didn &apos;t really think that a genius was a particularly depressing individual .
they thought that a genius of magisches göttliches , that it was living in the walls of a künstlerateliers &apos;s life -- about like dobby , the hauself and the artist is doing the rauskäme and the artist in work , and the result of the work would work .
this is brilliant -- there &apos;s the distance i talked about -- the psychological , the psychological , the psychological , you know , the following of the action of the work .
and everybody knew that it worked so that it was right ?
the artist of the altertums was to be protected , like , for example , to , for example , right ?
if your work was not going to be a complete brilliant , you couldn &apos;t look for you . everybody knew that you had this körperlose genius , who had helped you .
if your work floppte -- not entirely your fault , or ?
every single person , your genius was something .
so the people in the west really thought about creativity .
and then the renaissance and everything changed . and this big idea was : let &apos;s take this big individual in the center of the universe -- over all the gods and the tools , and there &apos;s no room for the mystische creatures that are orders by the divine annehmen .
it &apos;s the beginning of the rational humanism and people started to think that creativity was completely completely from the individual individual .
for the first time in history , you hear people who are a genius , a genius call -- instead of that he has a genius .
i have to tell you , i think that was a big mistake .
you know ? i think it &apos;s a very precise person , and it &apos;s like the gourd , it &apos;s like the becken and the essenz , kreativen , unendlichen , unendlichen , unendlichen , unendlichen , unendlichen , is a small bit of responsibility to make them a fragilen , human psyche .
it &apos;s like someone to swallow the sun .
the site and distorted all the landscapes and it creates all of these unerreichbaren expectations .
i think that this is the most popular erfolgs-druck that our artists has been going to be last year .
and if that &apos;s true , -- and i think it &apos;s true -- is the question : is the question : is the question : &quot; is the question : &quot; is the question : &quot; is the question : &quot; is the question : &quot; is the question : &quot; is the question : &quot; is the question : &quot; is the question : &quot; is the question
can we change it ?
maybe a patient understanding of the relationship between people and mystery of creative return .
maybe not .
maybe we can &apos;t put the gedankengut out of 500 years of the 500 , not just a 18-minütigen talk .
and there &apos;s certainly people in this audience , the really berechtigte scientific scientific scientific scientific scientific research , basically -- feen , the people who were nachfolgen and feenzauber on their projects .
i &apos;m not going to take all of them all on this journey .
but the question i want to do is , why not ? why not ?
why not think about this ?
because it makes a lot of sense of how everything else i heard about when it was about to explain the absolute machende of the creative process .
a process that &apos;s looking at -- as everybody knows that it has ever attempted to do something -- so in other words , everybody &apos;s here -- not always sensible .
in fact , he can sometimes feel sometimes paranormal .
i had a begegnung of the encounter when i was the extraordinary american poet , which was the most amazing poet , which was the most amazing poet , but told me that she was working on the fields of the fields , and she said she would feel like a poem , and hear a poem about the landscape of them .
she said it would be like a donnernder train from air , &quot; a train from air .
the one of the land would be on it .
she felt if it came , because it would bring the earth under your feet .
she knew that she could do one moment in a moment , and that was -- in their words -- „ race , like the devil “ .
she ran the house for the house for the house for her poem was followed by this poem , and it was only a really einzig to get a sheet of paper and a pencil , so it had to get it through it , and could put it through it .
in other , she wasn &apos;t fast enough , and ran away and ran away and ran the house up and she was going to pass it up and she was going to pass it on , and she said it would be kept on land and -- as she said -- „ after a different poet .
and then there was this moments -- the part i &apos;m going to forget -- she said that there was a little bit of that there was almost to be almost .
so , she runs the house and looking for the paper and the poem is driving by them , and she reaches a pen by her hindurchgeht and then -- she was like -- she was like that , as it was like that would be the same hand with her other hand and getting it .
she &apos;s got the poem at his tail and put it back into your body and took it on the sheet of paper .
so this opportunities came to this poem and the gedicht and intakt on paper -- but backwards -- from the last word for the first .
when i thought that i thought this is really creepy -- that &apos;s exactly how my creative process is going to be .
that &apos;s not like my creative process -- i &apos;m not the gowanus !
i &apos;m a maultier . to work , i have to go to the same day and i sweat , and i &apos;m sweating and really lousy unangenehm .
but even i &apos;ve got to this thing in my maultierart , sometimes this thing .
and i guess many of you have done this .
even i had work or ideas that made from a source of a source of mine that i really can &apos;t identify .
what is this for a thing ?
and how do we have to lose without our minds , but we &apos;re in the contrary to be in its health health ?
for me , the best living example of how you can do this , the musicians can be musiker tom . i was asking him to a magazine for a magazine .
we talked about this topic . and you know what ? the most of his life was the embodiment of the gepeinigten modern artist , who was trying to be able to do this unkontrollierbaren creative impulses that were being in the ihm of him , to stop and with them .
but then he was walking and ruhiger . he told me that he was going to be a day in a street in los angeles , and then it changed everything for him .
he went to high speed when he suddenly hear a little fragment of light , a little bit of melodie , which is often superior to him , and he &apos;s going to be a quälend heavy heavy , and it &apos;s prachtvoll . it &apos;s prachtvoll , but he can &apos;t delete it .
he didn &apos;t have any paper paper , he doesn &apos;t have any pen , he doesn &apos;t have any kassettenrekorder .
so he starts to see this old beklemmung in him , like „ , i &apos;m going to lose this thing , and will be going to be verfolgt by this song .
i &apos;m not good enough , i don &apos;t have it .
but instead of trying to get panic , he just stopped .
it &apos;s all the entire machine and did something completely new .
he just looked into the sky and said , &quot; „ sorry , you can &apos;t see that i &apos;m going to drive my car ? &quot;
„ i see that as i could just say a song ?
if you really want to be really , come to a günstigeren moment when i can take care of you .
if not , you know , you know , you know , other people &apos;s other .
go and quäle leonard cohen .
his whole team has changed .
not the work itself . the was still not as dark as dark and ever .
but the process , the schwere beklemmung that surrounds him , was when he was in the outside , when he was looking at the genius , where he was like a anger and he was going to sozusagen it , and he realized that it was not a verinnerlichtes thing .
it could give a eigentümliche , wundersame , bizarre collaboration , a kind of conversation between tom and the fremdartigen , the äußerlichen thing that didn &apos;t was very much .
when i heard this story , it also has a little bit of the way i worked and it was even saved .
and this idea of rettete me when i was in the schreibprozess of „ eat , pray eat , love , and i fell in one of these things that we &apos;re all working on , and it &apos;s not going to be able to think that it &apos;s a disaster , which is the worst book that was written by the age of the written .
not only bad , but the worst of all time .
i started thinking , i should just go to the project .
but then i remembered it , like tom in the free heaven , and i tried to do it .
so i took my view from the manuscript and spoke to my commentary in a empty corner of space .
i was talking to you , „ , you and i &apos;m going to see , you know , when this book isn &apos;t brilliant , it &apos;s not completely my fault , right ?
because you see , i see everything i have , i &apos;m going to have , i don &apos;t have more than that .
so if you want to have better , you have to go to here and your share of the west .
okay . but if you don &apos;t do that -- you know what , then you know , for the devil .
i &apos;m going to write about because that &apos;s my job .
and i want to end up with the protokoll , that i was now to my part of the jobs .
because ... at the end of the end is it , it &apos;s like follows . and centuries ago , in deserts , people have tänzen with sacred dances and music that were stopped -- to the middle class .
these strong were always great because the dancer were professional and they were fantastic .
but again , very rare , something happened , something happened . one of the performers was actually überweltlich .
and i know you know what i mean , because i know you &apos;ve all seen all of your life in your life .
it was the time of the time and the dancer through a kind of pforte , he did nothing else when he ever had before -- 1,000 nights before -- and all the added added together .
and suddenly , he couldn &apos;t tell you more about it .
it was collected from inside the inside and down and down and everything erhellte through a göttliches fire .
so as something happened in this time , people knew what was . they called it at his name .
they put the hands together and started singing : allah , allah allah , allah , allah , god , god , god .
that &apos;s god , you know ?
interesting historical , when the mohren südspanien brachten brought them to this practice . the pronunciation changed in the course of the centuries of „ allah , allah “ , allah “ , olé “ , olé “ , which you still hear is still stierkämpfen .
if a bunch of a bunch of a darsteller in spain , something magical done has done something called magisches allah , olé , allah , großartig , bravo , bravo , you know , a flüchtiger look at god .
and this is great because we need this .
but the tricky part is going to follow the next morning when the dancer and recognizes that there &apos;s 11 o &apos;clock at a tuesday -- and he &apos;s not a fünkchen of god in himself .
it &apos;s merely a alternder sterblicher with schmerzenden knien , and maybe he never will never get to this höhen höhen .
and maybe never god will ever get your god names , when he turns out , but what &apos;s going to start with the rest of his life ?
this is hard .
this is one of the most pessimistic activities of a creative life .
but maybe it doesn &apos;t have to be so full of pein if you didn &apos;t believe that the most recent aspects of you might be .
if you just think you &apos;re a loan -- from a unvorstellbaren source of your life that will be done on somebody else , if you &apos;re done with it .
if we start thinking about it , it changes everything .
so i started thinking , and so i think i think i think , while i was working with certainty , while i was working on the book , it &apos;s going to be the sheer part -- as dangerous , i was very , very expected of my abgefahrenen .
what i have to say to myself , if i &apos;m going to be crazy , it &apos;s not afraid .
it &apos;s not illegal .
just do your job .
and it &apos;s still to be the contribution to your mind , whatever it is .
if your job is dancing .
if the dumb american genius , you &apos;re going to be the page , decides , for a brief moment , a moment of miracles by miracles by miracles , then „ “ .
and if not , dance are not dance .
and „ olé ! “ for you .
i believe i believe and i feel that we should teach it .
„ olé ! “ for you , just despite you , just for that you have the mere human love and the eigensinn of it .
thank you .
thank you .
olé !
last year , i showed these two slides to illustrate that the arctic eiskappe , that the arctic eiskappe , the size of the bottom of the bottom of the bottom of the bottom of the bottom of the bottom of the bottom of the bottom of the bottom of the bottom of the bottom of the bottom of the bottom half the bottom of the bottom of the bottom
but this didn &apos;t really feel strong enough that particular problems , because it &apos;s not the thickness of ice .
in a sense , the arctic is the arktische of the beating heart of our global klimasystems .
it grows in winter and schrumpft .
the next slide i &apos;m showing you is a zeitrafferaufnahme , which is happening in the last 25 years .
the dauereis is with red .
as you see , it grows on the dunkelblau satellite . this is the annual ice in winter , and it &apos;s in the summer .
the so-called dauereis , five years old or older , is almost like blood vessels that &apos;s like the body that &apos;s inside the body .
in 25 years , it &apos;s going to be gone here .
this is a problem that the erwärmung is the frozen of the ocean for the arctic ocean , in which there are big amounts of sexual carbon , which is when it &apos;s auftaut by microbes .
compared with the entire amount of klimaverändernden cells in the atmosphere , this whole amount of double when we transcend these particular point .
now today &apos;s sprudelt in some flat seen in alaska from itself from the water .
professor katey walter in alaska &apos;s university in alaska is another flachen , and to another flat winter .
wow !
you &apos;re going to be good . the question is , how will it be ergehen .
and one reason is that this enormous wärmespeicher of greenland is going to be built .
this is a jährlicher tauwasserfluss .
but the volume are substantially bigger than ever before .
this is the kangerlussuaq river in southwest .
if you want to know how the sea sea levels are fliesst into the ocean .
these rivers are taking place .
at the other end of the planet , antarctica , the biggest eismasse on the planet .
last month , researchers decided that the whole continent has now been an negative eisbilanz .
and the westantarktis that came across a few unterwasserinseln , is particularly strong .
this is 20 feet of meereshöhe , like greenland .
in the himalayas , the drittgrössten eismasse , you see the top new lakes that were just a few years ago .
40 percent of all people in the world are getting half of their trinkwassers from their trinkwassers .
in the andes , this glacier is the trinkwasserquelle for this city .
the wassermengen have gone .
but if you &apos;re versiegen , the most drinking drinking drinking water is going to be wegfallen .
in california , a 40 percent of the schneedecke was seen in the sierra leone .
this is the speicherbecken .
and the predictions like you read , are serious .
these austrocknung in the world are going to be a dramatic increase in fire .
and the disasters all over the world have really been in a really ausserordentlichen and more dagewesenen .
so many of the last 30 years , as many years , as in the vorhergegangenen 75. , in the vorhergegangenen 75. , in the last 30 years , the last 30 years of 75. 75. in the vorhergegangenen 75. .
this is a completely unhaltbares entwicklungsmuster .
if you look at this in historical context , you can see what it is .
in the last five years , we &apos;ve produced 70 million tons of co2 in co2 , 25 million tons of tons of every day .
look at the area of the eastern pacific , from the american continent and beiderseits of the indian subkontinents , where there &apos;s a drastischen reduction in the ocean .
the biggest factor for global warming , besides deforestation , 20 percent , is the burning of fossil fuels .
oil is a problem , and coal is the serious biggest problem .
the united states are one of the two largest grössten , together with china .
and the proposal was , many more kohlefabriken .
but we start seeing a change .
here are the ones that have been used in the last several years , with some green alternatives that were proposed .
trotzdessen , there &apos;s a political debates in our country .
and the kohleindustrien and ölindustrien have spent a viertelmilliarde dollar letztes to promote clean coal , which is a contradiction in itself .
this image of me remembered me .
around christmas , i was walking around home in tennessee , a billion tons of kohleschlamm .
they &apos;ve seen it in the news .
this is in our entire country of america &apos;s native abfallfluss .
this happened to christmas .
one of the most exciting of the kohleindustrie to christmas .
frosty of the kohlenmann is a vergnügter , happy .
it &apos;s in the skin and abundance in america , and it helps to grow our economy .
frosty , the kohlenmann is sauberer every day .
it &apos;s affordable and liebenswert and workers stay in the lohn and bread .
this is the source of most coal in west virginia .
the most powerful bergarbeiter is the ladder of massey coal .
let me say you quite a very clear . al gore , nancy pelosi , harry potter , they don &apos;t know what they &apos;re talking about .
so the alliance of the most popular two campaigns are living .
this is one of your own .
in the coalergy , we see climate change as a serious danger for our business .
so we have to give us the obersten zeil , a beträchtliche auszugeben to bring a werbeaktion to the road to the truth of coal .
in fact , coal is not dirty .
we think it &apos;s clean -- and smell also still well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as well as
so , don &apos;t worry about the climate .
do you take that .
saueber coal , you &apos;ve heard a lot of it .
so let &apos;s make a tour of these modern , sauberen kohlefabrik .
fantastic ! this machine is quite noisy .
but it &apos;s the sound of the clean kohletechnologie .
and yet , the burning of coal is the hauptgründe of the species for the global warming , the remarkable saubere kohletechnologie that you see here .
look at it carefully , this is the creation of the water , clean kohletechnologie .
finally , the positive alternative of our economic challenge and our challenge of the national security .
america is in a crisis , the economy , the national security , climate crisis .
the red thread that all connects these connects , is our dependence of kohlenstoff-basierenden kraftstoffen from dreckige and ausländisches oil .
but now there &apos;s a bold , new solution to liberate us from this misslichen .
versorge america &apos;s been new electricity in electricity , within the next 10 years , within the next 10 years .
a plan to bring back to work to work , to make us safer and help us stop global warming .
finally , a solution that is big enough to solve our problems .
versorge america . find more out .
this is the last .
it &apos;s about a neuversorgung of america .
one of the fastest ways , our dependence of old , dirty psychology , to reduce our world .
the future is here . wind , sun and a new system .
new investments to create jobs for jobs .
versorge america new . it &apos;s time to accept .
there &apos;s a old african saying , &quot; if you want to be quick , go alone .
if you want to get a far , go together . &quot;
we have to come far and quickly .
thank you .
i want to ask you to ask them , at the time of your childhood , when they played with bauklötzen .
while they realized how to make the hands of the ausstreckt and zugreift , the klötze electroencephalogram and moves , and they actually learn to try and solve problems and change .
the spatial idea is deeply connected to how we understand a lot of our surroundings .
as a computer scientist -- inspired by the kind of interaction with real objects , and i started to wonder , and i started to wonder , if we were able to use computers , the instead of a flachen fingerspitze , if we could take on both of a flat arbeitsfläche -- what if we could take on both of those händen and data and so they could do
this question was so much that we decided to bring ourselves to the answer and siftables .
in short , a siftable is a interactive computer in the size of a kekses .
you can move with your hand , you can see each other , you can capture your movements and you have a screen and a funkempfänger .
more importantly , are physically , why you can just move them like bauklötze , and can move the effects of the hands .
and the siftables are a example of a new generation of hilfsmitteln to the manipulation of the world .
and if these tools are developing and developing consciousness for their movements , each other , each other , and the subtleties of our umgangs with them , and then we can start with the exploration and entertaining interaktionsarten .
i start with some simple examples .
this siftable is for the videowiedergabe konfiguriert , and if i &apos;m going to get it into a direction , the video is going to be , and if i put it into the other direction , it &apos;s backwards .
and these interactive portraits takes each other .
so if i put them side-by-side , they &apos;re interested in the interest .
if you &apos;re surrounded by voneinader , you can notice that and can be a little nervous .
and they feel like that , and they &apos;re also evolving .
a interesting consequence of interactions we started realizing that we could apply the ordinary gestures of data , as about as the colors of the color , as you do with it .
in this case , we have three siftables als as farbtöpfe konfiguriert , and i can use them to put color in the middle , where they &apos;re blended to fall down .
if we overdo it , we can make a little bit more zurückschütten .
there &apos;s also some nice opportunities in education like languages , math or logikspiele , where we give people the opportunity to be able to see the opportunity to see the opportunity to see the possibility of fast and the results .
here i am -- this is a fibonacci series i &apos;m going to be with a simple gleichungsprogramm .
this is a game with words that &apos;s kind of a mixture of scrabble and boggle .
basically , you get every round of siftable buchstaben and while you try to make words , you &apos;re going to be a dictionary .
then after 30 seconds , again , mixed again and you have a new buchstabenkombination and new possibilities .
thank you .
these are some kids that came to a trip to the media lab , and i could get them to get it , and i &apos;ve taken it to a video .
they really loved it .
a interesting thing about this kind of applications that you have to give people to people .
all you say is to say &quot; words &quot; and you know exactly what to do .
here &apos;s another people that are testing .
this is our jüngster beta-tester down there .
it turned out that he wanted to be just the siftables .
so for him , they were just bauklötze .
this is a interactive trickfilmanwendung .
we wanted to develop a lernmittel for sprachlerner .
this is what &apos;s called .
he can bring new characters into the scene , by using the siftable from the table , which shows that figure .
here he &apos;s the sun .
the sun goes on the sun .
now he put a tractor into the scene .
the orange tree .
good job ! yes !
by shaking the siftables and she can put them in the side of that , and he can interact with the characters , let &apos;s interact with the characters .
... your own story .
hi !
it &apos;s a story with a very offenem end and he can decide how they co-evolved .
fliegende cat .
the last example i &apos;ve spent time today , is a musik-sequencer for live-auftritte , which we &apos;ve developed and in the siftables as a sound , like führungsstimme , bass and schlagzeug .
each four different variations is four variations ; you can pick up what you want to use .
and you can einspeisen these sounds into the sequence , which you can use again in any patterns of patterns .
and you &apos;re going to put them together , by just a ton-siftable on a sequenz-siftable .
there are effects that you can change live live and filter and filters .
you &apos;re connecting it with a specific tone and then it &apos;s tilting to put it .
and then more and more effective , and volume and volume that you &apos;re on the whole sequence .
so let &apos;s look at .
we start in the field where we einspeisen the führungsstimme in two sequenz-siftable einspeisen and this one in a row , they expand and add a little bit more .
now i add a bass .
now i &apos;m going to do something else .
and now i &apos;m going to get the filters with the drums , so i can navigate the effect of live .
i can accelerate the whole sequence by making the speed of the speed .
and now i &apos;m going to get the filters with the bass , for something more expression .
i can put the sequence during them .
so i have to plan them to do it in the workplace , but you can improvise it , or something you &apos;re going to give or worse .
and finally , i can browse the whole sequence by looking at the lautstärke-siftable .
thank you .
so as you can see , my excitement is to develop new mensch-computer-schnittstellen , which is better to the fit , how our brains and bodies work .
and today i had time to show you a part of these new design-welt and some of the ways that we work in our lab .
the idea i want to give you to the path is that we are at the cusp of werzeugen from werzeugen to the interaction with digital media , which is the information that we &apos;re going to bring information into our world , which is our demands of our demands .
thank you very much .
i &apos;m looking at all the conversation with you .
yes , good afternoon .
i &apos;m excited that i &apos;m there .
yes , so what should be biohacking ?
i just have to take a little bit of a little bit , and it &apos;s a bit of biohacking with modern molecular molecular biology .
i &apos;m studying molecular and i &apos;ve been looking at a few years of the biohacking , and i &apos;ve been looking at this because i just wanted to know and do anything , and also , even more importantly , what i &apos;ve learned in the study of theoretical theoretical .
so that was my primary motivation .
so it was a curiosity and i wanted to get closer to the matter of matter .
i think that the molecular molecular in general , so , very , very , very , very , biotechnology , everything you count , synthetic biology and so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on , so on ,
extremely important is very important , now it &apos;s extremely important , and much more importantly , much more important .
there &apos;s so much things like this whole aid of plants , plants .
there &apos;s craig venter now in the u.s.a , trying to make biofuel , so gasoline gas .
there &apos;s also the things that are already in the everyday , which most people are unaware of , for example , for example , for example , the ones that allow us to wash with 40 degrees , are also gentechnisch optimierte .
and the list can use to use it .
and so from the interest , this technology , i &apos;m going to continue to continue on .
so what &apos;s now why ?
most of most of the most familiar people know about the softwarebereich .
computers , and then it &apos;s always going to always be in the media , yes , the hacker break somewhere and claws and so on .
this is kind of really sad , because that &apos;s not what they really did , and what actually did it actually .
and this is the software-hacker , in the 1970s , achtzigerjahren with computerbasteln and it &apos;s also the internet .
and it &apos;s about to a spielerische , creative , kind of , kind of works , a problem .
and the problem , this is not just a technical problem , it can also be a very gesellschaftliches problem , which is just a zugangsproblem , so a beliebige , a question , a question , and how can you do that , or how you can do that better .
and it was just called the software großgeworden , but there &apos;s also a whole bastlerszene , there &apos;s a whole bastlerszene that are doing all kinds of things that are doing all kinds of things .
and now , there &apos;s also more in biology , and i want to take this metaphor from the synthetic biology , and i want to take this out of the most informationswissenschaft biology , because the d.n.a code is actually a informationswissenschaft code , which is not quite a bit of the computer , because it &apos;s because it &apos;s because there &apos;s real matter , and not just
but it &apos;s also a code , and you can also use it and you can also hack it , and you can find it , and i found that i find incredibly fascinating , and i just wanted to do much deeper with it .
this has actually been really embraced the zweitausend of the really shape , these networks .
there &apos;s hackteria dot dot , which is originally from the switzerland , which is with europe and with cooperation in india , but now , most of the members of the people are members of the world &apos;s greatest or older people .
this is a more artistic , so there &apos;s a more artistic , so there &apos;s many artists and philosophers and collaboration with scientists and to ask yourself with these technologies and to process and to process , and that &apos;s what &apos;s museumsausstellungen , and yes , it &apos;s all possible .
but it &apos;s always about trying to find such a lockeren access to have a potential to have a significant job .
and then there &apos;s do-it-yourself-bio dot org .
this is from the u.s.a network , which is actually more like a kind of forum where you care about it and online .
these are a bit technical , and also a little bit of businessmäßiger , and then they &apos;re also like , yes , angewandte questions .
and then from these networks that have done the entire popular system , it &apos;s so much that i &apos;ve been going to try to try and take a very much time i want to try to do it briefly .
here &apos;s the image in the left , you see biocurious , which is a hackerspace , so basically a kind of school , a private school , a private sector , gemeinnützige , a private sector .
kids , old , all kinds of people go to it , to just run around , they have a lab and look at what &apos;s going to do when these laborprotokolle .
here &apos;s a group of the left down there , house-of-natural-fibers , is that there &apos;s been quite a long time .
more than these other ones .
and the other part of the artistic materials in the biological materials , and yes , elektronikbasteleien , and combine that on pretty abgefahre way .
one group of sweden that i &apos;ve ever met before , who &apos;s been trying to see the public , which is to learn the public , which is what you learn to learn and do so on the straßenfesten little actions , and people try to explain what is d.n.a .
and i &apos;ve got up in the other image in the other museum in copenhagen in the medical museum in the medical museum in the medizinischen .
and this is , yeah , that &apos;s the most beautiful people , but the only thing that &apos;s what &apos;s actually all of the media , is this fascination in technology .
and what you can do and do it with the society and ask , so , like , okay , okay , what do you know what you want to do , you &apos;ve got to do it in your mind , you &apos;ve got to do it so much that you want to do with it ?
so , o.k , to hack biology , you need to be able to do some stuff .
you need to be biological materials , and you need tools , and that &apos;s a lab .
so what you normally do is to understand that , in a lab , that &apos;s so complicated machines , extremely expensive , extremely , very , very , ausgebildete academics , and so on the doktortitel and so on .
and our approach was to say , o.k , that actually , you don &apos;t have to do that .
this is not necessary because each every each each has ever has a lot of kaffeeautomat has actually higher technologies than most of the most laborgeräte , that &apos;s really so .
and then , with this premise , the premise of this premise , for example , brian degger in england , a minimallabor zusammenzustellen , has a dampfdruckkochtopf genommen , a heizplatte , and yes , so that , so suppenbrühe , and it &apos;s going to be used bacteria .
so each one , which is a soup that &apos;s been a soup that he has to be long to long , even before .
i tried to go back to my lab , and then i got to gekauft and i bought a little bit of d.n.a analysis , and i &apos;ve been doing a little bit of d.n.a analysis , trying to do a vaterschaftstest , so that / fingerprinting , so mal .
that should not be a joke , but .
here &apos;s the picture here , you see the lab , in anführungsstrichen , so this is so zugestellte garage with the uni garage , which has been a group of laborgerümpel , a group of paris , which has done and pretty successful , and also quite successful stuff , i want to be a project that &apos;s even a project .
and this is biocurious , who &apos;s also known to erwähnte , this is a kind of volkshochschule for molecular biology for molecular biology .
and yeah , you see , it &apos;s relatively relatively heterogen , so that there are all of people who are doing the alone that the alone , to large , so large , big organizations that are doing that are already going to do more of the more formal .
but still always the approach that it &apos;s just to be easy and available to be available .
the first project we &apos;ve done as a international group of ourselves , and we &apos;ve been aware of our own group , and we are now , as a real scene , and we are online , and we know that the people who are still chatting and so .
and then , from the do-it-yourself-bio org website , and we &apos;ve got to be really sure , we have to make sure , and then two veranstaltungen are , one in london , zweitausend 10 , and just a minute in the u.s.a , in san francisco .
and then , then , then , then , yes , yes , who are we , what we want to do , what do we want ?
and what are our values and what are our our ancestry , our workplaces ?
and then we have a code-of-conduct sample .
so this was quite intuitive , so everybody has just so his wishes , and that &apos;s what it &apos;s going to move .
there , i think , i think , a very good code .
and we have not clear , but this is the point , but that &apos;s what i think has pretty good about , and people are right there , and people are right from that .
and we even tried to do this in the academic world again , but there &apos;s no way that it &apos;s not like that .
so i think we &apos;re from the biohackerszene in the ways that even further a step further than the academic world .
yes , what projects do we &apos;re doing right now ?
a project i did with the hackteria-netzwerk in switzerland , was that we wanted to recruit a so-called optical trap or optical pinzette .
this is if you &apos;re focused a laserstrahl , you can put little particles in the air , or in the liquid , and then in this focus , the one that &apos;s there , so that &apos;s what such a traktorbeamstrahl like that kind of traktorbeamstrahl .
this is really what &apos;s really done in the academic setting , and we thought that we might have to be able to be able to do , and then you have a webcam , the aufgeschraubt , the lens , the lens , the lens , then you have a microscope , it &apos;s about a microscope .
you see this down .
and then we have a d.v.d brenner auseinandergeschraubt and the brenner to the laser , and then trying to focus on this camera .
and that didn &apos;t work , but we &apos;ve learned much .
so another project that came from the french group of paris , which has actually been done , that &apos;s pretty cool .
and this is so that he &apos;s so like this , so a hirnwellenmessgerät , so e.e.g , so that &apos;s so something that he has to be beschäftigt with neurobiologie , his nickname is sam .
he then had this helmet of this helmet , and in the cooperation with the cooperation that was added .
and then there were able to go to the visitors in the room , on these chair , this helmet aufsetzen .
then they were measured their brainwaves , and depending on what they thought or how they thought about , is then different lights in the room .
was quite a pretty schickes project .
another thing from the united states , which has also to do with this vaterschaftstestgeschichte , is the p.c.r , which is the polymerase-kettenreaktion word , complicated word .
so it &apos;s about copying , to copy genes , to provoke , d.n.a , d.n.a , to be able to make them visible .
so if i do this to the scene of the crime , then you go to the scene , and then they &apos;re making any of these haarproben , and then they &apos;re going to take these kinds of methode , and then you can say , o.k , this hair belongs to this person .
and the machines that are pretty expensive , which are kauft , the cheapest billigsten , the cheapest gehen .
and this is not in the hobbybereich , but it &apos;s really cool technology that can also be too much .
so this is just a application of many , which you can do with it .
and the ones have two of these two builders rangesetzt and said , &quot; o.k , we do the easy source , so we have a lot of open hardware , so that &apos;s where they &apos;re zusammengebastelt , and they have this device , and they have the cheapest anbieter of the marktreife , and now the cheapest of these are the most efficient ones of these devices .
i think , kind of sechshundert dollars or something .
but anyway , it &apos;s still not cheap , but it &apos;s definitely in a frame where it &apos;s clearly a clear .
so it &apos;s my mind , a very gelungener .
a project i started to start building a gene-gun .
gene-gun is , yeah , like this kind of luftdruckpistole , the shoots of it , about this , two inches or so .
you &apos;re lädt d.n.a and the goldpartikel and then the goldpartikel , and then i have to pick up the zwiebeln and then the leuchten to the outside .
so the device that you see there , that doesn &apos;t work .
but this is so my prototype , which has been pretty much like this , so on this , so much as a branch , this thing , the thing that was going on , and pressure was going to be a pressure , and that was the pressure to be high , and that was the thing that was broke .
and then i took a sahnespender and that &apos;s what it &apos;s been doing .
a sahnespender , if you make the full power with water , the enough pressure , the enough pressure , so i think , as 40 to sechtzig bar around the world .
and so you can accelerate particles , and then they go into the zwiebel .
and the commercial device costs about fünfzehntausend euros or something like that , sahnespender to the fifty .
so it &apos;s not the same efficiency , but it &apos;s basically the principle .
and this is the moment that &apos;s the kernanliegen of the scene , and also the availability of technology and also to increase the information and the information and the verständlichkeit that people can get there .
because , as i said , it &apos;s a very important technology , and most people have relatively little bit of it and also not a chance to make it really well .
because if you read about it , from sekundärliteratur , that &apos;s not the same thing , as you &apos;ve done it or saw it .
and i think technology is going to be more important in our modern societies .
and if you can &apos;t make a informierter citizen in society and say , then you need access to knowledge and to the technology .
and you have to do it and understand it and understand it and understand it .
and the firmiert dann then underneath the schlagworten open knowledge and citizen science .
so that you &apos;re going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to grow with these scientific technologies .
and this is the kernanliegen of the biohackern .
these are the people who are at least in the website , d.i.y.bio-dot-org website .
this is already a relatively remarkable number of people .
and interesting is also that they are in southeast asia .
that &apos;s what i think there are fewer people , than actually , in fact .
so i know some of some of some of that .
and these are just the biohacker , the individual people .
and partly also with these hackerspaces , so that &apos;s there .
and that &apos;s very , very , very .
as i said , it &apos;s just begun .
and hackerspaces , so the computerhackerspaces , because the c-base in berlin was the first .
and this is a gigantic network of very good , yes , infrastrukturzentren , who are being transformed everywhere .
and we hope we &apos;re going to be able to do that , then we can also adjust and then , then , then , then , then , they &apos;re also very well involved in order to be involved .
and i would invite every once to be able to come and try and try and try and do yourself .
it &apos;s not so simple , but it &apos;s not impossible if you have enough curiosity and enough energy , you &apos;re going to be far too far .
thank you for listening .
that was it .
yes , hi .
how do we work ?
this is a question that makes me very moved very , but also in the realm of the forschungsbereich in the field of usability and all of the things in the field of civic experience .
there &apos;s about how you encounter people in interactive media , so they can use these interactive media and so they create a very useful experience .
i think the interactive media is going to be archaische in us , cognitive models , so , new models , which has been very , very long , very long time , and we &apos;re just going to get the right now through interactive media .
and this is very amazing because you actually believe that these hochtechnologie , you &apos;re missing that this hochtechnologie , you know that the one is actually going to be able to do it in the future , but actually , it &apos;s so that the future is exactly in our archaischen roots .
what are actually archaische models ?
i &apos;ve got four stichworte aufgeschrieben , and i want to explain to you .
to archaischen cognitive models , and that &apos;s the models that we have in the pre-industrial times of us .
and to this archaischen models , we &apos;ve heard that we have a prinzipiell of natural ratio .
that sounds like this .
i &apos;m going to take you back to the same time and get them to prove to you that they have a natural ratio .
the second thing is that we &apos;ve been able to talk about because of this archaischen models , very , very , very , very bildlich , although we &apos;re using a kodifizierte language .
and the third part , which explains itself .
we all know that the interactive media is about the definition of the linearity , which is the verneinung of linearity , and what tells us that we feel the linearity that we should be normal .
the fourth point is that the history of us is a place of the informationsweitergabe .
so , as this is now with the virtuality , the most basic thing in the world is .
i want to show you this .
how many doors has the house that they live ?
and we &apos;re going to try to answer them , but it will happen and happen to happen .
they go through the spirit of this house , in demn , they live in , and look at how many doors are .
and that &apos;s what you do .
they virtualisieren the reality and the way that without computers .
fantastic , right ?
and there &apos;s a lot of us to be the medien-campus for the medien-campus for the virtual reality in our v.r.-labor , we can actually do that .
and this is the vermögen of the virtual reality that have been required to the people in the pre-industrial times also required to bitter , because they had nothing .
they had no books .
or not no fotolitografie .
they had no media .
the only thing that had been her head .
and in this mind , memory was going to be the memory .
in this head , knowledge was abgerufen and using this virtual images , the imagination , was also being told .
and so it &apos;s so strong in us , we can &apos;t deal with the virtuality as well as well .
the interesting thing about this is when i put a little trip to do a little trip .
yes , that &apos;s what .
the interesting thing about this is that at this time , the human being , the human being , the time was the same time .
if you &apos;re going to think about this .
what are the media today ?
then they &apos;ll notice that it has a change .
but i &apos;ll just talk to you again .
this is the most tool of the informationsvermittlung , since most stories .
schamanen , preacher , so-called wissenswächter , were designed to be made to maintain knowledge to stories .
and today , we &apos;re still very , very much , very much .
the author of the book of the book , jonathan gottschall , zufolge wir , we still have a year eintausendneunhundert with stories of stories .
this means for a child that it &apos;s to reach the most of the time of the time of the life of the lebens of the world &apos;s life .
now we think our love depends on stories that we have a child on the lap of our parents .
no , no , far away .
this goes back to further back in the cultures of the pre-industrial times .
but in the realm of the interactive media , it &apos;s been particularly impressive , that we have to have a se in our biological memory in our biological memory , which is to be able to think .
i &apos;ve been a example of the lion of the nordamerikanischen tribe .
and the lives lived in the küstenregion of british columbia .
and as you can see , this is a very inselreiches area and you had to navigate , from island to island , to get food .
and the ones that have done with this kind of lead-landkarten .
you may have seen it , if you &apos;re interested in a bit of what &apos;s going on .
the ones have similar principles .
they have no lead-landkarten , but they &apos;ve used the so-called gennanten songlines or traumpfade .
and what the interesting thing about this is that the navigation and the topography of regions could be mapped over the world .
where language had been rang .
that means you &apos;re navigierte over sounds and rhythm .
and this one of these rhythmus and this rhythm , the topography of a region and also enabled that you could defragmentieren these songs and different and move to the left , and then back to the links .
why don &apos;t we get more to get to a b to b ?
anyway , not to navigate .
what &apos;s actually happening ?
and this is what happens to be the gennante .
we &apos;ve got us in the same way that we &apos;ve been moving .
and what happens is the maschinenzeitalter and happened , and it &apos;s the book and it &apos;s the fotolitografie .
and that &apos;s what happens is that we have the responsibility for our memories and the own production of our individual memories have been on external media .
on the book and on the image .
so we have leider god &apos;s gottes .
and there &apos;s suddenly been making a plötzlich for us , and has nothing to do with the reality .
bruce brown , a famous designforscher on the brighton-university , which is that the book and so on , it &apos;s the fernsehen and so on , that &apos;s what we call the internet today , and so on , that &apos;s what we call the internet today , that these are massenmedien of our memories , and our capacity to have our capacity to virtualisieren our capacity .
let &apos;s make a little zwischenbilanz .
from the vogt-zeitalter to the maschinenzeitalter .
what has influences our thinking and apply our erinnerungsvermögen ?
then the most verblassenden bush in the pre-industrial cultures .
and the ones are over the course of the centuries and more überschrieben has been through the einflüsse of the maschinenzeitalters .
this means that instead of us to remember , we &apos;ve standardized , far as far as a few of the masses of memories that we can hang our personal memories .
we don &apos;t produce more even more .
we have an abstract language .
we &apos;re not going to imagine the thing that we don &apos;t do more in pictures of the things that things don &apos;t happen in pictures , but we &apos;re going to give you our language .
we &apos;ve used to get to the things that things happen .
and we &apos;ve accepted the linearity as a law and there &apos;s only exceptions that the non-linearität .
what &apos;s left is that &apos;s storytelling .
still , we are the storytelling as a informationsvermittlung , very , very verhaftet .
the question is , what &apos;s coming right now ?
we had the vogt -zeitalter , we had the maschinenzeitalter , and we now have this so-called so-called system .
this sounds very spacig and sounds very , very science-fiction .
but these concepts of cyber-zeitalters , that bring us back to this opportunity back to us again .
there &apos;s about virtuality , it &apos;s about non-linearität , it &apos;s about storytelling .
i want to explain a little bit about this .
there are technical concepts like the augmented reality that means the extended reality .
so if you look at google glasses , this is a concept that makes us the virtual world with the world &apos;s virtual world , which means that means is to be undermining our affinität to the virtualisierung , which is a normal tool , natürliches , natürliches .
another example is the so-called virtual reality .
so , as you like , of course , the most exciting of my favorites , because we &apos;re going to move around in not existenten , virtual worlds , a very welten of the model of the holodecks .
and another example is the most efficient , smart systems .
these are spaces that are smart on a human being .
all of that needs the ability to accept our own ability to accept a real habitat .
i &apos;ve been in the end , and i hope that video works , a very , very beautiful project , which is the bachelorarbeit of michael burk , ann-kathrin krenz , joris klause .
and the two letzteren are here .
maybe you can take a little bit about that , so they can go into the two to the two sides of the project .
and this project i &apos;ve brought as an example of how again , again , a lot of models .
the whole thing is a game , i have to say .
what the storytelling of course is extremely entgegenkommt , and it &apos;s a game .
and if i say , you &apos;ve probably probably seen a very likely to find that any people will do some people vor irgendwelchen irgendwelchen or that they &apos;re playing with the mit konsole in your hand .
anyway , it &apos;s in the case .
this is a game for outside .
and this is what i think is that i could make the outside world , so i &apos;ll be able to go back to the real world .
and this game connects the virtual world , so the data data , the data that we produce with the real world .
i apologize i have to be so much .
you can do much better than much better , because there &apos;s more more than more than more .
and this is about that i &apos;m going to have a city to look at the city of being positive or negative .
and so i get a very different sight , a whole other idea , which is a very different impression , which i see is going to see negative and positive zones of a city and make a different kind of different map of a very real city .
and we can now look at this now .
so , what you see here , sorry , is another explanation of what you see .
of course , this virtual world in the walls are actually clear .
and with a kind of flashlight , we can make these virtual worlds .
so , i &apos;d like to think of my talk about my talk and the ability that we &apos;ve been out of the vogt -zeitalter , and that &apos;s what we &apos;ve been going to be in the maschinenzeitalter of the system that we &apos;re going to be used to be aktiviert and in the maschinenzeitalter , and that we &apos;re not going to be able to be able to
thank you .
yes , i &apos;m very excited to be able to be able to be .
i &apos;ve been asked to ask whether this is a sprechender bag , and i &apos;m going to talk about it .
that &apos;s not going to do it .
i &apos;m going to translate to the same time , which is inside .
but i just do it right now .
yes , kids are from nature or should be curious , designers .
i &apos;m a gestalter house , so i &apos;m also looking at the issue of curiosity and how change the curiosity also change our minds , and why we might lose curiosity and so on , and so on .
this is a whole bunch of things that you &apos;re looking for next to the actual cortex as a creator .
when professors are curious about , they &apos;re going to be a frequent forschungssemester reingeschoben .
and this is also what i had last year .
a forschungssemester to the subject to the subject of the subject .
now you &apos;ll ask yourself , why are the whole gestalter of the gestalter , archaischen urformen of communication , interaction and so on .
and so , i think that &apos;s one of these little devices because things are always going to be more and more complex , and there &apos;s a lot of things that are going to be , and there &apos;s what &apos;s actually about us , what is actually benutzungsfreundlich or intuitively .
and before the background , i &apos;ve been able to design the next interface , so the next generation in the human computer in the human computer , in the human computer , the computer is to be able to change how our tools or the computer is changing from the computer to the digital assistenten .
so i &apos;ve got to do this , when is what , of course , or is intuitively .
maybe even a look at a look .
why does that happen ?
so if we look at the evolution of our society , there &apos;s just a little bit about , we move forward from the third of the fourth gesellschaftsgeneration or gesellschaftsform .
so from the modern in the computergesellschaft .
each society is actually a primärmedium .
the beginning of the language of language .
that means you &apos;ve been found by having a shared language , you could communicate with each other , and you &apos;ve been able to communicate with each other , or in other areas , cities and dörfer and has become so nen .
the primärmedium was the language , something very natural , something very much .
you had to learn to learn , not a toddler can talk about nature , but we learn to learn it and more .
that became the end of the ancient society and the first form of abstraction .
this was a riesen-aufschrei , because of course , the living language began to manifestieren language in the form of scripture that means what &apos;s called fluid and alive , and i &apos;m going to end up and meißele it in rock and so i &apos;m going to do it .
the other , depending on how i meißel and when i meißel , it &apos;s a very different way of being a kind of life .
but sukzessive , then , then , then , then , they had to get this script to be erhielt .
then the next generation , in which we live in the right now , even more life .
this is just the through pressure and print schrift with gutenberg and others .
in the time , it was a affront , the adel , where the adel and others said , you &apos;re actually insanely insanely , and they &apos;re going to start to read , and then they want to be the most mitreden , and that &apos;s what &apos;s totally total .
and now we &apos;re going to come into the next generation and the exciting thing is , so a generationswechsel is just a few hundred years , and we &apos;re really in this moment in this phänomenalen phase that we &apos;re going to do this .
the confused of us is totally , because we see the new media , socil media , facebook social media , facebook and so on .
and with the total transparency , what &apos;s new thinking about what &apos;s happening on the old thinking , don &apos;t know that in the lasagne pferdefleisch , and no beef , you know , other phenomena , i want to just vertuschen and want to do this .
and these two worlds are going to be just going to be in the world , new and old thinking .
and this is exciting to this , if you look at the image , these new society , these computergesellschaft , entlehnt , very many , and archaischer denkmuster out of the stammesgesellschaft .
but not more on local level , but on global level .
we understood that the weather is global .
that the subject is a global .
not , if i &apos;m going to be here in the local point , and the neighbor &apos;s less ecologically , it doesn &apos;t work .
this is , from local village , it &apos;s actually a global village with the same principles , of course , of course , as well , as well as total transparency .
so as you knew who knew who has what was with whom and when it &apos;s happening , this is what happens now that happens today about these erweiterung of our self in global level .
it &apos;s like that we know , we know , we know , and always faster and better and better .
so as it was happening to the previous village .
so i just want to see what &apos;s going to happen to me , which is what it means , what &apos;s actually about us , what &apos;s also about us , what &apos;s also about what we might also have is , but also instinctively , so what does the difference ?
because often , people come from people , they can &apos;t do it , so they can &apos;t deal with it .
so you have to deal with what is called , and not just it simply changing it , it &apos;s different , but it &apos;s supposed to be better .
and of course , of course , is something that is , and how can i take as a deeper and the way that you can make the things that they &apos;re a benutzungsfreundlich , so far , because then they &apos;re having fun and just use it .
you &apos;re also looking at , as the studiums of the ages , the subject of perception and the wahrnehmungspsychologie .
and this is , of course , what you start and get and see and say , okay , okay , now i &apos;ll just look at it in the inner self .
and what &apos;s like , because actually , it &apos;s actually from ?
so how do we work when we &apos;re going to go ?
and what &apos;s actually , of course , and how work works , how do our channels of perceptions and how does the cognitive desire ?
because steve jobs has said , you know , you to to understand it .
so you have to look at the detail , if i want to make some benutzungsfreundlich or intuitive handhabbar , what does that mean in the core .
and here you see , you have a lot of our seven senses , which is , we have five times , we &apos;ve been in the right now , because certainly in the near future , the next future , the first sense , and as a pattern of our own self .
and looking at how process we are information , how do we take information ?
just to say , what is information ?
information is any difference that makes a difference .
many use of the word , don &apos;t know what it is to be a little bit of thing .
but i need to understand , in the creature , when will information information is going to information , when you get information from data and information , so i know how i know , i know , as i can do , as i can do , and of course , as well as i can do .
and of course , how does design impact influence on the perception .
we see this when i see things , i can make them verwirrend , like , &quot; i can make them verwirrend , where i don &apos;t know what &apos;s salt and pepper , or i can make it intuitive by doing things .
so much of them , in a very large , but i see it right now , where &apos;s salt and pepper .
and if i say to someone , give me salt , or pepper , and then he &apos;ll start to the right , right now , where is what &apos;s inside .
and just the left and the left and hopefully hopefully i hope that no sugar in there is salt .
but also , our perceptions , how do you get it too .
for example , this perception in context .
the right circle looks like this , even bigger than the little bit of the little , although it &apos;s not the case , but it &apos;s a very big big , and yet , it &apos;s changing our perceptions , depending on the context of the context .
anyone know what that is ?
come on .
pattern recognition should work still .
there &apos;s going to be a more like my glasses .
so it &apos;s the n circle .
a second circle begins to stop , to stop it .
and if i got a halboval dazusetze , we don &apos;t see a more unit and a circle of time , which is circle , circle , circle , and we see a unit , we don &apos;t see more three parts , a circle , a circle , a circle , a circle .
you know , you &apos;re called gestaltgesetz or eben , which is also in terms of itself in perception .
and for the the gestalter , the most of the first semester , the great gestaltgesetze .
gestaltgesetz , gestaltgesetz , gestaltgesetz the continuity and so on .
and then in the third , they &apos;re forgotten .
but this is a essential important component if you want to make things too much as much as you want to do .
the next phenomenon , which is very interesting , which is the most interesting .
and i &apos;ve been very hard to see , but very , very serious , you know , you &apos;re doing it , and you &apos;re looking at it .
so we &apos;ve got the eyes and now you think , we see from front of the back .
this is wrong .
you see from behind the front .
and you &apos;re a presumption in front of the front , that you see something that they &apos;re acting , beispielweise circle .
this is what we &apos;re going to see is we just see our vision before we then see it back into our seheapparat reinbringen , to say , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay .
i got out there &apos;s cognitive rückkoppelung , you &apos;ve got what you want .
and then that &apos;s also coming back .
then , again , because the back traut traut doesn &apos;t and says , i &apos;m going to tell you a really long time , and sure you &apos;ll take you off , you know , what you see , it &apos;s what you want .
and then back again , back again , and then it &apos;s actually just seen .
so a whole way , quite spannender , how certain things are ablaufen and in what &apos;s happening for millisekunden-bereichen things happen .
i don &apos;t know who knows this picture .
and that &apos;s what happens exactly what i &apos;ve described .
now , everybody &apos;s trying to see this pattern .
i don &apos;t know who recognizes what .
see somebody &apos;s anything ?
a dalmatiner , right .
if i saw that , that there &apos;s a dalmatiner in there , then you know that .
it &apos;ll never forget more because i &apos;m going to show you where the dalmatiner is .
now , you see the dalmatiner .
and further , now , you see it forever .
this means that i &apos;ve actually told you , you &apos;ve never seen no patterns of dadrin , but i &apos;ve got them konditioniert within a short time , and over again , in this verworrenen image .
and this is this projection of the world , rückkopplung .
now i know it &apos;s now and i &apos;m going to go to front , i see the dalmatiner .
i see the dalmatiner .
so , quite exciting , very exciting processes that then in this , yes , gray is not , but here &apos;s actually a rosanen crowd of the rosanen .
anyone know what three seconds are ?
for long , yes .
this is our present .
so , it &apos;s also interesting to know as designers .
if i know something three seconds , i &apos;m going to sort of like to go from the present into the present , i can also see very well wartezeiten positive , where i always put it by doing three seconds .
it &apos;s just to be present as a present .
and then , it took the past and so i can use very elegant wartezeiten for example , for example , when i know this phenomenon .
what &apos;s going to be fünfundzwanzig in the millisekunden ?
yes , you know .
and a whole thing is a very exciting .
this is the time you fall in love with .
this means that , in fact , the graph , if you know that , you see it , you see , who &apos;s like long , because i don &apos;t know any gewähr for what it can happen .
and sechzehn milliseconds , also a very exciting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the most time of most perceptions we have .
this means that first impression in a very challenging fast speed , how we perceive things .
and as we see things , we see what we &apos;re seeing and how we were able to share ourselves against our environment , so we can think of that .
of course , the creator isn &apos;t just the subject of the perceptions and neural verarbeitungen or kognitionsergonomie , but mostly , of course , the subject of the mensch-objekt-beziehung .
so how about a human being with certain things .
there &apos;s a little produktsprachlich functions , so that &apos;s so much as formale or formalästhetische .
there &apos;s anzeichen-funktionen where i know exactly where i really have to do .
but there &apos;s also symbolic functions , why is somebody for such a little täschchen , where anyway is no horrende , so much horrende in money , although it &apos;s not so much ?
there &apos;s more like the symbolischen , on the bedeutungsebene , we also have to be as an environmental plan of course .
back to my own topic of the interface , and the topic , of course , is usability .
usability usability means how can i get a certain goal or how can you get a users in a particular way , and efficient and zufriedenstellend and zufriedenstellend .
so , it &apos;s more the norm .
how can i make some more comfortable ?
can i use this directly or i need to do the n manual or i need to do the ne entsprechende .
and fewer usable or benutzungsfreundlich .
that i just only do that different , and beautiful , doesn &apos;t mean it &apos;s better .
you have to understand .
and then , if you look at the software that we &apos;ve seen , you see , you &apos;re also going to see why neunundneunzig percent of our current lives is not intuitiv , or not on a anhieb nutzbar , although it &apos;s much more intuitive to many areas , although it &apos;s much more intuitive .
it &apos;s not a elementarer benutzbarkeit for apple &apos;s apple , nen elementarer , if i want to make the technologische devices .
why ?
because in the rule , we &apos;re seeing through this new kind of nutzbarkeit , so the natural user , for example , for five times faster , for 100 times , we are in the average .
you have to imagine that if you do something about the classical softrware , five hours , and with this new kind of natural software only one hour .
that doesn &apos;t mean that they &apos;re going to go back to four hours , but you can buy your employers or even more , you know , it &apos;s going to be a little bit of how it &apos;s going to be done with the four hours .
i want to say that it &apos;s a corresponding leistungssteigerung of us , also some of things .
and if we &apos;re going to take back in the realm of the software , here , this is the first command line that were very abstract , where you had to cope with those systems .
then the next , the next , the next neuronalen model , or mental model like the software eergonomen , which is , you have to have a idea of something that metaphor is the metaphor of a desktop to make the metaphor of the desktop .
so not more zeroes and einsen or kryptische codes , but a metaphor .
that made this whole lot of a lot more benutzungsfreundlicher , but it &apos;s also much better .
the next generation of the graphischen is working much more with behavior .
so since i &apos;m going to show you as a high school teacher that behavior .
that &apos;s also a paradigm shift .
that i always think that this is always unwichtiger for success , just a applikation .
and if i put a step back in these natural , the user interfaces , where i was in the world , by the language , the language , the geste and not just the things , and then the things that have to do , then i &apos;m still quicker and even more .
but it leads me to the point when the point is when you &apos;re going to do it ?
and then if you &apos;re going to be a way , and then i have to come back to my little friend here and see what does that mean , what does that mean , when is really a really strong thing ?
and this is always true to us , always something that i have to think about it , if i have to think about it .
so , apparently , he doesn &apos;t want to think , but it &apos;s just making it .
the less i sort of about it about it , the more intuitive it is .
and what does that mean ?
that means when we look at that we can put together from a different different different field , for example , for example , i can do this .
this means that i can actually put a intuitive , human handlungsmodell on a software and so that the software is doing it .
now , of course , the question is , what is actually the most potent handlungsschema of us , and now i &apos;ve been going to do it .
this is called the so-called osit-modell .
this is the same one of us and osit is a akronym and it &apos;s a akronym for retirement , informieren , informieren .
and that &apos;s what everybody does all of you all the time , but it does it look , and yes , it &apos;s kind of intuitive , or also , instinctively .
the paradigm is already ausprägt in the womb and it &apos;s interkulturell , so it works in the world and old , and it &apos;s going to be used by all the time , without knowing that most of the most exciting is .
osit osit will be about 50 to aktivität , so in the sleep , so in the sleep , you realize that it &apos;s less often than a day .
i can now see this mental handlungsmodell , selektieren , informieren , transagieren , transagieren übertragen on a interaktionssystem .
and by this kind of transmission , similar as the metaphor of the desktops , but not a metaphor of a physical object , but a metaphor of a handlungsmusters , a handlungsprinzips .
and this is on a higher grail of the benutzungsfreundlichkeit than the transmission of a classical metaphor , which is the desktops .
and if i &apos;m going to take this out of the right now , for example , i think , as a selection , selektieren as a selection , i can &apos;t see it in the event , and i can &apos;t see it in detail , and yes , i can &apos;t send it anywhere or somebody else or transgendered or shopping or so on , and so on
then i can transmit the whole thing .
i try to make a look at a beispiels .
there &apos;s definitely kuchen .
so , übersicht : now i &apos;m going to do with the object , again , reinzoomen .
i &apos;m going to get the entire course of the whole thing , now can filter and say , &quot; show me all of you with chocolate .
and in a way , a interface , which is a lot of natural and very much natural .
because i can get the things like the web , and you &apos;re going to be able to be substantially natural than when the hierarchisch is webseiten or other organized organized or other people doing this kind of stuff .
imagination more is more than knowledge , and with this phrase , i want to close to you , and a more and more , designer need to think differently , and in this sense , i &apos;m going to give you to your attention and request for your attention and request .
i want to give you a very specific aspect of curiosity .
the first thing you &apos;re going to be when you &apos;re a child when baby is , when you have a baby , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you have to allow them to play more or less , more , more , more ,
and the curiosity don &apos;t learn .
so , this is all of these ones that are here and curious , in fact , people who have a property that you can &apos;t learn .
it &apos;s about this , basically , this whole umweltdiskussion , weltuntergang , vierzig , 40 years , in quality of quality .
and there &apos;s a central point in there .
and the depends on phosphorus .
give pee a chance .
every day , they give them a few grams of the two phosphorus and every day , they have to pick two grams .
otherwise you can &apos;t have teeth .
you can &apos;t store energy .
you can &apos;t have bone bones .
we could just walk as a amorphe mollusken through the weltmeere .
if we don &apos;t have phosphorus and therefore .
amazingly , it &apos;s so that we &apos;re going to talk to something that &apos;s what &apos;s supposed to be called ne , but not so that .
because all of the talk about energy , but nobody talks about the phosphor-problem .
the phosphor-problem is a lot of critical .
we &apos;re dependent on two countries .
we &apos;ve only been spending for two years and already now in the world &apos;s population growth in the world , and it &apos;s been used to the environment that &apos;s used in all the atomanlagen .
in the last 20 years , most of the zwanzig tonnen has been been distributed in the fields of our fields .
and that &apos;s all we do .
it makes leukemia in children .
and we think we would protect the environment when we &apos;re a little less less .
so , for example , schütz , the environment , the world &apos;s environment .
schütz the environment , make less waste .
schütz the environment , verbrauche less energy .
but that &apos;s not a protection .
this is so like i would say , schütz your child , it just just three times .
this is just a little less .
so if we think about the wiege to the bahre , our entire earth will be used to our earth or a hot .
so that &apos;s why to think about the wiege .
and the most important thing about it is to look at the ground as it .
in the ground , over the world &apos;s population is stored .
in the moment , we &apos;re going to build corn and lose between 11 and thirty hundred thirty tons of tons of tons , or on the square meter .
that means we lose in the soil , we &apos;re going to lose more than the ground for the ground .
we can actually tell us , of course , to the müllproblem .
and everything is yes or content .
in offenbach , for example , are the hausmüll percent of the müllmenge &apos;s zwanzig .
and because we &apos;re going to be older , it will be the windeln .
that &apos;s what they &apos;re doing is all in the vorwindelphase .
yes ? yes ?
a baby needs a baby , like a baby , you need about two sechstausend diapers .
we could take that to 10 percent , but what does that matter ?
this is going to be in china in a second .
that &apos;s completely trivial .
so the question is , how do we deal with these diapers ?
here &apos;s a proof of the way that men are not pigs .
i want to tell you .
because the phosphorus is going to be abgegeben over the solid components .
in the people of the urine .
yes .
so , we can &apos;t be pigs .
because that &apos;s what it &apos;s like , it &apos;s a second , right ?
traditionally we think in the umweltdiskussion , we &apos;re too many .
and if you &apos;re the people who are trying to be the people who say that , if you &apos;re better , you &apos;re not going to go , you &apos;re going to be raffgierig and feindselig .
and so someone tells you like al gore , one of our great hero , there &apos;s nothing more wichtigeres than human population .
in israel , you say , if you &apos;re a menschenleben rettest , you &apos;ll buy the earth .
here you say , the more you umbringst , the better .
yes .
the first question is , are we really too many ?
if you look at the ants , the weight of the ants on earth , then the ants weigh the ants are about four times more than we .
i could also get the termites too , but in the united states , no one may be known as far as far as they are .
that means ants weigh a lot more than we .
and because they physically work much tougher than we and because they only live three to six months , they &apos;re going to be in their weight , in the energy , in the energy , you &apos;re going to be creative in the energy of people .
that means we &apos;re not too many , we &apos;re too stupid , yes ?
and where you see how far we really wanted to get and could , and how sad we are at all the earth , you can see that for example , for example , for example , the zwanzig , you have to be a program to be klimaneutral , yes ?
you can only be klimaneutral if you don &apos;t exist ?
the only opportunity .
have you ever seen a klimaneutralen tree ? &quot;
yes ? yes ?
one one ?
that means our entire intelligence means that we want to be a dümmer as a trees , yes ?
yes ? yes ?
no tree is kohlenstoffneutral .
luckily , not to be , yes ?
there &apos;s no überbevölkerungsproblem of trees .
there are still sechshundert milliarden trees .
you &apos;ve ever heard about something of the überbevölkerungsproblemen of trees ?
that means all our intelligence means that we want to be the bäume .
and where you see , even in something like demeter , the strikteste bio- , landwirtschaft landwirtschaft , it doesn &apos;t allow us to go back to our own stoffwechselprodukte .
every year we lose three million tons of phosphorus , which really would go back in .
and so we &apos;re too many .
just about it .
so that &apos;s what we feel guilty about the earth that we say , no bio-landbau , no bioland , no nature-et-progrès , no nature-et-progrès , and how they all are going to be able to go back to our own exkremente .
isn &apos;t it sad ?
so we &apos;re too many .
it &apos;s safe to be secure , to be less harmful .
but where are we useful ?
we &apos;re trying to minimize our ecological footprint , but it &apos;s about having a big footprint , which is useful .
we want to be good for society , we want to be good for the economy , but if it &apos;s about the environment , it &apos;s the highest thing , right ?
nullemissionen , yes ?
you can only have nullemissionen if you &apos;re not there .
even if you were going to shoot , they would have cut emissions .
so you can &apos;t solve it .
we can do it different .
we can &apos;t return our nutrients .
we &apos;re doing agriculture in brazil where we &apos;re nutrients .
so , in fact , we can do this way in the way that is in agriculture .
we do this in china where we take the capacity of the quantity .
in china , a nachttopf is still a nachttopf today , sort of honigtöpfchen , right ?
and in our western world , we were always becoming stupid , our nutrients .
this means that the entire western zivilisationsgeschichte draws it , from the city that the city has always been taken , but the farmers never has a set .
and then , the cities had to grow more , because farmers went into cities and the cities would keep their nutrients .
all of the western rich rich are always expanding , until they don &apos;t have more and they &apos;re going to do it .
yes ? yes ?
in china , it was different .
you have bruchlos civilization about 200 years because you always had to be able to zurückzubringen nutrients .
even if you invited to eat food , you expect to be eating them , they &apos;re going to stay until they &apos;re going to go .
because it &apos;s unfreundlich , to go and nutrients nutrients .
you have them to get them to eat food , not to nährstoffdiebstahl .
that means you can see in the internet , as you can see nutrients .
and this is actually nice , if you do this , it &apos;s a strong power , which is a strong country in a hectare of people , in a year , it can be a $ 100 dollars and the facility and the facility and pig and pig and enten and fish and fish .
and the great thing about this is that the verbrechensrate in the favelas are over over the favelas of 100 percent .
so we don &apos;t need to control people to be very bad .
we can support them , good .
that &apos;s of course , but the implications are wearing themselves .
the byproduct is clean water .
and they &apos;re designed by the design that &apos;s just a farmer that &apos;s just a farmer .
that means that the verbrechensraten go back .
and none of these facilities , we &apos;ve been built over solar panels in the last 20 years , not that facilities ever had .
you could easily just get a pint of altöl reinwerfen and then it would be the facility over years .
not rather than not .
that means we don &apos;t need to control the people , more than poor people .
we can support them , good .
that means we have to zurückkriegen phosphorus .
and by the way , if you want to do what you want to do , you &apos;re going to write in germany , in the best part of all the world &apos;s best digital is in frankfurt .
unfortunately , not in offenbach , but maybe you can actually help you a little bit of it .
because the frankfurter facility could potentially be the best to phosphorus .
and it has to return .
we see that the phosphorus is really critical .
and we see that it &apos;s true .
we &apos;ve been going to be used for three years now .
the dutch government has explained , they &apos;re going to be the first country in the world , which is the phosphorus .
but we need this .
you understand , there are two countries that control almost nearly almost 50 percent of the world &apos;s population .
there &apos;s opec a bunch of waisenknaben .
these are sechsundzwanzig countries that control 40 percent of the ölvorräte .
and oil we are going to replace a different way .
but the phosphorus is not able to replace .
so , this is not about making a little less bad , but it &apos;s about making something really right .
and it &apos;s especially to ask what &apos;s right .
that means it &apos;s about efficiency , not efficiency .
in holland , you understand that , of course , because in holland , the country is built on flowers .
yes ? yes ?
imagine if your wife is unhappy when you have them searchable , and they come to the fünfzig .
completely inefficient .
but quite effective , yes ?
or take a lippenstift .
one woman in germany , you eat about six of three pounds during their lives .
and it &apos;s .
this is not exactly the fact that scientifically isn &apos;t accurate because we don &apos;t know how much weggeküsst is going to be .
but a lippenstift , even in this lighting , i can tell you , is completely inefficient , but it &apos;s all effective , yes ?
a whole thing about life is beautiful , isn &apos;t efficient .
it &apos;s not a special thing , but legal .
too asking what is the right ?
not the klärschlamm , a little bit better and it abzulagern it with it and in it in the verbrennungsanlage of the verbrennungsanlage , but first time , how do you get your own ?
imagine the mozart of efficient .
yes ? yes ?
if i &apos;m going to take you to dinner and say , yes , there &apos;s a pill with offenbach-geschmack and a glass of water .
wonderful , &quot; right ? &quot;
this is efficient .
all of the life is beautiful , isn &apos;t efficient .
if you &apos;re in somebody in somebody in somebody ?
yes ? yes ?
that means everything in life counts is not about to avoid it .
the entire umweltdiskussion .
we say people , oh yeah , you don &apos;t have a umweltbewusstsein in the south .
no , the throw is right right , right ?
every place where you &apos;re wegwirft , you know , you get again .
but the wrong things .
if you &apos;re the wrong things , you have a müllproblem .
in how we think about north .
there &apos;s every footprint .
if you run , yeah , everybody &apos;s footprint .
because the bottom is going to die and the mosses , and the water goes away the ground .
if you &apos;re in italy , everybody &apos;s footprint , that the water is in the meadow .
so it &apos;s about creating a big footprint , which is a marsh .
not schuldmanagement .
we say in germany .
yes ? yes ?
but if i ask them , how do you go to your wife ?
what are you going to say ?
sustainably .
then i say , herzliches beileid , yes ?
that &apos;s right now .
so not save , verzichten .
every waste is nährstoff .
and it &apos;s a lust when you see in italy , like people in high bow , &quot; the people in the high bow of the bow is going to be in the car .
because you know , this is a lustvoller process .
it &apos;s the ne form of revierverhalten , yes ?
you can show , i was there .
but with the right design , you can .
we &apos;ve developed a eiscremeverpackung developed , which is a raumtemperatur liquid .
you can get them searchable where they go and stand .
in two hours , they &apos;re going to take care of it .
and they contains seeds of rare plants , so they can contribute through the biodiversity .
that means we &apos;re useful , not less harmful .
so it &apos;s two cycles .
not all of us should be kompostierbar .
a television or a washing machine , which use them to use them , they don &apos;t use it .
just the things that verschleißen , like schuhsolen , like bremsbeläge , like autoreifen , who have to be so that they have to go in biological systems .
the things that are only used to be used in technical systems .
but today we &apos;re just talking about the biological systems .
yes ? yes ?
for example , the sneaker , yes ?
all the direct ads , not for the company puma hitchhiking , but for that , you &apos;re going to help this company , that products to do this .
because we don &apos;t do things that are going to do things anymore .
yes ? yes ?
so if i take you to eat and say , this is free of hähnchen , then you &apos;re not going to give you anything .
no , we &apos;re stuck what &apos;s inside .
positive .
so not like detox . &quot;
not toxic in the west .
it &apos;s all of what &apos;s in it is useful .
these are the first shoes , with whom you can go to the kavalierstart of the fußgängerampel and the rubber can go to the rubber in biological classrooms , right ?
all of it is kompostierbar .
and if it works , it &apos;s natural for us , of course , for adidas , for nike and mauritz and the whole textile industry .
and this is half of all the abwasserprobleme worldwide worldwide that are caused by the textile industry .
so , you know , you &apos;re helping you to ask yourself , you know , you know .
hey , puma , power , do you really want to really do it ?
because the ones have been going to have twice the vorstandsvorsitzenden .
and i &apos;m not sure if you really do .
so , let me just give you a little bit .
but it &apos;s about .
yes .
that &apos;s what was just been shown .
that &apos;s going .
we can make things that you can do that if you verschleißen , if you &apos;re kaputtgehen , you can get them in biological .
technical cycles is just the same .
there &apos;s a direct rücknamesystem .
this is the first ecological rucksack , actually , that &apos;s what it &apos;s done in circulation .
and so that , in every store you can browse things .
if you get to that , yes ?
remember , remember the one time ?
if the moment is waste .
everywhere , these windeln are being almost .
in the countries where people come to money .
there &apos;s going on the deponien , but also else in the landscape , yes ?
if we change the plastics , if we change the wasserspeicher systems , if we change the wasserspeicher , you can see that they can actually go back to zellulosebasis , then you can actually grow in a baby in israel or in tunisia , in tunisia .
yes ? yes ?
and if you take these these up , you zerkleinern , sterilisieren , and the powder , to plant the trees .
so this is the baby kohlenstoffpositiv for the whole life , already .
so , we don &apos;t need to be klimaneutral , we can be motherly .
it &apos;s about a beneficial poop print .
yes , sort of , like .
yes ? yes ?
that &apos;s what we can do .
we can still reinvent it again .
i was able to have a institute .
and there are lots of people with , and they all have to be .
there &apos;s a club that &apos;s made of a club , cradle-to-cradle-verein , where everybody can .
so not more saving , verzichten , avoid , reduce , no waste .
do you make this curious ?
thank you .
the work of the interpreten .
music than language .
in the description of my talk , i wrote that i as a interpretin , as a übersetzerin , so i understand in english .
interpreten are the übersetzer grades in klingende music .
that &apos;s not just a translator , not just word for word to word the text in a different language , but also the deeper sense of words and wortzusammenhang , so that it &apos;s a very long translation of being able to do it .
it &apos;s been able to translate from the germans in english , can you know more , more than if it &apos;s about to be grey or poetry .
so , it &apos;s a very fremd thing , but what we &apos;re doing with our musiksprache .
as a interpretin of a musikstückes , i only have the only one that the only thing .
you think that the composer in the front has exactly anything hineingeschrieben , which he has been there .
in fact , the notes are very vague and ungenau .
these notes are about equivalently or ungenau , like a verbal , albeit very seemingly penibelst accurate , description of a landscape .
because in this verbalen landschaftsbeschreibung , the fragrance of flowers is not smell , the degree of the fittest of the grüns is not to hear the grad of the windes , not too .
this means that the interpreter has to be able to do this ungenauen angaben in a different , which is hörbare , concrete , concrete musiksprache .
today i want to show you what i could do to do in this , so , even more , even more language .
so basically , a translation of translation .
so i &apos;m going to take it to the whole thing that all of the things that would have to translate even if i could translate again , it would be a translation of the translation of translation .
so the music works for me as much as the spoken language .
the notierten notes have the function of the letters .
so it &apos;s not going to read just reading reading and to learn the dazu on piano or the right point on a violinsaite .
that &apos;s just the letters that you &apos;ve learned to paint .
the sense of the letters is just when you can get language .
so you need to use the learning for the learning of music for the music of the music for the most fundamental language .
there &apos;s also a abstufungen , whether you learn it for the hausgebrauch , just passive , or you can talk to the musical muttersprachler .
the work of the interpreten starts to see how a theaterregisseurs .
after you first have a piece of tedtalks , you have to play a piece of it , because you &apos;re excited to be the hintergründen of the origin of the composition .
you &apos;re going to have information about the piece of the sekundärliteratur .
you read in the middle of the letters , tagebüchern , or whether it &apos;s words , thoughts , thoughts can be .
you studied the works that he was before and he was composed .
you get comparisons comparisons .
the beweggründe , it &apos;s writing .
like , and what did he do ?
how his lebensumstände are , like the society and politics ?
all of this .
you think of yourself in this time , by looking for example , you know , you read the pictures of literature or literature .
and as a result of time , you &apos;ve got to know a rich know about composers that you &apos;re going to play , and it &apos;s still a always easier to feel in it and feel .
the composer is always more to the friend , with whom you live together .
his cause is to write the piece , is becoming more and more and more to my personal concerns .
now , the notes of all of the other than a kind of aufzeichnung of the conscious of the composers , but just a framework , i &apos;m going to now take this scaffold to make sense of meaning and meaning .
i say to my own words , which is the difference between this scaffolding .
i &apos;m playing games , which could have these sounds .
now for me and for composers and what you might have to do now for him today .
every note , every phrase gets a sense , because i feel it , because it &apos;s a reason for my now .
it has to me in this room and now be stimmig , otherwise i can &apos;t convince my audience to convince that my cause is .
it &apos;s always a very happy concert , if i have the experience , the piece that i &apos;ve been in the advance of the space , as new in the field .
as you ever repeat , you &apos;ve always seen a happy new day , even though it &apos;s always the same rituals of life , aufstehen , frühstücken , and i &apos;ll go back to the same thing as i was going to go back to the same thing .
i &apos;ve gotten a day , the seasons , seasons , the seasons goes down to the jahreszeiten , at the morning , in a konzertsaal , it takes a longer , it &apos;s longer that sound again , it &apos;s too home .
i take the breathing of the audience , consciously or subconsciously .
all of that influenced me and all the way that the thing is about the composition of the composition .
and quite amazing , when i stand with a duo-partner on stage , and we have the same wavelength .
then the same thing happens in a good , angeregten conversation .
you get a new idea , and it &apos;s going to give you this kind of answered with a response .
it &apos;s exciting , because then , things that we don &apos;t have so much as much as we have so much , and what you can &apos;t have .
it makes great fun to this whole way , and you &apos;ve got the audience to have the audience , as the music will be alive .
so every concert is a different concert .
i &apos;m never going to play more like this , like this moment .
i can &apos;t play today as playing as in 20 years .
there &apos;s more than today , and i &apos;m going to have more than today , and so i &apos;m going to have a lot more farbnuancen in the musikklänge of the musikklänge , and emotion and emotion .
sure , i &apos;m going to have some farbtöpfe farbtöpfe , but for it , new dazubekommen .
have a nice thing to do .
it was a klavierkursus for a klavierkursus for my beloved old teachers , professor jürgen ude , a well-known beethoven-spezialist , konzertpianist und , and a langjähriger professor of the musikhochschule here in stuttgart .
unfortunately , i was a lot to young jung , so he was already emeritiert when i finally started studying .
but i had the great fortune , it was very early , with a 13 years , and i was , and so i was so much to my kursen .
i was 17 when i was sitting on a saturday once again , and played the last nugget of chopin , a spätwerk .
he asked me what the preamble in this is that the preamble was for me .
this is a getragenes part .
and in my jugendlichkeit , i said , i was .
and he &apos;s got to schmunzelte and he said ?
that must be the altersunterschied .
because for me , it means to me .
he was talking about it .
well , with 17 , you have left dreams , but not a lot of memories .
i &apos;m going to play this piece of all over the years , and it &apos;s always been a long time to have a single note .
every time it &apos;s exciting , because over again , i read something new .
one example of this is from a different field of a different field . but it &apos;s also a different gemalt gemalt .
it &apos;s always the same garden , but to different tageszeit , verschiedenem light .
he has translated the seerosen verschiedentlich , so he saw it , as it &apos;s been seen as it &apos;s going to be on this moment .
his personal impressionen of the seerosen .
the x-malige interpretation is that one .
meanwhile , i &apos;m already older than chopin jahren with zweiunddreißig , when he wrote the piece .
he has only lived in only years .
and it &apos;s important to me , over and over again , even if i can do it .
to keep zwiesprache , right with the composers .
because the grades are the only connection to him .
especially when it &apos;s passed away .
now , how do you start talking about the language of music ?
i said yes , you need for about equivalently for the spoken of spoken language .
and often , the musikunterricht is so that you &apos;re learning to read the scores .
you learn to learn the first time you &apos;re going to read , before you just talk to a word .
you learn to find the notes on the instrument .
and then when all of the fingers and really , like it &apos;s moving into the notes , then they get sounds , they &apos;re sound like music .
when the next happens is , the students get the nächstschwierige piece .
over interpretation is barely talking about the anfängerunterricht .
well , there &apos;s the front door , which is a piece of piece .
lento , slowly .
loud and leisezeichen , f and b , etc .
that &apos;s most of the most of the most of the most .
but even if you &apos;re going to make these disparate , it still still gets a little technical .
and yet it &apos;s still not a interpretation .
i wonder .
i wonder that you often have a little bit of elementares .
and that &apos;s what to do music to the instrument , your own musical musical and feel before .
that &apos;s singing .
a child that didn &apos;t have learned the singing because it won &apos;t have the parents , it &apos;s not .
this is like sprechenlernen .
it &apos;s necessary , his own experiences and the idea of music to have the music to bring it over a way , so on a instrument , to bring it to a instrument .
people who never have to have been the people who have never been to be felt with your body as it &apos;s to form a tone .
a phrase with his own breath .
the most exciting is , is the extension of our body .
our vocal chords to singing , our hands and the dancing .
so the hammerköpfe is the fortsetzung of my fingers .
the tune comes from the gesungenen and rhythm .
the dauernde berieselung today is not förderlich .
you don &apos;t need more even more to make music if it &apos;s a boring .
not more necessary to be a liedchen or a liedchen .
every single music will be plattgemacht when you &apos;re constantly constantly talking about music .
sure , there are some of you who say , yes , yes , but what do you do if i can &apos;t sing ?
the question i &apos;m going to do is , you can &apos;t sing , a , because they believe they can &apos;t sing ?
or b , because they haven &apos;t learned to sing ?
in both two , it &apos;s not too late to try to figure out whether you can &apos;t do it , or learning how to use these little muscles , the ones that are doing the vocal chords , right .
that &apos;s how you can train .
or c , because you &apos;ve got them to bescheinigt them .
i &apos;m going to ask , how fachlich kompetent was that diagnosis ?
have you already have a zweit- or drittmeinung , how to make it beautiful ?
or d , you don &apos;t like music and want to do that , and they want to be profitable to do with it .
but what i &apos;m going to do is , because music is a beautiful , kommunikative thing .
but maybe you can also see them .
well , you know , you see , you have to be a aussichtsloser candidate .
but also , please don &apos;t say , i don &apos;t understand anything from classical music .
i can &apos;t say whether it &apos;s good or bad .
i &apos;m going to say , but surely you can tell you whether it &apos;s like , or not .
because i don &apos;t think somebody says , i don &apos;t know if it &apos;s too much because i can &apos;t cook .
so , they don &apos;t mean to eat , just because they can &apos;t cook .
so you don &apos;t have to provide classical music because they &apos;re not playing an instrument .
listen to you and say whether it tastes or not .
whether the music is too gepfeffert or too cute .
you say what you feel .
and you &apos;re going to get them and want to be more and want to do something more than more than the schmecken of drinhaben , and even the taste of the taste is .
why i &apos;m going to challenge from my audience , that it &apos;s also active to me ?
because the music is a language and a language is to communicate .
a piece of art , which you never look at , has no power to be .
the food , that was a chef or a chef , needs to be eaten and not just looked at the same time .
so listen to you , if a music is played .
it &apos;s not just a nice geräuschtapete .
if you &apos;re going to hear the adults of music or at least actively music , a child , a child , it &apos;s very easy for a musiklehrer , to ask , which color your flower ?
can you do it in blue ?
and the child plays a gedenkpause , rather than a red now , a red flower .
and this is quite different than before .
and that was the first beginning of a musical expression .
so the first step to a interpretation .
and what happens if you &apos;re playing a piece of today that originally , the originally , a hundred years ago , zweihundert or years ago ?
meanwhile , the instruments are fortentwickelt .
there was no bachs at the time .
it was just not yet .
i think that the stream would be enthusiastic if he had the klanglichen of the modern klaviere of modern klaviere .
i can now have the klangvorstellungen that bach has been to make the stream to the modern wing to sound what a barockes cembalo can &apos;t .
and also , beethoven , you know that he heard more than he was already deaf .
today , today , a modern orchestra is able to play everything , which is a orchestra of the time of the time .
so the composers are komponisten on us that you &apos;re reinventing reinventing the pieces .
so you &apos;ll be able to be able to be able to be in the mind .
and also , what you would think about today .
or what i &apos;m going to do today is because what you might have thought about .
thank you .
you know what the envy is ?
were you ever been doing ?
and how felt that ?
just suck .
i got a friend who drive a passerati .
and when i come to my little mail of skulls , piesel , and i &apos;m going to see that feeling of this feeling .
i was talking about this .
i say , ulf , what do you do is that the n big car ?
and it &apos;s actually the first year of his first year .
and even , you know , you know , much less than i .
why don &apos;t i have to do that , right ?
and then i immediately got to me that &apos;s a way .
it &apos;s against justice .
and as i say to the word justice , this is a awkward sense .
our organism has invented a great method to make these feelings like envy just to disappear .
you can also try to try and try to understand how revenge or gewinnsucht or ähnlichem .
i want to tell you about this mechanism today , or something that &apos;s going to be familiar with you , you know , you &apos;re likely to be familiar with .
the mechanism comes from the lie .
but you don &apos;t think about the lie , as you might have heard you , if people say , no one has the purpose of a wall .
and then rocks stones , so he &apos;ll give you the visibility of the lens .
on a lie , you see that the liars itself doesn &apos;t believe what he says .
it &apos;s easy to check that it &apos;s completely different in the sense .
he &apos;s just like it , and not yourself .
no , the lie i &apos;m talking about that it has to do with it .
they need this lie to maintain a lebenslüge operation .
you can get less easy , yes , nachprüfen or whatever .
they need time .
from this time , a anecdote that you might know .
the spanish painter picasso has once a woman .
this woman has been to come in , the portrait of the portrait of the portrait .
picasso , wait for it .
it &apos;s always going to be always going to happen .
and if you laugh at this point , you see how important these lie is , and how much time you need to learn something that artists can really work .
because artists have a gestörtes relationship to lie .
the artist tells you something with them , and especially this lady , what she doesn &apos;t see if you just look at it in the mirror .
the artist tells you something that you &apos;re going to do with it , you know , what you &apos;re going to do is to look at this work .
then , this awkward feeling , it may not look at you , and it will always be going to be more similar .
here you have this mechanism , which we can use the lie as a great invention of our lebensverhältnisse .
and not only in art , even in the volksmärchen , in the mythology , in stories , in stories , it &apos;s again .
you may know this idea of the dame , which is the jeden in the mirror and asked him who is who &apos;s the most beautiful in the country ?
one day one day tells this mirror , yes , there &apos;s a schönere .
behind the seven mountains and so on .
and you also know how much hostility of this true , it &apos;s free , also the mirrors can &apos;t lie to the mirror , from that true .
but we should just make us familiar with that you cannot say that there &apos;s a schönere somewhere in different somewhere .
here &apos;s what it takes to be , which is what we &apos;re going to understand under politically correctness .
we need this place to this point that the deception that we can &apos;t even know .
we don &apos;t just have in art , in the volksmärchendichtung , but also in science of these great lies .
and there &apos;s this story of the woman of worchester .
it heard from this book from charles darwin , the origin of species and the descent of people .
the person from the apes should be rude , and yeah , there &apos;s a common ancestor between humans and apes .
and then she ran her husband and said , &quot; well , that &apos;s not true , &quot; right ?
the human being told by monkey or a common ancestry .
no , no , no .
and if it &apos;s true , we need to prevent people who are going to be aware of it .
why do we need to prevent people from something called something like it ?
because we cannot live without these lebenslüge .
because we have this self-deception , this sense , this feeling , abstammung from the highest creatures , not from such a naturebene , from such a organism , like a organism , one pebble and otherwise things that are for us .
so we can &apos;t balance these things .
we need to avoid that people are very important to things , especially if you &apos;re true .
so you see how slowly these mechanisms look like this , and as the traces looks like , he &apos;s going to be able to put on something else on something else as a great picture of us , i want to give you a more story .
one particularly beautiful story , like i mean .
my wife told me .
she came from school , she &apos;s a teacher , and she told them from one student .
a autistischer student .
they may love to love it , because he &apos;s got an awful aufrichtigkeit .
and she asked him what are your hobbies ?
and he says , well , i &apos;m in the fire .
and because i &apos;m in the firemen , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
yes , you feel it if you &apos;re heiter at this point . there &apos;s something wrong .
i told my wife , always if a man in a moral neighborhood , the wörtchen because we should try to replace it through the wörtchen .
do that once and then experience the sentence .
even though i &apos;m in the firemen , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
you feel that &apos;s the actual truth behind the egg .
so a little bit of bub , who cares about it , not for feuerlöschen .
and the interest in the feuermachen .
but there &apos;s no population , after that we can use to be able to figure out where you learn how to do fire .
there &apos;s just the only thing that the fire .
there he has gone .
and überdies , you don &apos;t say his teacher &apos;s teacher , you like to put a little somewhere somewhere somewhere somewhere and happier , if the fire nachher .
no , it looks much better if we show that we &apos;re going to be able to be able to get the risks that the other thing is going to be , if you put it in fire .
here you have this little mechanism .
these verweis that in the innersten of the bub , he knew that he &apos;s actually related to the fire , but that he can &apos;t say that .
here you have this zensor between the driver and the conscious , who immediately knows that they can do something about it , and the things that they know they &apos;re very different , so they can make much better for them and others .
so just like this , you know , these words , the ones that we &apos;re using in language is to use the language of political cells .
actually , we know that something else is .
but we know when we &apos;re doing that , the social performance are very sensitive to very delicate .
we can &apos;t just do it .
it &apos;s impossible , such things in a society that work to present .
i want to talk to you what we &apos;ve found in my institute .
after the logic , these selbsttäuschung , these selbsttäuschung , the willingness to do , another reality that we actually know in the most elegant , that it &apos;s almost to spread out .
so , i want to leave you two , maybe three examples .
the first example of the example , we predict what many of you know and some of them are very , very few all not need at all .
i mean the soul .
what is the soul ?
the soul is so different , he says about it .
it &apos;s something that isn &apos;t about stopp stofflicher , nature &apos;s nature .
and if you have people who have been to have a soul , or you can say that they &apos;re going to have a geistiger framework of the soul , or you can think of the soul , they &apos;re just a little bit of materie , not just a fleisch of matter , and a little bit of steinernes , etwas , an , vergängliches , vergängliches , unwichtiges
and from this soul , you think you &apos;re kind of nature in this wolkigen nature , in this luftigen nature , anima , is it in latin america , and the lufthauch .
and if this lufthauch , the people who were talking about the people , it &apos;s angefüllt with mind , with nature , with nature that only live with , yes .
and then he can just davonlaufen .
this is so the idea of how the soul .
so they &apos;re going to take from the outside to people .
so we &apos;re going to be able to think about what necessarily necessarily be present for our lives .
and if you have these instances of eyes , you understand the logic , with us to experience this happiness , through a lie to a lie .
because now you can apply a dreisatz .
dreisatz you know from school .
this is now a dreisatz , which gives us a logic .
this is the hardest part in my talk .
here you need something logic , but also the willingness to lie .
so , in order to lie that they can just simply do this logic .
in this dreisatz three sentences .
the first sentence is , klaus , there &apos;s no soul .
so the second set of the sentence is , if you have klaus , it has no soul .
now there &apos;s a third sentence .
i was here in a row .
a third sentence who immediately want to be a strong sense of soul .
the ones say who no soul , that &apos;s dead and can &apos;t say anything .
and here you feel .
here &apos;s this logic in this , yes , in this täuschenden talk .
you see it immediately .
the first two sentences that are logical correct .
i can confidently say anything .
the logic doesn &apos;t make a difference about reality .
i can say , the kanzlerin is a man .
and if i &apos;m right , the kanzlerin is a man .
if i don &apos;t have right , it &apos;s not a man .
the logic doesn &apos;t matter what &apos;s going on .
i can confidently anything .
but critically , if i &apos;m right , it &apos;s just going to be .
so if klaus says , there &apos;s no soul .
secondly , if he has right , he has no soul .
these things are logical correct .
and now we &apos;re going to see our täuschendes consciousness , and you can make something .
it depends a third sentence of doing nothing to do with the first two sentences and pretends it as if it was the opposite of the first sentence and vice versa .
because actually , we have to prove whether it &apos;s the soul or not .
but with this logic , it just simply to be correct , and a third dazuhängt , which looks like it &apos;s like that , as he would have to do something that we can save our lebenslüge .
so , we pretend it &apos;s not possible without a soul without a soul .
and we &apos;re very happy about it .
we can put these things on different examples .
in the present , we have a whole modern example of the time that it &apos;s over the tageszeitungen .
so , for example , you have to be another philosophisches subject , a dauerbrenner from philosophy .
that has to do that , we &apos;re going to be able to get back into the vierzehnte century .
there was a gelehrten who was called johannes buridanus and after the buridansche esel .
the buridansche esel is a esel , which is made of pure nature .
the didn &apos;t have these soul .
this is a naturding .
and if you &apos;re in the exact right in the middle between two gleichgroßen heuhafen , it &apos;s verhungert .
because he doesn &apos;t know how to go to the heuhaufen .
so he &apos;s right in the middle .
so that &apos;s what the naturdinge introduced .
gleichgroße forces with gegensätzlichem vorzeigenzeichen .
there &apos;s nothing happening .
and if you take another example , so if you immediately do the heuhaufen bigger , it doesn &apos;t need to do anything and nothing .
automatically does he runs to the right thought .
so if you have this idea that you &apos;re being driven in nature , it &apos;s going to be determiniert by the bigger piles that will put it to the bigger , you feel that there &apos;s so much like a free will .
and if we &apos;re in frankfurt , there &apos;s the main , i remember the max-planck-institut max-planck-institut .
there &apos;s a scholars called wolf singer , and from him , you sometimes say , &quot; wolf singer , &quot; there &apos;s no willensfreiheit .
now we can train the second sentence and say if kissing singer has been right , then he doesn &apos;t have any willensfreiheit .
these sentences are absolutely logical and correct .
and what we &apos;re going to read almost daily in daily newspaper , that &apos;s going to find this in the third sentence .
and the looks like that , who &apos;s not a willensfreiheit , can &apos;t be for his actions and claims to the responsibility , and it &apos;s so much .
again , you have it again .
actually , you would have to prove to you if there &apos;s something like willensfreiheit .
but the logic of deception allows us to do as though the first sentence of the first sentence of the first set of the sentence , as you would have to do that , you know , the opposite of the opposite of evidence .
and now you can just do if you want to do anything , if you want to test yourself , and especially if you want to make people happy , that courage to lie to lie .
so you just like , for example , if you encounter a person you can say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
and please don &apos;t use the german word for vorhersager , which means that means .
they don &apos;t call them , that would be a little bit more politically inkorrekt .
you say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
immediately , you &apos;ll see one of the vorhersager , &quot; you know , that can &apos;t prove it .
and you &apos;ve got a problem .
because while you &apos;re engaged with it , you can &apos;t prove that they can &apos;t prove that there &apos;s no vorhersager , is the man happy .
he &apos;s very happy about it because he has misled .
because he has led them to a fährte , on the front of it , he doesn &apos;t go .
because , in fact , this person is not interested in the way .
it &apos;s just about it , itself , itself , itself , to have to have to have to have to have to prove that there &apos;s vorhersager .
so , in the way the shift of the beweislast experience you see the großartigkeit of the lie .
and once again , if you have a way to feel this dreisatz among other people , they do it because they &apos;re going to do other happy if they don &apos;t remember their own selbstlüge .
thank you for your attention .
yes , good afternoon .
i &apos;ve been asking to ask , if i can mention you .
she &apos;s one of the most amazing veranstalterinnen here , and i asked myself , whether i &apos;m going to give you a talk and my idea .
i have to say , you &apos;ve got it to reden , it was a hard hard to talk about my idea .
and i might have to imagine my inselprojekt , i think i &apos;m trying to try to imagine .
but it &apos;s of course , the sum of the world , quite a lot of ideas .
i &apos;m probably one of the same girls , i &apos;m probably not going to be probably the generation that i &apos;ve been obsessed with this bad öko image , because i &apos;ve been studying a few times in karlsruhe , technical school , i think , &quot; i think , &quot; i think , &quot; i think , &quot; i think , &quot; i think , &quot; i think
and i got back to the achtziger years of berlin , because i wanted to make renewables , and that was the last thing .
there was the kernforschungsanlage leopoldshafen .
the hießen of the time , all the kfa , the jülich was called kfa .
the hot heißen today .
because a good engineer has either built a great deal of cars .
but what &apos;s called doofes solarpendel , from the kind of hundred watts from the square meter , which was a toy .
and in berlin , there was a crazy ingenieurkollektiv .
i &apos;m thankful to say that he &apos;s got the word again again again , because after the mauerfall , you don &apos;t use the word for the word , because everything was just a bad thing .
but that was not like this in the achtiziger years .
there was so much that there was selbstverwaltete alternativbetriebe and one of them sitting in kreuzberg in kreuzberg , where you put evil .
and the place of the terrorismusses , but that was called wuseltronik and has done and solar power and the sonnenenergie and i &apos;ve started the middle of the ladder .
and yes , a lot of what was told me , and i &apos;m very , very , because many , many beautiful expressions of these things that i &apos;ve also too .
i worked in the collective years of working in the collective years .
we were zwanzig people .
if a no said , the vetoprinzip was vetoprinzip , which was difficult to me , i was really difficult to remember this completely zermürbt , and i &apos;ve always been doing my great ingenieurstudium to a schwachsinnige thing , because all my father &apos;s friends always have been teaching him , you &apos;ve got the money to the window .
it &apos;s busy with the schwachsinn .
and this was really , really , very , very , very bitter , and you get a picture on the ground , which i was asked to a picture of the durchhalten where i asked a picture of 10 years ago , einheitslohn , einheitslohn , einheitslohn , of course , in the collective of course , that really should be so much that it should be .
and i got to sechsundneunzig ausgehalten and then we have been mitbegründer with friends , i &apos;ve become the mitbegründer of the company that was going to be zusammen with the spin-off q-cells of the world &apos;s largest zellenhersteller .
a riesenerfolgsgeschichte , but we &apos;ve got a little bit of the problem of growing , and we then have a little group of the growing and we then went back and forth , and that &apos;s what &apos;s going to be , again , it &apos;s going to be a little bit of the time and the next thing that is , again , it &apos;s going to be
and i &apos;ve brought you a project i want to think about you .
and the title of the man was , yeah , as you get to 100 percent .
and we just have a relatively einfach-verrückten history to ask where could you use a memory of today .
on this island , this is the island of graciosa on the azoren .
yes , that &apos;s the data .
there &apos;s a couple thousand people .
the ones today have a renewables of fifteen percent .
and the question is , why don &apos;t you have more ?
that &apos;s just technological .
if you &apos;re more windkraft to each other , the system starts to fail .
and i also always tell the politicians , when they &apos;re going to besichtigen our facility .
they always say , why ?
we &apos;ve been 20 percent in germany .
but not a problem .
but not , we have in europe in europe , and our network is actually the european european .
if we had 20 percent , we would have to have the same problems that people have on this island .
the question was just the way that was the rechnet , the first interaction with the island , but just once .
as big , as a battery , you have a battery to be a island of 20 , dreißig , 40 , fünfzig , maybe even a siebzig percent renewable .
and yes , i &apos;ll go back to a slide .
the conventional system looks like this , anywhere in the world .
by the way , a year , a year , a hundred dollars in the world &apos;s largest capacity on the world .
the power of a hundred power of power , because that &apos;s particularly fast .
the energiehunger of the world , which is going to be going to be deleted with diesel because you don &apos;t need permission .
this is fast .
you &apos;re looking at the box box .
and then it looks like that .
in the third , three of the dieseln , two of them are going to be .
yes , this is what a particle is the burden .
we also have very detailed data .
and the windkraftanlage or the solaranlage or whatever it is , is in the rule , a back-up system is a system that can only be in small amounts of sunlight .
our goal was to say it easy to say , okay , okay , okay .
the diesel is back-up , and the wind , the sun is the burden that they can actually replicate the bigger .
and if you want to go over 20 , 30 percent renewables , so energy per year , not the performance in the moment , then you need to shake the diesel .
that means that the moment you have to worry about the renewables , and the renewables can take the entire net .
you can only get them only if you get in a way .
that &apos;s not the way that nobody did .
there &apos;s a little bit of the small style , so you can also use your rasierer on your rasierer over a little wechselrichter .
people ask me what is going to do in adlershof , because they &apos;re actually doing in adlershof ?
but that &apos;s what &apos;s going on .
if you want to have several of these wechselrichtern zusammenschalten and the need to build a net , that &apos;s what it &apos;s complicated .
and our goal was to come to the fact , we wanted to get to the siebzig and then there &apos;s this rest of the rest of the rest , the last 10 , 20 percent renewable , which is going to be very , very expensive , and it &apos;s not going to work that you &apos;re going to work that you &apos;re doing .
this is going to be a energieträger , which then , hydrogen , methane , power of gas , you know , or sch , that will be then .
they have to go to a saisonalspeicher and winter-sommer and not just tag-nacht .
we just wanted to know what &apos;s about a normal elektrochemischen battery .
how far you get there ?
and then a whole bunch of simulation .
and they have wind and sun and the last and the last and came to the outcome , a whole bunch of a very exciting outcome that &apos;s going to take a middle of the konventionellen per capita , about 50 cents a year , about vierundvierzig cents .
that was the first calculations of six years ago .
and then we said , okay , okay , okay , okay , okay .
well yeah , we have a business model .
we &apos;re cheaper like the diesel-system , if the average five percent is increasing a year .
and then we started using the insulanern to negotiate .
what would have done anything ?
have with investors , i &apos;ve been looking for new gesellschafter .
we were only five people to rebuild a year to rebuild society .
and here &apos;s the actual representation .
the brown is sort of the conventional system , the green system is our system .
that our system has a preisanstieg , because we &apos;re still doing 20 percent of the diesel and also a preissteigerung on the other things .
and the power-utility that the elektrizitätsversorgungsunternehmen on the island , has been , that &apos;s what we find .
we also want to support , but we don &apos;t believe you can solve the technical problem .
and so we &apos;ve been able to make us a hall to build a hall where we &apos;re going to use the electric use of the island of the island in the scale of the scale in the scale .
that means we &apos;ve been looking for , and then we &apos;ve been looking for the greatest battery of the world .
here you are .
the coming from asia , in the case of japan .
and witzigerweise is it in the &apos; 70s , in the same years , abb , and then became entwickelt , and then became the japanese .
you can see , it &apos;s a very , very big battery .
it has a megawatts of performance and can bring them six hours for this performance and that &apos;s the battery we have to have simulationstechnisch rausbekommen .
and then they then have .
we also have one of these diesel-aggregate in the same size , as it &apos;s been there , in the hall , in the hall , the entire dynamic behavior of this web , so there &apos;s this , so there &apos;s the right , here &apos;s the big battery , here , here &apos;s the whole umrichter , which we &apos;re going to simulate .
over here , we &apos;re going to simulate the whole übertragungsleitungsystem , the kilometer-physik of cable to capture the schwingungsverhalten of the web .
and here you can see again .
we can also kilowatt zweihundert kilowatt on the grid .
here &apos;s this again , we see the diesel , here &apos;s the whole thing , and again , the whole thing .
and what we did was , since zweitausendneun , the hall of zweitausendneun was actually done , all of the things that there was all the system in the individual system , to develop software , we &apos;ve made .
so we are not batteriehersteller , but we define ourselves as a company that &apos;s only between the subject and the subject and the subject .
you need to communicate to battery , you have to communicate to the battery , you have to communicate into the grid , and that &apos;s very complicated .
the beauty of the subject is that you &apos;re basically going to basically be able to get rid of the vorwegnehmen to solving that we &apos;re going to get when we want to increase our capacity of renewables .
so this whole discussion , as you go back and forth , like this , as the idea is , we have to be used for fünfundzwanzig to fünfundzwanzig , for instance , we &apos;re going to dreißig for five percent , so we müdsen the wind and the sun .
natürlicht offers to smart-grid .
so smart-grid , a riesenthema everywhere .
we can actually start to integrate elektromobilität , rumzufragen , rumzufragen , you can &apos;t manage the load .
that means if you &apos;re not a number of percent renewable , you don &apos;t get it without memory .
you can &apos;t smart-grid through your n , you can do it by ausbau , yes , you should do that , you should do the percentage of the anteil , but you never will give it to memory .
and that &apos;s so bad news .
so many people are coming and look at the there , because you can see what you &apos;re going to get .
if we cut the diesel , you have no more spinning mass , which causes a certain one in the net .
and our europäisches verbundnetz is basically just a little bit of rotierenden massen of large kraftwerken , where the wave all over the whole europe is about all the time .
we look at this web , looking at the 50 hertz , and when it &apos;s nine , nine times , we &apos;re going to get a few ventilchen aufzumachen , and then a few ventilchen aufzumachen , then we &apos;ll get back up again .
that &apos;s the system .
and of course , this is incredible .
if you go to the somewhere , you can take it .
the spinning black-and-white of the land has at least 10 seconds to keep the net stable .
and in time , they can respond to another .
if you don &apos;t have more , these spinning mass , you have to replace it with leistungselektronik and elektrochemie .
and we can have this big battery two milliseconds in the world .
there you see , which is enormous geschwindigkeitsmöglichkeiten .
and the message is , we need to cut up on this rotating mass of the ziele , 20 percent , 20 percent , 20 percent , 20 percent , and so on , if we want to reach the knowledge , if we want to achieve all of the minds , if we want to achieve all of the minds .
then we need to be able to increase our must-run capacity in the net .
must-run is simply the power to keep the frequency .
yes , this is a riesendebatte in the moment , zubau from the kohlekraftwerken , because we don &apos;t have any , or gasturbinen , because that &apos;s not .
and we just try to just try that you can engineer the capacity , that can break down and build the elektrochemische .
there are also a whole lot of studies now .
and then people are getting people and then the people are getting and look at our versuchsstand on the edge of our inselteststand .
and yes , the discussion is always about asking the question , how far you can get a piece of future .
and many discussions that i had in the last six years , were similar to the discussion that i had in the last 30 years .
isn &apos;t , is a schwachsinn , kinderspielkram , we &apos;ve never been , it &apos;s not .
we have now dreißig gigawatt in germany .
this is vorbildlich .
and i just go from that , in the next 30 years , the same capacity of elektrochemischen in the world are being wiped in the world .
just quite simple , it &apos;s going to come .
there &apos;s a whole bunch of widerständen and services .
the beauty is that i &apos;ve been doing this in the last two years , that the scientists are going to put on my side .
we &apos;ve been given over tens of millions of förderprojekte , also to klemmen the ne of the deutsche .
that &apos;s going to be going to be going on the next april .
so , from so , you also notice that there &apos;s a change there , and just that &apos;s just one of these abwehrhaltung , to the idea of the idea of 100 percent .
and if you have a hundred percent renewable , it &apos;s like a autarkes system .
so , in discussions , it &apos;s always trying to do this insulaner , that insulaner , which have a little bit of little , that has a little bit of little grid that has nothing to do with our verbund .
the question is just simply , if you &apos;re fully fully independent regardless of creation or uranen energierträgern , the somewhere in the world will be rausgebohrt in the world and you &apos;re going to be a island .
then they use it , and then what &apos;s the sun and wind there , where they live .
and this is a little bit of our vision of a vernüftigen energieversorgung , and i &apos;m also dankbar , and i &apos;m also sure that you &apos;re using , solar use .
and this is what we do , and it &apos;s like , and the most important thing that we do , and the talk of premium kola is that you can use a collective and use it to be a little bit of a collective and a little bit of zusammen .
and yeah , i want to just encourage you to encourage you , in the sense that you can &apos;t be a little crazy and also have a vision .
and you really have to stay pretty zäh , but i think that it &apos;s going to be .
thank you .
as steve lopez , the los angeles , the los angeles times , one day through the streets of los angeles , he stopped a wonderful music .
she came from a man , a african-american , sympathisch , rau , homeless , who played on a violin that had only two left .
many of you will know the story about this , because from steves articles , it was launched a book that was verfilmt at the wiederum junior when steve lopez was lopez and jamie anthony , the kontrabassisten , the kontrabassisten studierte , who was studierte at the juilliard-konservatorium of his paranoide schizophrenie .
nathaniel left , a nervenzusammenbruch and 30 years later , he lived in the streets of skid row in the center of los angeles .
i recommend to read , steves book , so they &apos;re not just the wonderful thing that it &apos;s not just the wonderful thing that the music is made of these two men and how they eventually had the instrument that it was the instrument that this is the wortspiel , the mithalf , the mithalf , the mithalf road from the road .
i met mr. mr ayers in 2008 , two years ago , in walt disney hall .
he had just a demo of beethoven &apos;s first time and fourth symphony , and came behind the stage to imagine .
he spoke in a very heiteren and geselligen note about the yo-yo ma and hillary clinton and hillary , and how the dodgers would never create in the baseball world , and all of the most important passage is used to the first one , the first one of the first time in the last sentence of the total .
we came to talk to the subject of music , and a few days later i got a email to the mine that nathaniel was interested in my mind .
i have to mention that nathaniel has a medical treatment , because he was already treated with elektroschocks and handschellen , a trauma that has his whole life .
and as a result , it &apos;s especially susceptible to these schizophrenen periods of these schizophrenen stages , and it &apos;s so bad , and he &apos;s tagelang , and he &apos;s tagelang , and then tagelang , and that straßen of the horror and the folterqualen of his own mind .
and in just a reizstadium , nathaniel , when we were nathaniel nathaniel , when we started with our first paradigm in the walt hall , he had this irre flackern in his eyes and lost .
he spoke about invisible and smoke and it was to put someone in the sleep .
i was afraid , not meinetwegen , but i was afraid that i could take him into a person and i could destroy his relationship to the violin , and that i would start to talk to the violin , if i started talking about and arpeggios and other exciting forms of didaktischen forms of didaktischen .
so i just started playing .
i played the first sentence of beethoven .
and while i played , i noticed that in nathaniels eyes , a total of change was going on .
it was as if he was under the impact of a invisible arznei , a chemical reaction , that was my catalyst .
nathaniels manischer verwandelte verwandelte itself in understanding , in a stable curiosity and mine .
and as a miracle took his geige and began to play some from ausschnitte to the gehör of violinkonzerten and asked me to play them , mendelssohn , tschaikowski , sibelius .
we started talking about music , starting from bach , and we were , brahms , bruckner , and all the other bs , to esa-pekka bis .
and i realized that he wasn &apos;t just a enzyklopädisches knowledge about music , but it &apos;s also in a tight personal relationship with her .
he talked about a passion and a understanding that i just had to know my colleagues from los angeles in the philharmonie of los angeles .
by music and talking about music , and i spoke about this paranoiden , verwirrten man , the guy who was going to be the streets of los angeles , a liebenswerter , gebildeter , ausgezeichneter , ausgezeichneter .
music is medicine . music is changing .
for nathaniel , music is music health .
because the music allows him to him , his thoughts and delusions with help with his imagination and creativity in something real umzuformen .
and so he &apos;s got his quälenden .
i understood that this is exactly the nature of art .
so , this is why we make music : so we &apos;re doing something that in us , in the inside , in the inside , our emotions , our emotions , through our creativity , through our creativity .
and the reality of that expression is going to all us all , and moves , and all of us .
what nathaniel are going to be , so it took the music back into a community of friends .
the erlösende force of music took him back into a family of musicians that would understand him , who recognized his talent and achtete him .
and i &apos;m going to always finish with nathaniel , whether in walt disney hall or in , because he reminds me why i &apos;m going to be a musician .
thank you .
bruno bowden : thank you . thank you .
robert gupta .
robert gupta : i want to play something i &apos;m going to stolen .
i hope you &apos;re forgive me .
so i &apos;ve been able to do in my life .
i only loved two loved .
this first one , that was more like a passionate affair .
it was a beautiful fish , wohlschmeckend , good afternoon , gehaltvoll , a bestseller on the menu .
what a fish .
even better , he was convicted of the angeblich standards of sustainability .
so you could feel comfortable with it .
i had with this beauty of a relationship with several months .
one day called the head of the company and asked if i could recite a event about the sustainability of the farm .
&quot; of course , &quot; i said .
here was a company that was trying to solve what this problem was going to be used for our chefs , and how does we retain fish on our speisekarten ?
in the last 50 years we &apos;ve seen the ocean , we have been beaten in the forests .
it &apos;s hard to überbewerten the destruction .
90 percent of the great fish that we love , the tuna , the thunfische , the heilbutte , sie , they &apos;re collapsed .
it &apos;s almost nothing left .
so , it &apos;s going to be probably or übel , übel , fischanbau , a part of our future .
many arguments against it . fischzuchtanlagen , most of them , most of them are anyway , and they are inefficient , we &apos;re taking a tuna .
he has a futterverwertung of 15 .
that means , 15 pounds wildfisch , so you get a pound zucht-thunfisch .
not very sustainable .
it doesn &apos;t really well be very good .
so here was finally a company trying to make it right .
i wanted to be supported .
and at the day , i called the head of the öffentlichkeitsarbeit to company .
we call him .
&quot; don &apos;t , i said , &quot; just to have the facts , you &apos;re famous to the fact that you &apos;re having a lot of the way that you don &apos;t have the environment . &quot;
&quot; that &apos;s true , &quot; he said , &quot; we &apos;re so far out of our fish , not focused . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; we &apos;re basically a own world .
this futterverwertung of 2.5 , he said .
&quot; the best in the industry . &quot;
2.5 , great .
&quot; 2.5 to one thing ? what does your average ? &quot;
&quot; sustainable proteins &quot; he said .
&quot; great , &quot; i said . i put on .
and i was at night , and i was thinking , what &apos;s the hell is a sustainable protein ?
so i called the next day , just before the event , don .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t , what are the sustainable protein ? &quot;
he said he didn &apos;t know . he will be able to do .
well , i &apos;m going to play with some people in the company , no one could give me a conversation for me , until i finally finally had to telefonierte with the bad biologists .
we call it a little bit .
&quot; don &quot; i said , &quot; what are the sustainable protein ? &quot;
well , he mentioned some algae and some fischmehle , and then he said , hühnchen-pellets .
i said , &quot; hühnchen-pellets ? &quot;
he said , &quot; yeah , feathers , feathers , skin , skin , knochenmehl , reste , getrocknet . &quot;
i said , &quot; how much percent of the eures is chicken ? &quot;
in the assumption of maybe two percent .
&quot; well , that &apos;s about 30 percent , &quot; he said .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t , what is it to be about to put chicken ? &quot;
there was a long pause in the high line and he said , &quot; there &apos;s just too much chicken on the world . &quot;
i &apos;m going to entliebte me from this fish .
no , no , because i &apos;m a selbstgerechter genießer and gutmensch .
that &apos;s actually i even .
no , i &apos;ve actually chased micht from this fish because i swear to god , the fish after that conversation after chicken .
this second fish is a different kind of mine .
it &apos;s the romantic way that you learn better you can learn your fish , you &apos;re going to be the fish .
i first started to eat him in a restaurant in südspanien .
a befreundete journalist had been talking about this fish .
it has us in some sense .
he came on the table with a bright , almost schimmernden color .
the chef had him .
hold on .
amazingly , he was still delicious .
who can make a fish that he goes as well as he was verkocht ?
i can &apos;t it , but this guy can .
let &apos;s call him miguel . actually , he &apos;s called miguel .
and no , he &apos;s not cooked the fish and he &apos;s not a chef , at least in the way that you and i understand .
he &apos;s a biologist in veta la .
this is a fischaufzucht in the südwestlichen corner .
it &apos;s close to the mouth of the stream .
until the 1980s was the farm in the hands of argentiniern .
they züchteten fleischrinder , which basically basically .
they did this by the country by the country .
they built this complicated implication of the software , and they &apos;re moving water from the country and go into the river .
well , they couldn &apos;t get the best , not economically .
and it was a catastrophe .
it took about 90 percent of the birds around what &apos;s happening in those space .
and so 1982 has a spanish company with the country that &apos;s bought the country .
what did you do ?
they have the flow of the water .
they literally have the levers .
instead of the water , they used them to the canals to restore water .
they &apos;re fluteten the canals .
they created a 11.000 acres of fischaufzucht -- barsch , meeräsche , shrimp , shrimp , garnele -- and his company is completely completely umgekehrt .
the farm is incredible .
i mean , you &apos;ve never seen anything like this .
it starts out out of the horizon that &apos;s a million miles away , and all you see is geflutete channels and these density , lush .
i was not a long time ago .
he &apos;s a incredible guy , three parts charles darwin and a part of the water .
okay ? &quot; and we were moving through the wetlands and i keuche and schwitze , and habe , habe to my knees , and miguel hält .
here he lifts a rare gleitaar .
now he mentioned the mineralbedürfnisse of the phytoplankton .
and here , he sees a pattern of bundle that it &apos;s remembered to the tansanische giraffe .
it turns out that miguel has the biggest part of its career in the mikumi national park in africa .
i asked him how he has become a fisch-experten .
he said , &quot; fish ? i don &apos;t know anything about fish .
i &apos;m a expert for connection . &quot;
and then he goes and stürzt into more gerede of rare birds and algae and weird wasserpflanzen .
and you don &apos;t get wrong , that was really fascinating , you know , the most biotische community , so in the form of the form .
it &apos;s great , but i was love .
and my head was weak about this verkochte piece of köstlichen , which i had at the vorabend .
so i &apos;ve got him . i said , &quot; miguel , how do it come from your fish as good as it as well ? &quot;
he showed the algae .
&quot; i know young , the algae , the phytoplankton , the relationships , that &apos;s incredible .
but what food is your fish ?
how is the futterverwertung ? &quot;
well , he goes to tell me that it &apos;s such a such system that the fish eat what they would eat in the wild .
the rate of biomass , the phytoplankton , the zoo , that &apos;s what the fish that is .
the system is so healthy , it &apos;s completely selbsterneuernd .
there &apos;s no food .
the ever one of the farm belongs to your animals , who don &apos;t get your animals ?
later , on this day , i went on this day , and i asked him , i said , &quot; for a place that seems to be so natural as any farm i ever had , &quot; how do you do it ? &quot;
in the moment , it was like a filmregisseur had a bühnenwechsel .
and we went to the corner and we &apos;re looking at the most incredible sight , thousands and thousands of pinker , a literally pinker , a literally pinker .
&quot; that &apos;s success . &quot;
&quot; look at your bäuche .
she schlemmen . &quot;
schlemmen ? i was completely confused .
i said , &quot; miguel , don &apos;t you get your fish ? &quot;
&quot; yeah , he said .
&quot; we lose 20 percent of our fish and fischeiern on the birds .
now last year , there were 600,000 600.000 birds , more than 250 different species .
it &apos;s the largest and one of the most important private investment in europe .
i said , &quot; miguel , is a good gedeihender vogelbestand , not the last thing that you want to have on a fischaufzucht ? &quot;
he was killing his head , no .
he said , &quot; we &apos;re building extensiv , not rocket .
this is a ökologisches network .
the flamingos eat the shrimp .
the shrimp eat the phytoplankton .
so the middle of the course of the gut is the system that the system . &quot;
okay , let &apos;s get this überdenken . a farm that doesn &apos;t take their animals and a farm that &apos;s their own success at their health .
a fischaufzucht , but also a vogelreservat .
oh , and by the way , the nebenbei should not be there .
they &apos;re killing in a city of 240 miles away , where the bodenbeschaffenheit is better for the nestbau .
every morning , they fly to the farm .
and every night they fly back to the 240 kilometers .
they do this because they can follow the gestrichelten line of the landstraße .
seriously .
i had a kind of trip of penguins , so i looked at miguel .
i said , &quot; miguel , flies , fly out of a 240 mile and fly away from the night ? &quot;
do you make this for kids ? &quot;
he looked at me when i was a song of whitney .
he said , &quot; no . you do that because the food is better . &quot;
i didn &apos;t mention the skin of my beloved man , the delicious , and i don &apos;t like fischhaut . i don &apos;t like it . i don &apos;t like it . i don &apos;t like it .
it &apos;s this beißende , verkohlte flavor .
i almost never ever been to do it .
and yet when i tried to put them in the restaurant in the restaurant , she didn &apos;t have to geschmeckt at all .
she was sweet , and in the way , as if you would take a bite off the ocean .
i mentioned that to miguel and he nickte .
he said , &quot; the skin looks like a sponge .
she &apos;s the last 10 , before it &apos;s happening in the body .
it has evolved over the course of evolution to aufzusaugen unreinheiten . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; but our water has no unreinheiten . &quot;
okay . a farm that doesn &apos;t get their fish . a farm that their success is their success .
and then i realized when he says , a farm that has no unreinheiten , untertreibt , he gewaltig them , because the water that comes through these farm in the river .
it &apos;s a river , which is the things that are happening with each other , and they tend to be used to lead , chemical pollutants , abfluss of schädlingsbekämpfungsmitteln .
and if it &apos;s fought through the system and this leaves is the water that it &apos;s hereingekommen .
the system is so healthy , it cleans water .
so not just a farm that doesn &apos;t evolve their animals , not just a farm that is measuring their own health , but a farm that literally has a wasser-aufbereitungsanlage , not just for those fishes , but for you and me .
because if the water herausfließt , it &apos;s in the atlantic .
a drop in the ocean , i know , but i suppose it , and that should do it , because these things , as romantic as well as romantic as well as i do , it &apos;s also .
you might say that you &apos;re a recipe for the future , whether we &apos;re talking about barsch or fleischrindern .
what we need is to take a radically new concept of agriculture , from one of the food , in food .
but for many people , it &apos;s a little bit .
we &apos;re not realisten , we &apos;re genießer . we &apos;re killing .
we love wochenmärkte . we love little familienbetriebe . we talk about regional food . we eat food .
and if you say that the things that the future is good to your future , and says , &quot; hey guys , i love pinke flamingos , but how are you going to feed the world ?
how are you going to feed the world ? &quot;
can i be honest ?
i don &apos;t like this question .
no , not because we produce enough calories to feed the world more than just feed .
a billion people are starving today .
one billion -- that &apos;s more than ever before -- because of the krasser inequalities in the distribution , not the gesamtproduktion .
well , i don &apos;t like this question because they &apos;ve been the logic of our health care over the last 50 years .
the way to pflanzenfresser getreide , chemikalien on monokulturen , chemicals on earth , hühnchen , and the whole time has asked the agribusiness , &quot; if we feed more people in action , how terrible can you be ? &quot;
that was the cause . it was the rechtfertigung . it was the lack of american agriculture .
we should call them what it is , a training in abwicklung , a gewerbe , the quickly schnell capital of kapital , that &apos;s exactly the production of these production .
this is not a solar system , and it &apos;s not agriculture .
our kornkammer today is threatened , not because of the abnehmender zufuhr , but because of the abnehmender resources , but because of the resources of resources , but because of the resources of resources , it &apos;s because of the resources of resources , but because of the resources that we are .
not through the latest mähdrescher- and traktor-erfindungen , but by fertile , not by pumps , not by frisches , not by kettensägen , but by kettensägen , not by fischerboote , and not by fische , but by fishes .
they want to feed the world ?
let &apos;s start with the question : how are we going to feed ourselves ?
or better , how can we create conditions that make any community to feed themselves ?
to do that , don &apos;t look at the agrarindustrie-modell for the future .
it &apos;s really old , and it &apos;s done .
capital , chemistry and machines are standing in the middle of it , and it never really made a good thing to eat .
let &apos;s look at the ecological model .
this is that , on two billion years .
look at miguel , farmers like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , bauern , like miguel , bauern , like miguel miguel .
betriebe , who are not worlds , they &apos;re betriebe , the current anstatt , the extensiv , the extensiv , the extensiv , the extensiv , the extensiv , not only to be the only , but experts for connection , it &apos;s experts for relationships .
because they are the ones who are experts for flavor .
and if i &apos;m really honest , you &apos;re a better chef than i ever ever .
you know , this is right , because if the future is good , it &apos;s delicious .
thank you .
if i want to think about this , it &apos;s a thing that we want to consume , the idea of the data that we &apos;re going to consume is bigger than the sum of their parts and instead of thinking about how we can use information that are going to be able to use that pattern and we realize that they might be otherwise not visible .
so what we see here is a typical sterbediagramm to age .
the program i &apos;m using here is a little experiment .
it &apos;s called pivot and what i can do with pivot is that i can filter a particular physical filter , say , &quot; we say .
and immediately i see a different pattern that &apos;s coming .
and in the mittelbereich , the people here are the aktivsten and they &apos;re over here at the gebrechlichsten .
we can go to the top and we can see the data and see that kreislauferkrankungen and cancer are not the usual suspects , but not for everybody .
if we go back and after age , we say 40 years or younger , that crashes even the fact that the hauptursache is actually about the world &apos;s population .
and lo and behold , that &apos;s what &apos;s particularly in men .
so you realize that this is looking at information and data in this way , in the way that &apos;s very lebendigen in a lebendigen informationsgrafik .
and if we can do this for raw data , why not even for content ?
now what we have here is the titelbilder einzelnen , &quot; the sports illustrated , &quot; which ever printed .
it &apos;s all here . it &apos;s all online .
you can like to test it for my zimmern .
with pivot , they can access to a decade .
you can actually dive into a particular year .
you can jump directly to a particular copy .
now if i look at this , i see the athletes that appear in this copy and the sportarten .
i &apos;m a lance armstrong , so i click on the slide , all of the spending i &apos;ve been doing in the lance armstrong of armstrong .
now if i just want to get a gröberen of the mind , i could think , &quot; ok , what if i &apos;m going to do with the subject of the fahrradfahren ? &quot;
so i go back to step back and erweitere .
now i see greg lemond .
and so you get a idea of that if you get to this kind of information , gezielter , gezielter , breiter , reinzoomen , rauszoomen , you don &apos;t just don &apos;t just go to it .
you make something that &apos;s a little bit different .
it &apos;s something between , and we think it &apos;s changing the way information can be used .
i want to take this idea a little bit more about what a little crazy .
what we &apos;ve done here is we took every single wikipediaseite , and they &apos;re going to add a little summary .
the zusammenfassung contains a quick , and a symbol of the field comes from the field .
i just show the top 500 of the populärsten .
but even in this particular , we can do a lot of things .
so , let &apos;s get a glimpse of the topics that are on the highway .
i &apos;m going to choose the issue .
well , after i first elected it , i realize that the wikipediakategorien that are being decken at the time , the people of the year &apos;s magazines .
this is really important , because this is an insight that &apos;s not in a single wikipediaseite .
this is just to recognize if you look at a step , and the whole thing .
and then on a certain of these summaries , i can go into the subject of the year , &quot; people &quot; in the year &quot; go , and all together .
so if i &apos;m looking at all these people , the majority of these are regierungsbeamte , some of the things are regierungsbeamte . some of the science come from science , and some of the time , from the economy , and one comes from the musikbereich .
and interestingly , bono is also a ted prize winner .
so we can jump and a look at all the ted prize winner .
you see , we &apos;ll see the first time the first time it really is a net , not just from side to side , but much more abstract .
and so i want to show you what else is going to show you what a little surprise .
i just show you just the new york times website .
pivot , this application -- i want to call it a browser ; it &apos;s not a browser , but you can &apos;t show you about it , and we &apos;re going to give you this zoom-technologie website like this .
so i can go back a step back and take a specific sektion .
this is why important , because you just can see through the anschauen of websites in this kind of web , the whole way of the same way .
so i can get my mind in a particular way .
here &apos;s the most popular demonstration of the demonstration that i &apos;ve been sitting on here .
and i can sort of do anything that i &apos;ve been looked at today .
and if i go back to a step back and look at everything , i can look at my point after my such-vergangenheit , and here , i &apos;ve looked for the nepotistisch &apos; nepotistisch , here , after , or here , live labs labs .
and from here , i can go into the page and you can go back .
it &apos;s a metaphor that &apos;s dipping used to ever , and every time it makes it bigger than the sum of the datenteile .
in the moment , in this world , we think that data is a curse .
we talk about the curse of the fittest .
we &apos;re talking about the drowning in information .
what if we could take these situation and the internet on the head , so that we always get from one to a lot of things , and you start to make a lot of things , and see patterns that would be otherwise hidden ?
if we can do this , this is going to be the amazing , maybe a new source of information .
and instead of just moving in information , we can get from that .
and if we know knowledge , we might even pull even weisheiten out of it .
so i hear , thank you .
i grew up with a gehörigen portion science fiction .
in my school , i went to school to school every day every day a hour .
and my nose kept in a book , a science-fiction-buch , which my mind in other worlds , and on the erzählerische of the erzählerische , my deep tief in my sitzende , unersättliche befriedigte .
and this curiosity also , that i was always going to be in school , and i was not going to go through the forests , and proben , and proben and snakes and käfer and teichwasser and teichwasser and under the microscope .
i was totally wissenschaftsbegeistert , you know .
it &apos;s always about trying to understand the world and the limitations of possible .
and my love to science fiction seemed to be in my environment , because at the time , in the late 60s , we flew to the moon and the erforschten .
jacques cousteau came into our living rooms with his fascinating shows that animals and places and orte and a world of miracles that we &apos;ve never imagined before .
and that &apos;s probably fine to the science-fiction-rolle gepasst .
and i was artists .
i could draw . i could paint .
and there &apos;s no video games with computergenerierten movies still had the whole imagery in the media lab , i had to create the pictures in my head .
that &apos;s what we had to do , when we were a youngster to read a book , we took the description of the autors and the way it was on the screen in our heads .
my response to this is the drawing and painting of aliens , alien worlds , robots , raumschiffen and all of those .
in the matheunterricht , i was constantly amazed by the teachers , like i , hinterm , herummalte .
the creativity had to stop out .
and this is something interesting . what was that in jacques cousteau , i was fascinated by jacques cousteau casually , was the thought of a completely unknown world of our earth .
i would certainly never get a alien world with a spaceship , and that seemed pretty much .
but here was a world that i actually could actually enter here on earth , and she was just fascinating and exotic as all of that i used to be introduced when i read that books .
so i decided i was when i was 15 to become a gun .
the only problem was that i lived in a small village in canada , 1,000 miles away from the next ocean .
but i didn &apos;t have to do it .
i nervte my father , until he finally finally had a tauchschule in buffalo , new york , and i was done exactly on the other side of the border , where we lived .
i made my tauchschein in a pool of ymca in the winter in the winter in the winter , new york .
but the ocean , but a real ocean , i just got two years later , when we moved to california .
since the 40 years , the most exciting thing that are verstrichen , i &apos;ve spent about three hours under water . 500 hours in tauchbooten .
and i learned that the world of deep ocean , even in the most effective oceans , as rich as rich as we can &apos;t imagine .
the most important nature of nature doesn &apos;t have to be limits in the contrast of our own , human imagination .
until today , i was going to be the lowest awe for the days , i see the lowest awe for what i see on my dives .
and my love to the ocean is holding with the same intensity and ever .
when i was a erwachsener job , it was the filmmaking .
the best way to come up with my inner drang , to tell stories , to create , to create images .
as a child i drew the comic books and so .
so , films , the road , paintings and stories are going to put together .
of course , the stories that i was aussuchte , from the science-fiction-bereich , &quot; terminator , &quot; &quot; aliens . &quot;
in &quot; abyss , &quot; i could have my predilection for the unterwasserwelt and the diving with the filmmaking .
so , it &apos;s really my two passions .
something interesting happened in &quot; abyss &quot; to solve a erzählerisches problem in this movie -- and that &apos;s how we had to create a kind of liquid wasserwesen , we have to create computergenerierte animation , cg .
what was the first computergenerierte soft-surface-figur that ever had to see in a movie .
the movie came to the movie , just a few weeks , he played his own , but i realized that the audience on the world was the world &apos;s the magic , and the zauber of the west .
according to arthur cups , law is about bekanntlich technology and magic not to distinguish .
so they saw something magical .
and that &apos;s what i found was really exciting .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that has to be unbedingt in the filmkunst . &quot;
so we went to &quot; terminator 2 , &quot; my next film , even more .
together with ilm , we put the guy from liquid metal , and success is just about it all the way that effect would be .
and it worked . again , we had to take something magical . and the effect in the audience was the same . we &apos;ve got a little bit more money on the movie .
from these two experiences , a whole new world , a whole new world of creativity for creativity .
so i started a company , along with my good friend , winston , who was at the time of the best make-up- and creature-designer . she was called the digital domain .
the basic idea of this company was , it was the stage of visual printers and to start to start to start with digital produktionen .
we did that , and we do a wettbewerbsvorteil .
but the middle years of the 1990s , we realized that we were in the creature- and character-design -- what we had to do was actually -- we had to do the company to do .
i had written this piece of &quot; avatar , &quot; which was the most difficult of visual effects and computergenerierter effects in the whole new höhen , with a realistischen human , ausdrucksvollen , who should be synthesized with realistischen , and the hauptfiguren should be all cg . and the world should be cg .
but the ones that are very beautiful , and people in my company told me that we don &apos;t have to do that , we &apos;re not able to do that .
so i was driving this , and i made this other film over the big ship , the untergeht .
i have this as &quot; romeo and julia auf on a ship . it became a liebesfilm epischen , a leidenschaftlicher film .
but i wanted to actually be really interested in real wrack .
so i did the movie .
that &apos;s the truth . the studio didn &apos;t know .
i &apos;ve convinced you , by saying , &quot; we &apos;re diving to the conclusion . we &apos;ll just give it to the real .
we &apos;re going to show it in the eröffnungssequenz of the film .
this is immensely important . it &apos;s a good aufhänger for marketing . &quot;
and i persuaded them to finance a expedition .
sounds crazy . but it &apos;s going back to that the fact that your own imagination can create .
we actually created six months later , in a russian tauchboot , i was in a russian tauchboot wiederfand , four miles underneath the surface of the north , and i just put the real titanic through a bullauge .
that wasn &apos;t a movie , no hd , that was really .
so that &apos;s really blown me .
and the ones that was enormous . we had to use cameras and scheinwerfer and it all kinds of things .
and i noticed how much these tiefseetauchgänge , a weltraummission .
well , they were also hochtechnisch and bedurften umfangreicher .
you &apos;re going to go into these capsule , you &apos;re going to go into these dark , feindselige environment , where no hope is going to be a hope of rescue if you don &apos;t go back to yourself .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s just as if i was in a science-fiction-film .
this is really cool . &quot;
i was obsessed with the kind of the deep sea .
anyway , from the part of the part of the part of the curiosity and science , it was all . it was a abenteuer , it was curiosity . it was a vorstellungskraft . it was a lot .
and it was a experience that couldn &apos;t give me hollywood .
because , you know , i could imagine a creature , for that we could design a visual effect , but i couldn &apos;t imagine what i would see outside the fensters .
and i &apos;ve seen some of the following expeditions , and sometimes things that i haven &apos;t seen before before , sometimes things that ever had before ever seen before , and for the science of the science , when we saw them , they didn &apos;t found it yet .
so that &apos;s really richtig , and i wanted to go more .
and so i met a little unusual thing .
after the success of &quot; titanic &quot; i said , &quot; okay , i want to put my hauptberuf as a filmmaker in hollywood to the ice cream , and i &apos;ll put for a while . &quot;
and then we started , we were tauchten to the bismarck , and then they were using roboterfahrzeugen .
we &apos;re going to be the wrack of the titanic .
we took little robots that we built in a fiberglaskabel .
our intention was , hineinzutauchen and the insides of the ship , which never had ever been done before .
no one had ever the internal internal plan , and you had no resources to make it . so we evolved the world .
and i &apos;m now sitting on the deck of the titanic , in a tauchboot , and see planken , the diesen that this brettern here , pretty much more complicated and by whom i know that once the band has played there .
and i fly with a little roboterfahrzeug through the back of the ship .
i just bediene it , but my consciousness is inside of the vehicle .
it felt like i was physically in the schiffswracks of the titanic .
this was the most primitive form of a déjà-vu that i ever ever experienced , because before i &apos;ve ever been to ecke the ecke , i always knew what was going to be in the lichtkegel of the vehicle , because i was going to be used to the film when we were in the movie .
the other thing was , it was an accurate copy of the baupläne .
so that was a very highly strange experience .
she realized that you could use such roboterhafte avatare and so that you have to use such consciousness and the way that the way to the vehicle in the vehicle , in these other form of existence .
it was really a really profound thing .
and maybe a little bit of a way that might happen to what might happen in some decades , if you have cyborg-körper to do something about something or other things that i can imagine as a science-fiction-fan .
after this expeditions , we began to see what we had to see is , really appreciate , for example , to the tiefseequellen , where we saw these incredibly amazing animals , and that &apos;s basically the kind of extraterrestrial , but here &apos;s what &apos;s actually .
they live with the help of chemosynthese .
they don &apos;t exist in a confined entity , as we do .
and so you see animals that directly in a 500 degrees centigrade , they &apos;re going to be able to survive there .
at the same time , i was very interested in weltraumwissenschaft , that was the science-fiction-einfluss of my childhood .
and so i ended up with the people who are interested in space and the mit and the nasa and right weltraummissionen planning , and they &apos;re driving to russia , and they &apos;re going to go to russia , and they &apos;re going to go to the mission of the protokoll of the world &apos;s head , and then , then , we &apos;re going to take the international
that was fascinating .
but at the end , it was going to end that i took weltraumwissenschaftler with us .
i took them to the world with the world , astrobiologen , planetenwissenschaftler , planetenwissenschaftler , people who are interested in such extremes for these extremes , so i took them to take the sources , so they could take them out , and they could use the tools and so on .
we all of it , we have a lot of science , but actually science , it &apos;s a genauer .
so the circle of circle in the circle of my existence as a science-fiction-fan , when a kid , and the implementation in the reality .
in the course of this , i &apos;ve learned a lot .
i learned a lot of science , but now i think you &apos;re certainly thinking , a director must lead to be a leader like a schiffskapitän or something like that .
but i didn &apos;t understand much of leadership before i get these expeditions .
because at a certain point , i had to say , &quot; what do i do here ?
why do i do this ? what &apos;s going to happen ? &quot;
these blöden films don &apos;t give us a money .
we &apos;re just playing the key to the cost of it .
all of the thinking , i was between &quot; titanic &quot; and &quot; avatar &quot; and &quot; avatar &quot; davongelaufen and would have to be the nails on a towel on the beach .
i &apos;ve all these films , this is that this is what a very little audience made .
no fame , no honor , no money . what do you do ?
you &apos;re doing it to the task , to be the challenge of the challenge -- and the ocean is the most effective environment that there are , and because of the weird connection , the emerges , if a small group of people are being a team .
because we &apos;ve been doing all of these 10 to 12 people that have been on the years of the years , sometimes we were two to three months on the sea .
and in this community , you realize that the most important thing that is the most important thing that you have to have a set of each other , because you have a job that you can explain for any other than any other .
and if you go to land , and it turns out , &quot; we had to do it , the ganze , the ganze , and the whole thing that we &apos;re doing , and the trouble , the human body , and the trouble , you can &apos;t explain the other , and that &apos;s how to have police or soldiers who have been in common , and knowledge
there &apos;s a connection , a gegenseitiger respect .
so when i came up with my next film , &quot; avatar , &quot; i tried to try to use the same thing , which is that you &apos;re going to be respected and verdient in the back of the gegenzug .
so that &apos;s really changed the dynamism .
so i was going to go back with a little team on unbekanntem terrain , and we &apos;re like &quot; avatar &quot; with a new technique that it hasn &apos;t existed before .
incredibly exciting .
a huge challenge .
and we were given for a period of time , and a right now .
and it &apos;s changed my way to make films .
there were people who were the ones , we would have this ozeanwesen , really good and on the planet .
for me , it was more a more prinzipielle way to do my job , the actual process that has changed .
so what can we get from all of the things ?
what lessons we learned ?
i think the curiosity .
it &apos;s the most powerful human feature .
our imagination is a force that can actually create a reality .
and the achtung is rooted , more important than all the world &apos;s world .
and i get a young filmmakers to say , &quot; give me advice , how i can do something like that . &quot;
and i say , &quot; don &apos;t you even yourself .
the other thing you have to do is others . don &apos;t you even yourself , don &apos;t bet yourself . it &apos;s taking risks for you . &quot;
nasa has such a lieblingssatz , &quot; fail is not rocket . &quot;
but in art and explore to explore , we need to be an alternative , because there &apos;s a vertrauensvorschuss .
no important endeavor to break innovation , the innovation , ever as the risk of risk .
you need to be willing to take care of these risks .
this is the idea that i &apos;d like to give you to the path , and failure is a alternative , fear , but not . thank you .
today i &apos;m talking to you about energy and climate .
and this may be surprising because my vollzeitbeschäftigung is about the foundation to vaccines and the seed , to make the things that we invent and deliver to deliver the poorest billion a better life .
but energy and climate change are extremely important for these people , exactly , actually more important than any other than any other on the planet .
klimaverschlechterung means that their saaten are not growing over many years , and we &apos;re too much for too much , and things are going to change the things that they can &apos;t use their own environment .
it leads to hungersterben . it leads to uncertainty . it leads to unruhen .
so , it &apos;s going to be a climate change for you .
and also , the energiepreis is very important for you .
in fact , if you could reduce one of the things that you might have to be able to reduce the price , it would be a lot of the most significant thing .
now , the energiepreis is about time .
actually , it &apos;s based on energiefortschritten .
the kohlerevolution had the industrial revolution , and even in the 20th century , there was a vast case in the elektrizitätspreis , and so we &apos;ve got refrigerators , we can make a modern materials and so many things .
so we &apos;re in a wonderful situation in the rich world .
but if we cut the prize -- let &apos;s make the price of -- we &apos;re going to be on a new barrier and that &apos;s how to put it into co2 .
co2 and the equation is actually quite clear .
they summieren the ausgestoßene co2 , which leads to a very negative effects of the temperaturerhöhung and the temperaturerhöhung and the effekte and the effekte , that the natural ecosystems of the change is not able to adjust and all the way that they &apos;re eating with their own systems .
well , the exact relationship between a co2-anstieg and the dadurch temperaturveränderung and where their other consequences are there , but there &apos;s a lot of it , but not many .
and there are certainly about how bad that are these folgen , but they &apos;re extremely bad .
i &apos;ve asked the top-wissenschaftler , &quot; we really have to come up to close to close to zero ?
it &apos;s not half half or a quarter ? &quot;
the answer is : until we get close to zero , the temperature will continue to increase .
so it &apos;s a big challenge .
it &apos;s very different than to say , we have a three-and-a-half foot of high seas , under three feet , and then you can just put it on the right .
this is going to go down to zero .
well , we &apos;re going to use a lot of kohlenstoffdioxid , over 26 billion tons of tons .
each americans about 20 tons of tons of poor countries , less than one .
in average , it &apos;s about five tons of every year on the planet .
and somehow we need to change change that has gone on zero .
it &apos;s been a constant .
only different economic change has been affecting it all , and we need to go from rapidem increase to reducing and reduction to zero .
this equation has four factors . you &apos;ve got this thing -- co2 , you want to bring it to zero , and that &apos;s going to be a number of people who are going to be able to use the service , the average energy of the service and co2 , the co2 , the average energieeinheit .
so let &apos;s look at every factor of each other , and we think we &apos;re going to get it to zero .
probably , one of these numbers are very close to zero .
now this is a fundamental algebra , but we &apos;re going to go through .
first we have the population .
today live today billion people living in humans today .
and it &apos;s billions of 9 billion dollars on 9 billion dollars .
if we &apos;re very successful with new vaccines , the gesundheitsvorsorgung and reproduktionsmedizin , we might be able to reduce it for 10 percent to 15 percent , but we &apos;re going to see a slope about 1.3 .
the second factor are the services we use .
the optimal thing that we do is that food that we eat , clothing , television .
these are very good things and armutsverringerung , that service almost to make any one to each other to make any everyone on the planet .
it &apos;s great that this number goes up .
in the rich world , in the upper billion , we could make sure we could make more abstriche and less use , but in average , that number of each year , they &apos;re going to be more than doubles than doubles , the number of services that are going to be described .
here &apos;s a very basic service . there &apos;s a very big light , so you can read the homework ?
and these students don &apos;t have it , so they go out and read their schulaufgaben under the straßenlicht .
now , in efficiency , the e , the energy per service , there &apos;s finally good news .
we have something that doesn &apos;t work , not rising .
because of all of the successes in the lichtsektor , through other autotypen , through new methods , there are many services , and they have a lot of the most individual services to reduce 90 percent .
in other , the manufacturing of düngemitteln , 105 : 56,000 -- 00 -- 00 -- 00 : 58,000 or luftverkehr , is the spielraum for improvement , and it &apos;s a lot of small .
in the same time we &apos;re optimistic , we might have a reduction for a factor of three or maybe even a factor of a factor of a factor of a factor of a factor of a factor of a factor of a factor .
but the first three factors we &apos;ve gone from 26 billion on allerbestes billion tons of 13 billion , and that &apos;s just not enough .
so let &apos;s see the fourth factor of -- and this is going to be a key feature -- that &apos;s the amount of co2 that will be emittiert .
it turns out the question , whether you can get that to zero .
if you burn coal : no .
if you burn natural gas : no .
almost every herstellungsmethode of electricity today , co2 , besides renewables and nuklearenergie .
so what we need to do on a global level is to create a new system .
we need energiewunder .
now if i &apos;m going to use the term &quot; miracle &quot; , i don &apos;t mean the impossible .
the microprocessor is a miracle . the computer is a miracle .
the internet and its services is a miracle .
people here have contributed to the development of this miracle .
normally , there &apos;s no evidence that you need a miracle to a specific date .
normally you &apos;re just bouncing , and some of some of them are not .
in this case , we have to give up and a miracle in a very short time .
well , i wondered how can i really get that ?
there &apos;s a natural illustration , a demonstration that &apos;s going to be here in the people ?
i remembered myself last year when i took her and kind of like that .
the idea was really important for you , you know , there are people who live with mosquitoes .
for energy , i noticed this .
i decided that the freilassen of my diesjähriger is going to be the umwelt of the environment .
so here &apos;s a few of natural fireflies .
you have to me that they &apos;re not going to bite . actually , they won &apos;t even leave the glass .
well , there are all kinds of spielereilösungen like this , but they don &apos;t get much .
we need solutions , either a unvorstellbare scale and unimaginable innovation , and although there are many directions , people are searching for people , i really just look at all of these big demands .
i &apos;ve been studying gezeiten , geothermal and biofuels .
this may be a moderaten contribution to the fact , and if you expect to be better than i expect , but my favorite thing here is that we have to work on all five of them , and we can &apos;t give them all of them , because they &apos;re all kinds of problems .
let &apos;s look at the burning fossil fuels , burning of either charcoal or natural gas .
what you have to do , may be just , but it &apos;s not just that , you have to get rid of the co2 that comes from the burn , and then lagern and then lagern and hoping that there &apos;s going to be there .
there are some of these pilotprojekte that are going to be on 60 percent of the time , but it &apos;s going to be very difficult to get it , and it &apos;s a huge opportunity to get the co2 of co2 , but the biggest problem here is the lagerzeitfrage .
who will make it make it ?
who can guarantee you a little bit of what &apos;s literally a lot of billions of waste , as any kind of waste you can imagine from nuklear- and other things ?
this is a lot of volume .
so this is a tough nut .
next : nuklearenergie .
it has three major problems , and the costs , especially in hochregulierten countries , especially in hochregulierten countries , the question that you really feel that nothing can &apos;t make anything wrong , despite the treibstoff of the fuel that the fuel is not used for weapons .
and what do you do with the waste ?
because even though it &apos;s not very big , there &apos;s a lot of concerns .
so three very difficult problems that might be soluble , and you should work .
the last three of five years i &apos;ve been .
it &apos;s renewables , as they &apos;re called .
and also , even though it &apos;s great , it &apos;s great that they don &apos;t need fuel -- they have some drawbacks .
one is the power that these technologies are affecting dramatically smaller than the kraftwerken .
these are energiefarmen , you &apos;re talking about many quadratkilometern , more than a normal power station .
and also , these sources are going to change these sources : these sources are going to be able to change .
the sun doesn &apos;t seem all day , they don &apos;t seem every day , and also , as the wind is not constantly .
so you have to be able to depend on these sources , a way that energy is in times when they &apos;re not available .
so there &apos;s great preisherausforderungen . there &apos;s the challenges of transmission , and if we say , the source outside of the country , they don &apos;t have to be just the technology , you need to be able to deal with the risk of what &apos;s going to happen to different from the other .
and there &apos;s the lagerungsproblem .
and to show you the dimension , i &apos;ve been looking at all sorts of batteries , the hergestellt , computer , computer , handys , handys , handys , handys , and i found that all the world , that we &apos;re going to make that all the batteries we &apos;re going to produce is that we might be able to be able to be less than 10 minutes
so we need a big breakthrough , something that to be 100 100 100 100 times better than the public .
that &apos;s not impossible , but it &apos;s not so easy .
that &apos;s what happens when you try to say this unterbrochenen sources of say we &apos;re 20 percent of the world .
if you want to be 100 percent of it , you need an incredible wunderbatterie .
well where we should go , what is the right approach ?
a &quot; manhattan project &quot; ? how do we get to the target ?
what we need are many companies working on it . hundreds . hundreds .
in every one of these five areas , we need to use 100 people .
in many , you &apos;re going to say , are crazy ! that &apos;s good .
i think there &apos;s a lot of group in the ted group that &apos;s already there .
bill gross big companies have several companies , under a namens called großartige .
vinod khosla invested in dozens of companies doing great things and interesting ways to support and i try to support that .
nathan myhrvold and i &apos;m funding a company , maybe a company , maybe a überraschenderweise approach .
there are some innovations in the nuklearbereich , modular .
the development has stopped in this industry before you stopped a while , so it &apos;s not a big surprise that some good concepts .
the terrapower-konzept means that you &apos;re instead of a part of the urans , the one percent , the u235 , we decided to burn the 99 percent to burn .
this is a pretty crazy idea .
but in fact , you had to be a long time , but you could never keep it to simulate if it would be , but since it &apos;s going to be able to simulate , you can simulate it and see that , yes , there &apos;s a lot of materialienherangehensweise , it looks like it &apos;s going to be profitable .
and because you &apos;re going to see this 99 percent , it &apos;s a lot better than it .
actually , you actually burn the waste , and you can even use the waste of today &apos;s waste as a antriebsstoff .
instead of it , you burn it on your head , you just burn it . a great thing .
the uranium will used to use a little bit of graduell , a little bit of a candle .
you see that it &apos;s a kind of sound , often as &quot; wandernde wave . &quot;
the way that really solve the treibstoffproblem .
here &apos;s a picture of a place in kentucky .
this is the waste that 99 percent . you &apos;ve got the part of the part of the today , so it &apos;s called it called aufgebrauchtes uranium .
the triebe that were the u.s. north for hundreds of years .
and if you can go and günstig and filtriert , you get enough fuel for the rest of the planet .
you know , there &apos;s lots of challenges there , but it &apos;s a example of many hundreds of concepts that we need to get forward .
now we &apos;re thinking about how we should measure our success .
how should our minds look like ?
now , we go to the goal we have to achieve and then we &apos;re talking about the zwischenschritt .
many of a 80 percent reduction to 2050 .
it &apos;s really important that we &apos;re going to get there .
the rest of 20 percent are produced in poor countries , and still slightly different agriculture , and hopefully , hopefully waldrohdung and cement to clean clean .
so , to reach this 80 percent , the developed , the developed , including countries like china , to completely umstellen their elektrizitätsgeneration .
the other note is going to be whether we use the null-emissionen technology , whether it &apos;s in all the developed countries , and we &apos;re on the road to get them to the rest .
this is great important .
this is going to be a major part of this .
if we go back from there , how should the 2020 shall look like ?
it should be implanted the two elements .
we should use the effektivitätsmaßnahmen to bring reduction to the way , the less we &apos;re going to be emittieren , the less likely to be the co2-summe and the temperature .
but actually , this is the fact that we &apos;re doing business for the things that we &apos;re not completely completely to the grand reduktionen , just a little bit less important as the other , which is the speed of innovation for that breakthroughs .
these are these breakthroughs , we have to follow with vollgas and we can measure them : in firmenzahlen , in pilotprojekten and regulierungsänderungen .
there are lots of great books to this topic .
the al gore book &quot; we have the choice , &quot; david mckays energy energy . &quot;
they really go through and create a framework where this is made of the area of that this is made of being made of being made of that , because we need for all of the sides .
there &apos;s some of the things that got to come .
this is a wish .
a very konkreter wish that we invent this technology .
if you just give me one wish for the next 50 years , i could pick the president , a vaccine , and i love that wish , is that , halbierter energiepreis without co2 , without co2 , i will put it into this wish .
this has the greatest impact .
if we &apos;re not going to get this wish , the addition between the long and kurzfristig are madly in the united states and the kurzfristig , between the united states and china , and almost all of the life of these two billion &#93; will be a lot worse .
so what do we need to do ?
for what &apos;s going to do i do ? i do ?
we need to use more for more .
when countries meet in places like koppenhagen , they &apos;re not just talking about co2 .
they should discuss these innovationsstrategie and they were shocked by the ridiculously geringen of the geringen that are spent on these innovative approaches .
we need marktanreize , co2 , cap &amp; amp ; it &apos;s something that a preissignal creates a preissignal .
we need to spread the message .
we need to have dialogue and curriculum and the things that are being done by the government .
it &apos;s a big wish , but i think we can fulfill it .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you . thank you .
thank you very much . just to understand the little better better -- to say , can you give us a sense of the scale of that investment ?
bill gates : to get the simulation of a supercomputer , all the great scientists , all of the great scientists , we &apos;ve just been doing some 10 million of them , and even if we &apos;ve tested our materials in a russian test , to make sure that it &apos;s just in the 100en million .
the difficult step is to build the first reaktors , another billion , the regularien and the place that are building the first place .
once the first done is , when he promised , when he promised , it &apos;s all right , because the wirtschaftlichkeit is so different as we know them .
to understand this , it means deep in the ground almost like a vertical column nuklearen , this verbrauchten urans , and then the process starts to go down and go down ?
bg : right . today , you need to be fully neu , so many people can go and lots of people , and so many of the things that you can go and öffnet it and sachen and sachen and sachen and herausbringt . that &apos;s not good .
if you have very cheap fuel , you can befüllen it for 60 years -- think of a column -- they buried , without all the complexities .
and it &apos;s sitting there and there &apos;s been 60 years for 60 years .
a nuklearreaktor , which is a solution to the garbage .
bg : yeah . now , what happens to the waste : you can sit it -- there &apos;s lots of waste with this method -- then you take it and put it into the next , and burning it in the next to the next page .
and we start by the trash , which is already , which exists in these kühlbecken or trockenbehältern in the reactors . that &apos;s our startbrennstoff .
so this is what that reactors was a problem that we &apos;re going to fill in our underwear and it will reduce the müllvolumen dramatically in this process .
but while you &apos;ve talked about the world over these things over these ways , over these ways , talked about these ways of these things .
where is the greatest interest , so what really really is ?
bg : well , we don &apos;t have a place that we haven &apos;t yet put on a place , and there &apos;s a lot of interesting offenlegungsregeln in the name of the company , and there &apos;s a lot of interessanter in russia , india , china -- i was here , and i &apos;ve been talking about the energieminister and i talked about it , and talked about
i &apos;m optimistic . you know , the french and japanese have something in the direction .
this is a nuance of a thing that was done .
this is a very important step forward , but it &apos;s like a speeding , and some countries have built this built , so everybody has been a schnellen reactor , a kandidatat for our first .
in your mind : there &apos;s a chance to get a little bit of that ?
bg : now we need one of these skalierbaren , stromgenerierenden things that are very cheap , we &apos;ve been able to invent 20 years for the erfinden and then 20 years .
this is the kind of the ones that has us to have the most powerful miserable that we need to cover .
and you know , terrapower , if everything goes well , and this is a big wish , could it be easy .
and fortunately , there are dozens of companies , and we need hundreds , the same , if you work , if you work , if you work , that &apos;s the capacity for their pilots , for it .
and it would be best when it can make them , because then you could use a mixture of a mixture .
anyway , we need a solution .
the great kinds of hurdles , is this the greatest thing you know ?
bg : a energiedurchbruch is the most important .
it would be without the umweltherausforderung , but the power of it so much more importantly .
in the nuclear sector , there are other companies .
you know , we don &apos;t know their work as well as these work , but there &apos;s the modular method that &apos;s a different approach .
there &apos;s a flüssigen reaktortyp , which seems to be difficult , but maybe that &apos;s what we say .
and so there &apos;s different , but the beauty of this is that a million times as a result , and therefore , if you can do a kohlemolekül , and that &apos;s where they &apos;re going to deal with the issues , and the key to the fußabdruck , the potential to the country and other things , almost in a kind of eigenen .
if that doesn &apos;t work , what ?
we need to be notfallmaßnahmen to try to keep the erdtemperatur stable ?
bg : if you get too much too long , and just a heart attack in front of a heart attack , and what do you do ? you might need a herzoperation or something like that .
there &apos;s a forschungsrichtung that &apos;s called geoengineering , which is to move the warming , so we &apos;re 20 to 20 or 30 years of the time for us .
this is just a versicherungsmethode .
you &apos;re hoping that we don &apos;t need that .
some people say , you shouldn &apos;t just work on insurance because you might make a difference , so you keep going to eat , because you know that one will save the herzoperation .
i don &apos;t know if you &apos;re the smart that you &apos;re going to see the importance of this problem , but there &apos;s a discourse of geoengineering about whether you should have this to be able to get the way that things come up , or this innovation , is that we expect .
klimaskeptiker : have you a or two sentences for you to persuade them ?
bg : well , unfortunately , the skeptics of the world &apos;s skeptic and very different .
the ones that make scientific arguments are very little .
tell you that there are negative effects that have to do with the clouds , the things that are doing ?
there are very , very few things that you can say , from which there &apos;s a chance of a million .
the hauptproblem here is like that , like aids .
you make the mistake right now , and you &apos;re going to pay for a lot later .
and so the idea is , if you have all kinds of dringenden problems , you know , you &apos;re not going to be sure what &apos;s been in the world , and it &apos;s not necessarily the most popular , and there &apos;s people in the rich world that are at the rich world , and say , okay , that &apos;s not a big drama .
the fact is that this uncertainty should be concerned .
but my dream here is that if you take it out , and the same thing , it &apos;s not the co2 , i &apos;m not sure that it &apos;s not a co2 emittiert , i &apos;m not going to be able to do it , but i &apos;m going to end it because it &apos;s cheaper than the previous method . &quot;
and this would be the answer to the björn lomborg , that if you use all of these time and energy to solve all of these other goals , the bekämpfung of malaria and so on , that it &apos;s a dumb waste of resources , and so that it &apos;s a dumb waste of resources , whereas there are better things that we can do .
bg : well , the real spending spending -- we should say the u.s. should be 10 billion dollars a year , more than you &apos;re going to do today -- that &apos;s not dramatic .
and if you don &apos;t suffer any other things .
you get to great and there &apos;s big geldsummen , and here &apos;s reasonable people disagree if you &apos;ve got something that isn &apos;t really exciting , and trying to finance that . for me , it &apos;s where the most waste .
it &apos;s because you &apos;re very short to a kostendurchbruch and funded , just the recognition . i think we should try to do more things that have been a lot of cheaper .
if you get the abstrich , you get a very high energiepreis , you can only get the rich .
i mean , each of us could have five times a lot of time for our energy to change its lifestyle .
for the lower two billion , but it &apos;s a disaster .
and even lomborg .
his new masche is now : why is the research not more about doing more ? &quot;
it &apos;s still going to tell you about his former stories , with the skeptiker-camp , but he understood that this is a very lonely group , and therefore he &apos;s going to make it forschungsargument .
and this is a gedankengang that i think for appropriate .
the research , it &apos;s just crazy , as little .
bill , i think i &apos;m talking about almost all people here , if i say , i really hope you &apos;re going to be true . thank you .
bg : thank you .
a few years ago , here at ted , child peter skillman was a design-wettbewerb called &quot; the marshmallow-herausforderung . &quot;
the idea is pretty simple . vierer-teams need to have the größtmögliche structure of structure with 20 times , about a 1m duct tape , about a 1m and a marshmallow .
the marshmallow has to be on top .
and even though it really seems to be really , it &apos;s really difficult to make it very quickly .
and so i thought that this is a interesting idea , and i &apos;ve transformed it into a design-workshop .
it was a huge success .
since then , i &apos;ve been done about 70 workshops in the world , and i was entwicklern with students , and architects , even with ctos and the problem , and there &apos;s something that is doing the depth of the working in nature and i want to share some of them .
normally , most people are starting to orient themselves to the task .
you talk about it , you think about how it &apos;s going to look like it , it &apos;s rangeln to power power to power power , to power it .
then you invest a little bit of time in planning and organization . they &apos;re skizzieren and legen .
and they invest in a lot of their time in the zusammenbau constantly , and they &apos;re going to be able to be able to see structures in the zusammenbau .
and finally , soon before they have no time , someone put it on the top , and you put it down to the top , and it &apos;s a step back and &quot; ta-da ! &quot;
but what &apos;s always happened , is that the &quot; ta-da &quot; is &quot; ta-da &quot; to a &quot; uh-oh &quot; because the weight of the marshmallows is that the whole thing is shifting and einstürzt .
there &apos;s a series of people who have much more &quot; uh-oh &quot; than others , and under the worst of the worst bwl-absolventen .
they lie to lie , they cheat , they &apos;re confused and produce dürftige .
and of course , there are also more teams , and under the best ones are fresh absolventen of the kindergartens .
and this is quite amazing .
as we did , we produce them , they don &apos;t just the highest towers , but also the most interesting structures of all .
what you might ask is : how does this happen ? why ? what is that ?
and peter &apos;s saying , &quot; neither of the children spend time at the spaghetti time in the spaghetti sauce . &quot;
it doesn &apos;t invest in machtkämpfe .
but there &apos;s another reason .
and that &apos;s that bwl-studenten trains were trained to find a real plan , ok .
and then it came to it .
what happens when you put the marshmallow on the top , they don &apos;t have time and what happens ?
it &apos;s a crisis .
sounds familiar , what ?
what kindergartenkinder is doing other things that they start with the marshmallow and prototypes , successful prototypes , with the marshmallow at the top , so that they have to use the opportunity to fix the opportunity to fix it .
konstrukteure erkennen this kind of collaboration as a core of a iterativen .
and with each attempt to get the children in the immediate immediate feedback of what works and not .
so the power of working with prototypes , is to be substantially -- but we see how different teams are operating .
the average likelihood of about 50cm , bwl-studenten , half of them , lawyers , lawyers , more and more , not much more , more than adults .
who is the most successful ?
architects and engineers , fortunately .
and the way is the highest thing i &apos;ve seen .
and why ? because they understand and sich-selbst-verstärkende the geometric geometric patterns that are the key to build stable structures .
so ceos have a little bit about average , but here &apos;s what it gets interesting .
you &apos;re going to have a exekutive administrator on the team , you &apos;re going to be more expensive .
it &apos;s amazing . you see it &apos;s going to be winning , &quot; this team will win . &quot;
you can predict the predictions . why is that ?
because they have special skills of the body .
they conduct the process , you understand it .
and this team , the regelt and the work is going to be the power of the team .
and spezialisierte skills and their kombination and their combination .
if you have 10 teams , the typical ones , you get about six , the stable structures .
i tried to do anything .
i thought we &apos;ll bring the pokereinsatz .
so i offered a $ 10000 award for software .
what do you think about these design-studenten ? &quot;
what was the result ?
this happened . not a team had a stable structure .
if you had a 2,5cm high school , he would have worn the prize home .
so it &apos;s not interesting that high levels of wetteinsätze have a strong effect ?
we were trying to do these practice with the same students .
what do you believe is that ?
now understood the benefit of the &quot;
so , this is the same thing that &apos;s the same , bad team of one of the best .
they produced the highest construction in the time .
there are so abundant lessons for us , over nature of antrieb and success .
you may ask , why would someone actually invest in time to create a marshmallow-challenge ?
the reason is , i &apos;m working on digital tools and processes to help teams , cars , cars , video games and visual effects .
and what the marshmallow-challenge is doing is it helps to identify them .
because frankly , every project has its own marshmallow .
the challenge offers a common experience , a common language to build the right prototype .
and this is the value of this experience , this kind of practice .
and those of them that are interested in , can be able to visit .
it &apos;s a blog where you see how you build the marshmallows .
there &apos;s a schritt-für-schritt-anleitung there .
and you find crazy examples of all the world , like people are going to optimize the system and raffinieren .
there &apos;s also weltrekorde .
and the most favorite lesson , i think is constructing a verbindender sport .
it requires us all our senses to the task and we use our thinking to our thinking about how our feelings and our feelings , that &apos;s where we &apos;re facing .
and sometimes a little prototype of these experiences , which it takes us from a &quot; uh-oh &quot; -- to a &quot; ta-da &quot; .
and that can make a big difference .
thank you .
so we do so we would have a machine here , a machine , a machine , a machine that we would have here .
a big machine , a cool machine , ted-artige machine , and that &apos;s a machine .
and everybody in this room has to be in this room .
and you can go into the past , you can go into the future ; you can &apos;t go in here and now , right now , right now , right now , you &apos;re going to stay right now , and now remain now , right now .
and i wonder what they would choose , because i &apos;ve asked my friends in my friends , and they wanted to go to the past .
i don &apos;t know . they wanted to return to the time before cars or twitter or &quot; the american &quot; and &quot; american . &quot;
i don &apos;t know .
i &apos;m convinced that you &apos;re somehow somehow hingezogen to wunschdenken .
and i understand that .
i &apos;m not part of this group , i have to say .
i don &apos;t want to go into the past , and not because i &apos;m a abenteurer -- i &apos;m a fan .
it &apos;s because of the opportunity to go back to this planet , you go forward .
so i want to go into this machine , and i want to go into the future .
this is the greatest time that there was ever ever on this planet , no matter what scale you : health , wealth , wealth , mobilität , gelegenheiten .
there was never a time like this .
my ur-großeltern died all of them were all over .
my grandparents is to bring this number to 70. 70. .
my parents are the 80 on the fersen .
so there should be a nine at the beginning of my todeszahl .
but it &apos;s not even about people like us , because this is a bigger thing than that .
a child that will be born today in new delhi today , such as long as the richest man in the world was 100 years ago .
think about it . this is an unbelievable fact .
and why is that ?
smallpox . smallpox , billions of people on this planet .
they have the demographics of the earth in a way that it has no war .
they &apos;re gone . they &apos;re gone .
we have it bezwungen . we &apos;re going to take it .
in the rich world , diseases that millions of us just in one generation , even more threatened .
diphterie , röteln , kinderlähmung ...
even anybody else , what &apos;s that ?
vaccines , modern medicine , our ability to feed , billions of people , that are successes of scientific method .
and from my perspective , the scientific method is , things , look , look , it works , if it doesn &apos;t do it , one of the greatest achievement of humanity .
so this is the good news .
unfortunately , this is the whole good news , because there &apos;s some other problems , and they were often mentioned , they were mentioned .
and one of them is that despite all of our achievements is a billion people in this world every day .
this number goes up , and they &apos;re going to go very quickly , and that &apos;s been .
and not only that , we &apos;ve used our imagination to be able to have this world .
drinking water , urbares country , rainforests , oil , gas : they disappear , and if we don &apos;t get ourselves from chaos heraus-innovieren .
so the question is : can we do that ? i think .
i think it &apos;s clear that we can produce food , the billion people will feed , without the country , to rape .
i think we can power this world with energy that they don &apos;t go away .
i really believe that , and no , that &apos;s not a wunschdenken .
but this is the night of my heel -- one of the things that i hold on night . we &apos;ve never really had the same time that now , as well as we &apos;ve never had to do this , even as i &apos;ve never had to do this , even more like now , never yet , still never yet .
and we also had never able to be able to provide it , vernünftig einzusetzten , as we can today .
we are at the cusp , amazing events on many , and yet i really think about hundreds of years ago , and we really have to go back to the enlightenment , to find a time to find a time where we have progress in the progress that we have about these things in the world , in more than now .
people are doing in their faith , and that &apos;s so tightly that you can &apos;t free them .
not even the truth will be free .
and hear everybody , every one has a right to his mind , even a right to the progress of the progress , to progress .
but you know what you don &apos;t have right ?
they don &apos;t have any right on your own facts . &apos; &quot; tschuldigung , they don &apos;t .
and i took a while to find out the way .
about a decade ago , i wrote a paper about &quot; the new yorker &quot; written , a little article .
and i was amazed to try to climb resistance , to resistance , to resistance , which is the most effective health initiative in the public health initiative .
i didn &apos;t know what i should do , so i just did what i always do , i wrote a paper and drove .
and soon i was going to show you a paper about the prime minister of wars .
the same thing , just bigger .
people were crazy .
so i wrote about this article , and i couldn &apos;t understand why the people thought that would be the frankenfood , &quot; why they believed that molecules was a kind of a random way of a random way of a zufällige kind of herumzuschieben in the field of nature .
but you know , i &apos;m doing what i do . i wrote the article , i headed .
i mean , i &apos;m a journalist , journalist , journalist , journalist , journalist , journalist , journalist , journalist , journalist , i &apos;m journalist , i &apos;m journalist , i &apos;m journalist , i &apos;m journalist , i &apos;m journalist , i &apos;m journalist , i &apos;m journalist , i &apos;m journalist , i &apos;m journalist , i &apos;m journalist , i &apos;m journalist , i &apos;m
we type , we &apos;re going to take a rich , we eat , that &apos;s okay .
but this article did me , and i couldn &apos;t figure out why , and eventually i found it .
and that &apos;s because that fanatics that i don &apos;t really have to do this crazy .
these were umsichtige people , educated people , decent people .
they were just like people in this room .
and that &apos;s been so confused , so i got to be so confused .
but then i thought , you know what , we &apos;re honest , are honest : honestly , we &apos;re honest .
we &apos;re at a point where we don &apos;t have the same relationship to progress as well as we used .
we &apos;re talking about zwiespältig of them .
we &apos;re talking about ironic that with little principles . &quot;
okay , there are reasons , and i think we know what are these reasons .
we have the trust in institutions , in authority , and sometimes in science , and there &apos;s no reason why that shouldn &apos;t be that .
you can just call a few names , and people will understand .
chernobyl , bhopal , bhopal , die , vioxx , weapons , the us-präsidentschaftswahl 2000 .
i mean , you know , you can choose your own list .
there are questions and problems with whom we believed that they were always right . they &apos;re just going to be skeptical .
ask yourself , ask you , you ask them , demand them .
don &apos;t take anything to granted .
but now , if you get the evidence , you have to adopt this evidence , and we &apos;re not good .
and i can say that from the reason we &apos;re living in a epidemic of fear , like i never saw them , and hopefully never see again .
about 12 years ago , a story was published a story , a horrible story that the autismus-epidemie mit with the measles , mumps , mumps and röteln vaccine .
very frightening .
and the studies was done to see if that was true .
and studies of studies should be done ; that &apos;s a serious issue .
the data came in .
the data came from the united states , from england , from sweden , from canada , and they were all the same , no correlation , no connection , no connection .
it doesn &apos;t matter any difference . it doesn &apos;t make any difference because we believe in anecdotes , we believe what we see , what we think is that we &apos;re feeling really feel .
we don &apos;t believe in a bunch of documents from a bündel , which gives us data , and i understand that , i think that &apos;s what we &apos;re all .
but you know what ?
the outcome of this was a devastating , katastrophal .
and much of this fact , the united states is one of the only countries in the world where the impfrate is going to be in the masern .
this is skandalös and we should be ashamed .
it &apos;s awful .
what happened is that we could do that .
well , i understand that . i do .
because there &apos;s somebody here ?
has one single one in the audience ever die of dying ?
it &apos;s not very often .
in this country , in this country , but the 160,000 time in the last year .
that &apos;s a lot of deaths in measles , 20 dollars .
but because that &apos;s not here , we can get it up , and people like jenny can be used to be transported and from the jenny and from the jenny and analphabetismus of platforms like oprah and larry live .
and you can do it because they &apos;re not connecting and correlation .
you don &apos;t understand that these things seem to be equally , but almost never the same .
and this is something that we need to learn , and it &apos;s very quickly .
this guy was a hero , jonas salk .
he &apos;s befreite us from one of the worst geißeln of humanity .
no fear , no qualen , kinderlähmung , puff .
the guy in the middle of the middle isn &apos;t so much .
he &apos;s called paul offit .
he has just developed a few people a rotavirus-impfstoff .
he can save the lives of 400- , 500,000 children per year in the developing world .
pretty good , isn &apos;t it ?
well , this is good , besides paul herumläuft and vaccines and says , how valuable they are , and they &apos;re just going to stop caring .
and that &apos;s actually what he &apos;s like .
so paul is a terrorist .
if paul in a public anhörung speaks , he can &apos;t get without any bewaffnete .
he gets calls calls home because people like to tell you that they know where his children are going to go to school .
and why ? because paul has made a vaccine .
i don &apos;t need to say , but vaccines are unentbehrlich .
you take them to go back to the disease , the disease , terrible disease , and that &apos;s what happens .
we &apos;ve now been expanding in this country .
and that &apos;s going to be worse , and pretty soon , kids will die again because that &apos;s just a question of numbers .
and they &apos;re not going to die of measles .
what is mit kinderlähmung ? we don &apos;t know ? why ? why not ? why ?
one of my colleagues has written me a few weeks ago , and i told you to be a little too .
no one ever told the ever before .
she would not be nicht their child . no one .
fine .
why ? because we don &apos;t have a kinderlähmung . and you know what ?
we had no kinderlähmung yesterday .
today , i don &apos;t know , maybe i &apos;m going to be a flugzeug in a plane , and you &apos;re going to go straight to los angeles , right now .
and in a few hours , and it &apos;s a car , and he comes down to long beach , and he &apos;s going to be a dieser of this fantastichen ted-dinner .
and he doesn &apos;t know that he &apos;s infected with a lähmenden disease , and we don &apos;t know that , because so that &apos;s how the world works .
this is the planet that we live in life . don &apos;t do that as if it &apos;s not .
we love to make us in lies in lies . we love that .
do you all the vitamins to be taken her up ?
echinacea , a little antioxidantium that helps them to the jumps .
i know you &apos;ve done this because half the americans are doing every day .
they take the stuff , and they take a alternative cure , and it doesn &apos;t make any difference how often we find that they &apos;re useless .
the data is doing this .
they &apos;re doing their urine , more do you almost never .
this is okay , you want to pay for 28 billion dollars for the green .
i agree to you .
dark urine . dark .
why do we do this ? why do we do this ? why do we do this ?
well , i think i understand -- we hate the industry .
we hate to strong government . we don &apos;t have trust in the system .
and we should not have to do it . our healthcare system is mies .
it &apos;s cruel to millions of people .
it &apos;s completely amazing cold and seelentötend itself that can afford to us .
so we run out of the way , and where we walk ?
we run into the arms of the placebo-industrie .
this is great . i love the placebo-industrie .
but you know , this is really a serious issue , because that stuff is crap , and we give billions of dollars .
and i &apos;ve all of the little requisiten .
so , you know -- gingko , betrug , echinacea , betrug , betrug , because i don &apos;t even know what that is , but we give billions of dollars for it .
and you know what ? if i say that , i scream out to me , and say , &quot; what does it mean ? let &apos;s do what they want .
so you feel good . &quot;
and you know what ? you &apos;re wrong .
because it &apos;s no matter whether it &apos;s the gesundheitsminister , which says , &quot; hmm , i &apos;m not going to adopt the evidence of my experts , &quot; or any krebs-quacksalber , who wants to treat his patients with kaffe-einläufen .
if you &apos;re going to go on this path , where faith and magic , and science are replacing , they &apos;re going to be a place where they don &apos;t want to be .
they get to thabo mbeki in south africa .
he took 400,000 to his people , because he insisted that red beete , knoblauch and zitronenöl are much more effective than antiretroviral drugs that we know that they can put the trajectory of aids .
hundreds of thousands of unnötiger deaths in a country that &apos;s worse than any other disease .
please tell me that these things don &apos;t have consequences .
they have them . they always have .
well , the hirnloseste epidemic , where we &apos;re just right now , this is the kind of absurde battle between the befürwortern gentechnisch nahrungsmittel and the bio-elite .
this is a idiotische debate . you have to stop .
it &apos;s a debate about words , about metaphors .
this is ideology , not science .
all we eat , every reiskorn , every branch , every branch , every rosenkohl , has changed by the people .
you know , there was no mandarinen in the paradies .
there was no cantaloupe-melonen .
there was no weihnachtsbäume . we did all this .
we &apos;ve done it in the last several years .
and some of it worked , and some of it isn &apos;t .
we &apos;re not going to say what it doesn &apos;t work .
now we can make it more and , and of course , we can do something about it , but we can do something like a a in rice , and that stuff can help us to live in millions of people , millions of people .
that &apos;s not going to make it ?
i have to say , i don &apos;t understand .
we &apos;ve been to lehnen the gentechnisch food .
why do we do that ?
now , what i &apos;m thinking is : too many chemicals , pesticides , hormones , hormone , we don &apos;t want to have a huge fields with one thing that &apos;s wrong .
we don &apos;t want to patent that companies live .
we don &apos;t want to have that companies have .
and you know what my answer is to all this ?
yes , you &apos;re right . we &apos;re going to do this .
it &apos;s true , we have a huge nahrungsproblem , but that &apos;s not science .
that has nothing to do with science .
it &apos;s right , morality .
you know that science is not a company .
it &apos;s not a country .
it &apos;s not a idea ; it &apos;s a process .
it &apos;s a process , and sometimes it &apos;s going to work , but the idea that we shouldn &apos;t allow science to do their work because we &apos;re afraid of being a sackgasse , and it &apos;s a real sackgasse , and it &apos;s a real sackgasse .
you know , in the next 50 years , we will have to grow 70 percent more food than the moment . 70 percent .
this investment in africa has been over the last 30 years .
beschämend . &quot;
they need this , and we don &apos;t give them .
and why ? is the gentechnisch part .
we don &apos;t want people to encourage this verrottete stuff , like , like , for instance .
and the end is something that a half billion people eat .
it &apos;s about a potato .
it &apos;s just a sack calories . it &apos;s mies .
it has no nutrients , it has no protein , and scientists are building all of that in it .
and then people could eat the food and won &apos;t be blind .
they wouldn &apos;t starve to starve , and you know what ?
that would be beautiful . it wouldn &apos;t be chez , but it would be beautiful .
and everything i can say is : why are we going to fight that ?
i mean , let &apos;s ask ourselves , why are we going to take that ?
because we don &apos;t want to be genes ?
it &apos;s not about genes , genes . it &apos;s not about chemicals .
it &apos;s not about our ridiculous passion for hormones , our bodies are nahrung to international food , better food .
it &apos;s not about rice krispies , it &apos;s about getting people alive , and it &apos;s going to be a highest time to understand what that means .
because you know what ?
if we don &apos;t do that , if we do so close to us , we &apos;re doing something like that we do to something that we think , not guilty , high-tech colonialism .
there &apos;s no other description for what &apos;s happening here .
it &apos;s selfish , it &apos;s ugly , it &apos;s not our own military , and we really need to really stop .
so after this incredibly funny , you might want to say , &quot; you want to go back to this ridiculous and then in the future ? &quot;
anyway , i want to be on every case .
in the moment , you &apos;re going to be in the present , but we have an incredible opportunity .
we can put this machine on everything we want .
we can hinbewegen them where we want to hinbewegen them , and we &apos;ll move them where we want .
we need to lead this conversations , and we need to think , but if we go into the 10th , and in the future we will be relieved to have that .
i know that we can , and as far as it &apos;s about it , something that needs the world needs now .
thank you .
thank you .
i &apos;m interested in the placebo-effekt , and it may seem to be a magician that a magician is interested in this way , unless you look like this , as a deception , as a deception that will be just a little bit more tightly , if somebody &apos;s just stuck on it . &quot;
in other words , zuckerpillen have shown a measurable effect , which is just a measurable effect , which is just a pharmazeutische or a kind of -- for example , a pharmazeutische or a kind of -- for example , if you &apos;re just a patient , a measurable effect in the body that you call the placebo-effekt .
a deception will be a bit of something that &apos;s going to be like this .
so we also understand each other , i want to show you a fundamental piece of magic .
and i &apos;m going to show you how he works . this is a trick that at least at least since the 1950s , in every zauberbuch .
i even learned it from the cub scout of the pfadfinder in the 1970s .
i &apos;ll give it to you and then explain it .
and then i &apos;ll explain why i &apos;m going to explain it .
so , look what happens .
the knife that you can examine it ; my hand that you can study .
i &apos;ll just hold it in my mind .
i got my sleeve back .
and to make sure that nothing in my sleeve disappears or from him , i &apos;ll just put my wrist right here .
so , in this way , you can see that there &apos;s no time anything to any time . as long as i &apos;m here , there &apos;s nothing to my sleeve or not .
and the goal is just very simple .
i &apos;m going to open my hand , and hopefully , when everything goes well , it &apos;s messer by my naked physical law .
it &apos;s actually so tightly in his place that i can shake it without a knife .
nothing like this is going to be in my sleeve or come out , no trickserei . and they can examine anything .
ta-da !
now , this is a trick that i often have to do with little kids who are interested in magic , because you can learn much about deception when you look closely , even though it &apos;s a very simple trick .
probably , many of you probably know about this room here .
it works : it works : it works : it works : it works : it works : it works : it works .
i hold the knife in my hand .
i say i &apos;m going to make my wrist umschließe to make sure that nothing in my sleeve disappears or herauskommt , and that &apos;s a lie .
the reason i &apos;m going to make my wrist festhalte is that the most secret of the illusion is .
in the moment , where i &apos;m going to show you my hand from them , so you see this finger , you see this finger , my zeigefinger , just where he was , in a position where he &apos;s so potent .
it &apos;s great of the same time ?
there &apos;s somebody who had no childhood .
so , he &apos;s right here . right .
and if i umdrehe , it changes the finger .
and now you could talk about why that &apos;s a deception that you don &apos;t know three fingers , because the intellect and the way it &apos;s verarbeitet , they don &apos;t count information , they don &apos;t count , one , two , three , it &apos;s a group .
but this is what &apos;s really about this , and then i open my hand .
of course , it &apos;s going to be there , but not by the magnetism of my body , but by a trick , through my zeigefinger , the right now .
and if i try my hand , the same thing , i &apos;m going to see the same thing , by looking at me , by this movement , that the fingers is going to be verborgen .
i take this hand away . and here &apos;s the knife .
this trick can be your friends and neighbors . thanks .
now , what has to do with the placebo-effekt ?
a year ago or so , i read a study that really was really caught .
i &apos;m not a doctor or researchers , and therefore , that was a amazing thing .
it turns out , if you &apos;re a dummy placebo in the form of a white pill , in the shape of a aspirintablette , it &apos;s just a round of a round , white pill that has a particular messbaren .
but if you take the shape , you can change the dummy time , for example , to change , and these blue color and a letter is going to be in the measurable effective of the way .
and that &apos;s not any of these pharmazeutische , it &apos;s just zuckerpillen .
but a white pill is not as good as a blue pill .
what ? that made me really freak .
but it turned out that that &apos;s not all that .
if you take a capsules , the more effective more effective than the system of a no-brainer .
a colored capsule that &apos;s going to a end and the other red is better than a white capsule .
the difference is a role .
a pill a day , not as good as three pills -- i can &apos;t remember the exact statistics . i &apos;m sorry .
but the key thing is , &quot; ...
and that &apos;s also that the dosierungen play a role .
and the shape plays a role .
and if you want to have the ultimate placebo-effekt , you have to grab the needle .
right ? a syringe with a wirkungslosen -- a few milliliter of a wirkungslosen substance that you call a patient .
this creates a very strong picture in your head . this is much stronger than a white pill .
this chart is really -- i &apos;m going to show you another time when we have a shot .
so the fact is that the white ball isn &apos;t as well as the blue pill that not as well as a capsule that doesn &apos;t feel as well as the needle .
and none of it has really insidious eigenschaft , it &apos;s just our faith to be able to do that in us .
i wanted to know if i could use this idea for a magic trick .
i suppose that obviously a deception is deception , and it &apos;s really going to look like it .
we know from that study that you have to reach the needle , if it &apos;s going to go to the thing .
this is a 18 inches long . it &apos;s very , very , very spitz . and i &apos;m going to start you first .
this is really my meat . it &apos;s not damians spezielles meat .
this is my skin . this is not a special thing .
i &apos;m going to put this needle in my skin and through them until they &apos;re going to go back to the other side .
if you drop it in a little bit of it -- if you drop it down , i &apos;ve got a few friends in the hotel night , and some people who didn &apos;t know , and i &apos;ve had a woman &apos;s almost nearly nearly nearly .
so i propose if you &apos;re going to be able to get quickly , you look for the next 30 seconds , or you know what , i &apos;m going to make the first collapse of the back here .
you can see it right now , but you can also have a wegsehen , if you want .
so , it &apos;s like , right here , where my meat starts , at the bottom of my own , i just want to make a little einstich .
i &apos;m sorry . make it crazy ?
and now just a little bit of my skin and on the other side of the same .
now we &apos;re actually in the same situation that we had to be messertrick .
about about it .
but now you can &apos;t count my fingers , or ?
so , i &apos;m going to show you . this is one , two , three , four .
well , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah ,
i know what people think if you see that .
they say , &quot; okay , that &apos;s not so stupid and durchsticht himself , just the skin , just to talk about a few minutes . &quot;
now , i &apos;m going to show you .
what looks like ? pretty good .
yes , i know .
and people say back to the people , &quot; okay . i haven &apos;t seen this . &quot;
people are coming in the nebenräumen .
let me show you from me .
this is really my skin . that &apos;s not a special thing .
this is my meat , and i can browse it .
i &apos;m sorry . if you &apos;re going to break you , look at it , look at it .
people like this , or the people who see that later on the day , i think , &quot; well , this is actually quite familiar with this , but if it &apos;s really , it would be , you know , it would be a hole and there , if it really would be , it would really be . &quot;
okay , let me just give you a little bit of blood .
yes , there &apos;s it .
usually , i would have to take the needle .
i would clean my arm , and show you that there are no wounds .
but i think this is going to be this framework and with intention , from a deception , i &apos;m going to just go to the needle and go to the stage .
we &apos;re going to have a few times more time .
i hope you &apos;ll enjoy it . thank you .
everybody talks about happiness .
i have some people who count the number of books that have been published in the last five years , and they were going to be about 40 years , and there was a lot more .
there &apos;s a tremendous wave of the interest in the world .
there &apos;s lots of glücks-coaching .
everybody would like to make people happier .
but despite all these kinds of work , there are several cognitive ones that are sort of a lot of the most fundamental , right , right now .
and my talk today is going to be hauptsächlich by these cognitive biases .
this is true for laien , and it &apos;s true for scientists , and it &apos;s true for scientists , because it turns out that we &apos;re just as varied as any other .
the first of these traps are a widerstreben , complexity , complexity .
it turns out that the word happiness is just not a useful word because we &apos;re going to apply it to many different things .
i think there &apos;s a particular meaning that we could do it , but in large and all of the time , that &apos;s something that we have to be made of , and we will have to take the complicated view of what is going to be in .
the second case is a subset of experience and memory : basically , it &apos;s between happy in his life and happy his life or happy with his life .
and these are two very different concepts , and they &apos;re both zusammengeworfen in the idea of happiness .
and the third is the konzentrations-illusion , and that &apos;s the first fact that we can &apos;t think about a situation , which is to affect the wellness , without breaking its meaning .
i mean that &apos;s a real cognitive trap .
there &apos;s just no way to get it right .
now i &apos;d like to start with someone who had a frage-und-antwort-sitzung to one of my lectures , who had a story of a student who said , &quot; he said , he had a symphony , and it was absolutely beautiful music , and it was totally beautiful music , and it was a fürchterliches geräusch .
and then he added , really quite emotionally , that has been ruined all the experience .
but that didn &apos;t .
what it was ruined the memories of the experience .
he had had experience .
he had 20 minutes of herrlicher music .
they don &apos;t get a recollection of verblieben , the memory was ruined , and the memory was all the time that he had to keep .
what really is that we really want to think about ourselves and over other people think about two types of self .
there &apos;s a erlebendes self that lives in the present and the present , is able to experience the past , but basically the present .
it &apos;s the erlebende self that the doctor &apos;s doctor -- you know , when the doctor says , &quot; do it hurt when i &apos;m sitting here ? &quot;
and then there &apos;s a erinnerndes self , and the erinnernde itself is the mitzählt and the story of our lives , and it &apos;s just a little bit of the doctor that makes the question of asking the question : &quot; how did you feel like that ? &quot;
or &quot; how was your journey after albania ? &quot;
these are two different units , the erlebende self and the erinnernde itself , and the two and the two is part of the durcheinanders of the happiness .
well , the erinnernde itself is a storyteller .
and this really starts with a fundamental response to our memories -- it starts instantly .
we don &apos;t just tell stories when we &apos;re making ourselves to tell stories .
our memory tells us stories that is called what we &apos;re teaching with our erlebnissen , is a story .
and let &apos;s start with an example .
there &apos;s a old study .
these are actual patients that have a painful procedure .
i &apos;m not going to go into the details . it &apos;s not more painful , but she was painful when this study was done in the 1990s .
they were asked to report all the 60 seconds of pain .
and here are two patients . these are your record .
and they &apos;ll ask , &quot; who &apos;s got more suffered more ? &quot;
and this is a very simple question .
patient b has been more gelitten . his darmspiegelung was longer , and every minute of pain , and every minute of pain , the patient had a patient , and more .
but there &apos;s another question : how much thought that they were doing that they were driving ? &quot;
and here &apos;s a surprise : a surprise : a surprise : a surprise : a surprise : a surprise : a surprise : a surprise : a surprise , a surprise : a surprise : a surprise , a surprise : a surprise : a surprise , a surprise : a surprise , a surprise : a surprise : a surprise , a surprise : a surprise , a
and the surprise is that a much more schlechtere erinnrung in the darmspiegelung had been a patient or patient b.
the stories of the darmspiegelungen were different , and because a very key part of the history is , as you end .
and none of these stories is very erbaulich or great -- but one of them is that one of them .
but one of them is worse than the other .
and the worse , the worse was the worse where the pain was on the end of the end of his peak , it &apos;s a bad story .
where do we know ?
because we asked these people after their darmspiegelung , and also a lot later , &quot; how bad was the whole thing ? &quot;
and she was much worse for a a for b .
now , this is a direct conflict between the erlebenden self and the erinnernden itself .
from the erlebenden itself , the b had clearly had a single time .
now what you could do with patient , and we &apos;ve been doing clinical trials , and it &apos;s done , and it &apos;s done , and it &apos;s done , you could actually take the darmspiegelung of a a , just to put the tube in it without to shake it .
this is going to lead that the patient &apos;s suffering , but just a little less than before .
and if you do this a few minutes long , you &apos;ve been able to do that the erlebende itself is about a bad thing , and you &apos;ve been able to say that the erinnernde itself is much better , because now , you have a better story of his experience .
what does it draws a story from ?
and this is true for the stories that are going to us and it &apos;s true for the stories that we invent .
so what a story is about auszeichnet , significant and end .
end , very , very important , and in this case , the end of the end .
now , the erlebende itself is alive .
it has augenblicke the erlebens .
and you ask : what happens to these moments ?
and the answer is really simple . they &apos;re lost forever .
i mean most of our lives -- and i &apos;ve got the idea that the psychological present long as about three seconds long . what means , you know , there &apos;s a life about 600 million of them , in a month , there &apos;s about 600,000 . most of them don &apos;t leave .
most of you are completely ignored from the erinnernden itself .
and yet , you get the idea that you should count , that what &apos;s happening in this augenblicke is what happens .
it &apos;s the finite resource that we use as we are in the world .
and how we use it to be important to be important , but that &apos;s not the story that the erinnernde itself .
so we have the erinnernde self and the erlebende self , and they &apos;re really quite different .
the biggest difference between them is the ability to time .
from the sicht of the self , if you have a vacation , and the second week is so good as the first week , the most zweiwöchige vacation is going to be used as well as the einwöchige vacation .
so that &apos;s not the way that doesn &apos;t work for the erinnernde self .
for the erinnernde itself , a zweiwöchiger is a zweiwöchiger urlaub than the einwöchige vacation , because there &apos;s no new memories .
they don &apos;t have changed the history .
and in this way , time actually is the critical variable that has a erinnerndes self from a erlebenden self , and it &apos;s very little influence on this story .
now , the erinnernde itself itself is to remember and stories .
it &apos;s actually , the decisions that it &apos;s true , because if you have a patient , we had two two different surgeons in two different surgeons and decides that it &apos;s supposed to pick up the memory , the one who has the memory that &apos;s less bad , and that &apos;s the surgeon that will be selected .
the erlebende itself has no voice in this election .
actually , we don &apos;t choose between them , and we choose between memories of experiences .
and even if we think about the future , we don &apos;t think we don &apos;t think of our future as a experiences .
we think about our future for a vorausgesehene memories .
and basically , you can look at this , you know , as a tyrannei of the erinnernden itself , and you can think of the erinnernde itself as one , which is the kind of erlebende self by experiences that don &apos;t need the erlebende itself .
i have the impression that if we &apos;re going to do this , we &apos;re very often the very often , which means we &apos;re doing vacation vacation for the services of the services of the services .
and this is a little bit difficult to justify , i think .
i mean , how much zehren we are from our memories ?
this is one of the explanations that will give you the dominance of the erinnernden itself .
and if i think about it , i think about a vacation that we &apos;ve been doing a few years ago in antarctica , the clearly of the best holiday i &apos;ve ever had , and i think , really often in relation to the relationship , as often i think of other urlaube .
and i &apos;ve probably got to my memories of my memories , i would say about 25 minutes over the last four years .
well , if i ever had to have the bed , i had a more stunde with the 600 images .
now , these are three weeks , and that &apos;s a number of hours .
there seems to be an antidote to a drum .
well , i may be a little extreme , you know , how little appetite i have to do this from memories , but even if you do more of them , it &apos;s why we spend memories of the weight of the weight that we give for the weight that we &apos;re going to give ?
so i want you to think about a complete thought .
imagine your next holiday , you know that at the end of the urlaubs , you &apos;re going to get your pictures and get a amnestisches drug , so you &apos;ll remember anything .
now , would you choose the same holidays ?
and if you would choose to be a different year-old one , there &apos;s a conflict of the conflict and you have to think about how they do that conflict , and that &apos;s really not obvious , because if you think you &apos;re going to get a answer , and if you think of the sense of memories you might have a different answer .
why we have the urlaube that we &apos;re going to have a problem that provides us with a choice between the two types of self .
now , both of the two forms of self are throwing two terms of happiness .
there are actually two concepts of happiness that we can use one .
so you can ask : how happy is that erlebende itself ?
and then you would ask questions : how happy are the augenblicke in life itself ?
and they &apos;re all -- happiness for obesity is a fairly complicated process .
which are the emotions that are going to be measured ?
and by the way , we &apos;re now quite a good idea of happiness about happiness itself .
if you ask the happiness of the happiness yourself , it &apos;s a very different thing .
this is not about how happy one is alive .
it &apos;s about how happy or is that the person is thinking about your life .
very different concept .
each of these terms is not different to the moral happiness , and i &apos;m an amazing about the exploration of the happiness that have been going to have the exploration of happiness , in exactly the way that they have to be exactly the way that they have .
the distinction between the happiness of the erlebenden itself , and the satisfaction of the erinnernden itself has been recognized in the last several years , and now you &apos;re going to be able to measure the two separat .
the gallup of the united states has a worldwide survey where the more than half of a million people have asked to think about what they think about their lives and over their lives and there were other efforts in the direction .
so in the last years we started learning about the happiness of the two ways of self .
and the main lesson that we think i think is learned is that they &apos;re really different .
you can know how happy somebody is with his life , and that teaches you really not much about how happy he lives and vice versa .
just to give you a sense of the correlation that is about .5 .
what this means is that if you were somebody and you would say , oh , his father is a zwei-meter-mann , how much would you know about his greatness ?
now , you would know something about his greatness , but there &apos;s lots of uncertainty .
they have so much uncertainty .
if i tell you that somebody is going to be a little bit of life on a scale of ten , they have a lot of uncertainty about how happy he is with his erlebenden .
so the correlation is low .
we know something about what the happiness of the glücks-selbst .
we know that money is very important , goals is very important .
we know happiness is mostly pleased to be satisfied with people we like , spend time with people we like .
there &apos;s other pleasure , but this is related .
so if you &apos;re lucky to maximize the lucky of the two types of self , they &apos;re going to do at the end of the end of the end of the end .
the implication of what i said here is that we really don &apos;t really imagine really ought to be a replacement for well-being .
it &apos;s a completely different notion .
well , quite , quite , a lot of reason we &apos;re not thinking about happiness is that we don &apos;t pay attention to the same things that we think about the same things , and if we live in life .
so if you ask the simple question , how happy people are in california are not going to get the right answer .
if you think that question , you think people have to be in california if you say , say , in ohio life .
and what happens is that if you think about life in california , you think about the difference between california and other places , and that difference is what we say , in climate .
well , it turns out that climate not very important for the erlebende itself is , and it &apos;s not very important for the nachdenkliche self , the decides that you &apos;re happy .
but because the most important self itself is , you can draw at the end -- some people could go to the end of california .
and it &apos;s kind of interesting to what happens to people who are going to go to california , and happier to the hope .
now , your erlebendes itself will not be happier .
we know that .
but one thing is going to happen . you think they &apos;re happier , because if you &apos;re going to think about it , you &apos;re going to be remembered what the weather was in ohio , and they &apos;re feeling that they have the right choice .
it &apos;s very hard to think about well-being , and i hope i &apos;ve got a sense of how hard it is .
thank you .
thank you . i have a question .
thank you .
now , when we &apos;ve been a few weeks ago , they &apos;ve been told me that it was a pretty interesting outcome that came out of this book .
is this something you can make us , because you have a few minutes now , you now have a few minutes ?
daniel kahneman : safe . sure .
i think the most interesting thing we found in the gallup survey is a number that we don &apos;t have to find .
we found that in terms of happiness itself .
if we looked at how feelings are playing with income .
and it turns out that under a income of 60,000 dollars in the year , for americans , and that &apos;s a very large idea of americans , about 600,000 , but it &apos;s a big representative of 600.000 , under a income of 600,000 dollars in the year .
60,000 .
dk : 60,000 .
60,000 dollars in the year are the people unhappy , and they &apos;re becoming progressively more confident , ever .
so we get a perfectly flat line .
i mean , i rarely saw so flat lines .
what happens is that , in fact , money is a kein , but that lack of money on a slow misery , and we can measure this misery , very clear .
in the sense of the other self , the self self , you get another story .
the more money you &apos;re making the more expensive you &apos;re doing .
this isn &apos;t true for emotions .
but danny , in the entire american system , it &apos;s about life , freedom , the pursuit of happiness .
when people take this befund seriously , i mean , it seems to be anything on your head , everything we believe in terms of steuerpolitik and so on .
there &apos;s a chance that politicians , that the country is going to be a befund like the seriousness of the seriousness , and then make it going to make it happen ?
dk : you know , i think there are tribute to the role of the glücksforschung in politics .
the recognition is going to be slow in the united states , no question , but in the united kingdom , you &apos;re going to go and in other countries that you &apos;re right now .
the people are doing it , you know , you should think about happiness when they think about politics .
it will take a while , and people will argue , whether they want to explore whether or whether they want to explore the lebens-bewertung or whether they want to explore the diskussion , so we need to lead this discussion .
as you can increase happiness can be very different depending on how they think and whether you think about the erinnernde self or whether you think about the erlebende self .
this is going to affect politics , i think , in the next years .
in the united states , you &apos;re going to have to measure the erlebnis-glück of the population .
this is what i think , i think , in the next one or two decades , you know , a lot of the world &apos;s law .
well , it seems to me that &apos;s subject , or should the most political political debate for the next few years .
thank you for the invention of economics .
thank you , danny kahneman .
i &apos;m jane mcgonigal . i &apos;m going to use video games .
i &apos;ve been going to take care of 10 years now , and my goal for the next decade is , it &apos;s easy to save the world in reality as they &apos;re saving in online-spielen .
i have a plan . i want to convince more people , including all of them , more time , more time with play and more tollerer games .
currently we spend three billion hours a week with online-spielen .
some of you might think , &quot; this is a whole lot of time for games . &quot;
maybe a lot of time , if you think about how many problems we have to solve the real world .
but in fact , my research institute at the institute of the future is exactly the opposite .
three billion hours a week , a week are not nearly enough enough to solve the world &apos;s location .
in fact , i &apos;m convinced that if we want to survive the next century to this planet , we have to increase this time .
i have calculated that the world &apos;s time at 21 billion hours per week .
and so , this may be a little bit more unlikely , so i &apos;m going to do it , if we &apos;re solving problems like hunger , poverty , global conflict and obesity , climate change , and obesity , we need to play games for 21 hours to end up to the end of the next decade .
no , i mean it really seriously .
why ? this image , pretty much , rather than i think that games are so essential for survival of human species in the future .
this is a tudor of the photographer .
he wanted to give the feelings to play . so he was going to put the spielern .
this is one of the classical expressions of play .
if you &apos;re not a player , you may have some of them may some of the most dangerous nuancen in this picture .
you probably see this sense of urgency , something frightening , but also , also , in the way , it &apos;s really hard to solve a really difficult problem .
if you play some of these , you see some of these blocks here , the top of the eyes and the mouth are a sign of optimism . the eyebrows are now .
this is a player that &apos;s a sogenannten on the outskirts of a epischen .
oh , you know . ok . so , we have some players here .
a epischer victory is a result that is so positive that they didn &apos;t know that it was possible .
it was very close to the imagination .
and if you get it , they &apos;re shocked that they &apos;re actually capable of something like this . this is a epischer victory .
this player is just a epischen victory .
and this is what we have to see on millions of problemlösern in the world , if we take the barriers of the next century , if we take the barriers in the next century , the face that are being entgegen on the outskirts of a epischen sieges .
well , unfortunately , we &apos;re going to see this face in real life when we &apos;re going to solve the hard problems .
i call it as the &quot; in life , &quot; and it &apos;s actually a schlecht , and it &apos;s actually my face , look at ? ok ?
that &apos;s what i am in life , i &apos;m sick in life .
this is a graffiti in my former home in berkeley , california , where i was in my dissertation , why we &apos;re better in play with play in the real life .
this is a problem that many players have .
we think that we &apos;re not as good as well as in play .
and i don &apos;t mean just less successful , although that &apos;s going to be .
we are doing more in spielwelten , and i &apos;m going to do my good at the relationship with motivation , something to do with collaboration .
if we are in a spielwelt , i think many of us are changing our best version , anytime , hartnäckig , to solve the problem , to solve the problem , and so long as necessary as necessary as necessary as necessary as it takes to try to try and try it out of the fehlschlag .
and in reality , if we fail to fail , when we &apos;re going to break down obstacles , we &apos;re going to feel often different .
we feel overwhelmed . we feel about ourselves . we feel threatened , maybe you &apos;re going to be , maybe , maybe , maybe , frustrated or zynisch .
this feelings we never have when we play games , in play , you don &apos;t just play .
and that &apos;s what i wanted to explore as a student .
why is it impossible to play in games , think you could not just do anything ?
how can we take these feelings from the play in the field ?
so i looked at games like warcraft of warcraft , that &apos;s the ideal environment to help its physical .
and i &apos;ve been doing some things that are the epic of siege in online-welten .
so first , when you get in one of these online-spiele , especially in the world of warcraft , there are lots of different characters that are willing to be willing to give you a weltrettende mission , and immediately .
but not only one of the mission , it &apos;s a mission that fits the perfect level of the current level , right ?
so , you create this .
they never get a job that they can &apos;t solve .
but still on the edge of your ability , so you have to go , but there &apos;s no unemployment in the world of warcraft .
you don &apos;t get around and spin it . there &apos;s always a very important thing to do .
and there &apos;s a lot of collaborators .
where they &apos;re going to go , hundreds of thousands of people who work with them to meet their day-to-day mission .
we don &apos;t have that true life that &apos;s not so easy that , that feeling that you &apos;re going to stand up with a fingerschnipsen .
and also , there &apos;s this epic story , this really history , why we are and what we &apos;re doing .
then we get this whole feedback feedback .
they &apos;ve been out of &quot; level of &quot; and &quot; + &quot; + one of the stärke of intelligence . &quot;
this constant feedback is not in true .
if i &apos;m going to leave this stage , i don &apos;t have one of the time and + , a + + idea , 20 verrückte .
i &apos;m going to get in the real life of this feedback .
so , the problem of the kooperations-online-welten of warcraft is that it &apos;s so intense , it &apos;s so potent to be a epischen of a epischen sieges , that we &apos;re going to spend our entire time in these spielwelten .
they &apos;re just better than the reality .
until today , all the world &apos;s world wide have spent 5,93 million years to solve virtual problems of azeroth .
that &apos;s not something bad .
it may sound .
but to see it in context : vor million years ago began to go to our first carbon-neutral .
the first one of the world &apos;s first primate .
ok , so if we talk about how much time we spend with games , it &apos;s only one of the sense that you &apos;re going to take time in the scale of the human development in the scale of human development .
but it &apos;s also , because it turns out that we &apos;re using this whole time to play with this whole time , actually , in the way we &apos;re able to do .
we develop to collaborative , nature .
this is the truth .
so , you see this interesting statistic , which was published by a researcher of carnegie mellon university , the average boy in a country with strong spielkultur spent 10,000 hours to the 21st century .
so , 10,000 hours is a very interesting number of two reasons , for two reasons .
first of all , for kids in the united states are 10.080 hours the precise gesamtzeit , they spend the exact genaue , from the fifth grade , to the degree of the high school -- if you never ever ever ever missed .
so we have a complete parallelbildungsweg , on the young people , in the young people , what it means to be a good player , like anything you learn in school .
and maybe some of you have some of you new book from malcolm gladwell , &quot; überflieger . &quot;
so you know his theory of the success , the theory of the success of the day .
it &apos;s based on the great research of the kognitivwissenschaft that if we spend 10,000 hours of a random distance to the 21st of the 21st century , we will be able to master .
we &apos;re going to be so good at whatever the most people of the world &apos;s rights .
so what we have here is a complete generation of young people who are meister-spieler .
so the big question is , &quot; what are the most powerful meisterhaft meisterhaft ? &quot;
because if we could find out that we would have never been a brilliant thing to have this human potential to the disposal .
so many people have now in the world that at least one hour per hour of online-spielen .
these are our meister-spieler . 500 million people who are extraordinarily good in &quot; something . &quot;
and in the next decade , we have another billion player that are very good at whatever .
if you haven &apos;t heard it , you haven &apos;t heard it , you haven &apos;t heard it , you haven &apos;t heard it , you haven &apos;t heard it yet .
the spieleindustrie developed developed entwickelt , which is driving energy and on mobilfunknetzen , so , in the breitband-internet , so many of the world , in the world , especially in india , china , china , china , brazil .
you expect a additional billion player in the next decade .
so we &apos;ve got a total billion billion .
so i started thinking about what it is , what it is to make us better .
here are the four things i found . and first .
okay , so imagine how extremes selbstmotivierung selbstmotivierung .
dringlichkeits-optimismus is the desire , immediately , immediately to do something about a barrier , together with the belief that we have a hope of succeeding .
and yet , you know , there &apos;s a epischer victory possible , and it &apos;s always worth trying to try and try and try and try and try to try and try and get it .
players sitting around .
there are masters in the musical dichter of these poets .
there &apos;s a lot of interesting studies that show you , that we like people to do more than you &apos;ve played with them , even if you &apos;ve been asked .
the reason for this is that there &apos;s a lot of trust to play with someone else .
we trust that somebody was going to be able to be able to be able to be eingehalten that we have the same goal and to stay in the spielende .
so the zusammenspielen of the growing is the growing of the food , trust and another .
and as a result of this , we &apos;re building a stronger social relationships .
glückselige productivity . fantastic !
you know , there &apos;s a reason why the durchschnitts-word of warcraft-spieler 22 hours a week , &quot; as a teilzeitjob .
the reason is that if we play , we &apos;re actually happier to work hard to work hard to work , when we &apos;re not relax or anything .
we know that we &apos;re going to be able to be able to make a human beings work when we do it hard to work .
and player are always ready to work hard , if you get the right job .
and finally , the epic meaning .
so , in fact , it &apos;s been love to be part of the awe gebietender of missionen .
here &apos;s a hintergrundinformation to get the right light to the right light , you know all wikipedia , the most wikipedia , the most of the world .
the second largest of the world , with almost 80,000 einträgen is the world &apos;s world .
five million people use every month .
they have more information about world of warcraft in the internet than any other subject in any other world of the world .
they create a epic story .
they created a epic source of knowledge about the world &apos;s world .
ok , so these are four superpowers that are a single outcome . players are super-mächtige , hopeful individuals .
it &apos;s people who believe that they can change the world .
and the only problem is that they believe they can change the virtual worlds , but not the real .
that &apos;s the problem that i try to solve .
edward castronova is a volkswissenschaftler .
his work is awesome . he studied why people spend so much time , energy and money laundering .
and he says , &quot; we &apos;re going to be not going to be less than a massenemigration in virtual worlds and online-spielumgebungen . &quot;
and this is a square economist . so it &apos;s logical .
and he says , &quot; he says ... &quot;
not as i like i am , i &apos;m going to play games , i &apos;m a little bit more überschwänglich .
so he says that the reason actually makes sense , because players can live in online-welten than in the real life .
you can get stronger social solutions as well as a real life as in real life . they get more feedback and rewards in real life than in real life .
so he says , it &apos;s currently completely logical , that gamers more time in the virtual world than in real time .
i just want to say , is logically .
but it definitely is not a optimalsituation .
we need to start to turn the real world into a game .
my inspiration comes from a event , the 2,500 years .
there &apos;s these ancient cubes , from schafsknöcheln . you know ?
before these amazing spielecontrollern , there were schafsknöchel .
and these were kind of the first of people developed developed .
and if you &apos;re familiar with the digital greek city-state griechischen herodotus , you may know this story . the story of how to have a little bit about how and why it was invented .
according to herodotus , more games , more specifically , more specifically , in the kingdom of the kingdom during a famine .
so , there was such a such big famine that the king of lydien was going to be a crazy idea .
the people are silent . people fought .
it was a extreme situation . you needed to solve a extreme solution .
so they invented , according to laut , würfelspiel and vereinbarten a national strategy . at a day , you would eat . the next day you want to play .
and they would be so much in the würfelspiel world , because there are so intriguing and our befriedigender , glückseliger productivity , that they would forget that they were not going to eat .
and then the next day you would play . and the next day you would eat .
and according to the laut , they survived for 18 years of years , and they ate it for a day , and the next playing playing .
same , i think , let &apos;s give you a games .
we &apos;re going to give you games to get the world &apos;s suffering .
we &apos;re going to give you games to avoid everything that doesn &apos;t work in the real world , especially in real life is not necessarily , and we &apos;re going to take ourselves from the play .
but that doesn &apos;t have to be the end .
that &apos;s exciting .
according to 18 years , they didn &apos;t get a better job , so i decided to be a last würfelspiel anzusetzen .
they divided the kingdom in two halves .
they played a würfelspiel and the sieger to einem durften .
they went to a new home , and they were just going to give you so many people back to the survival of survival and were going to be able to get the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of it .
it sounds crazy , or ?
but the latest dna-beweise show that the etrusker that later the römische empire was going to break the römische realm , the same dna as the old lydier .
so scientists came to the notion of the notion that the herodotus is actually true .
and geologists found evidence of a global abkühlung that would almost take 20 years of what the famine could explain .
so could this crazy story .
you may have been able to work with the people by playing by playing by the spielen , by looking for 18 years and then these eingebung and so much about the other , that they were able to have the whole civilization of civilization .
so , that &apos;s what we can .
we &apos;re playing for 1994 .
this was the first strategiespiel in real time in real time in real time . that was 16 years ago .
she played 18 years for 18 years , we &apos;ve been playing for 16 years .
i &apos;m going to argue , we &apos;re ready to play our own episches .
so , you sent half of your civilization to the search for a new world . so i suppose i &apos;m going to take my 21 billion spielstunden per week .
we should übereinkommen in the fact that half of us are playing a day of a day , we have to be solved the world &apos;s problems .
i know you &apos;re going to ask , &quot; how do we solve the real world in games ? &quot; and exactly what i &apos;ve got my work in the past several years of the future .
we &apos;ve got this banner in our office in our office in palo alto , it &apos;s like we should understand the future .
we don &apos;t want to try to say the future .
what we want is to create the future .
we want to introduce the best outcome , and then people ask this idea in reality .
we &apos;re thinking of epische siege and giving people the opportunity to achieve them .
i &apos;ll show you just a quick three games i designed to try to try to try to provide people in their own future .
this is &quot; the world without oil . &quot;
the game is from 2007 .
it &apos;s a online-spiel where they have to overcome a ölknappheit overcome .
the ölknappheit is invented , but we &apos;ve got enough online-inhalte to do it , and you get the real way of looking at it , and then you get the real way , and then you get a lot of the schulen , if you &apos;re going to be the schulen of food , and you have to be able to do it , if you &apos;re going to
we &apos;ve tested this game with 1,700 players in 2007 , and we &apos;ve been since it has been over the last three years .
and i can tell you , it was a really experience .
no one wants to change life because it &apos;s good for the environment or because we should .
but if you &apos;re a epischen adventure , and i said , &quot; we &apos;re going to go out oil . &quot;
this is a fascinating adventure that you go .
you find out how they would survive . most of our gamers have the most spieler gewohnheiten .
so we &apos;ve been looking for the next weltrettende game , a bigger , higher goal than just ölknappheit .
we have the game called &quot; superstruct &quot; at the institute for the future .
and it &apos;s the calculation of a supercomputers that people only have 23 years on the planet .
this supercomputers is called &quot; global aussterbungs- sensibilisierungs-system . &quot;
the call to player , in fact , we have almost like a jerry-bruckheimer -film .
you know jerry bruckheimer-filme , where it &apos;s called &quot; dream-team &quot; , &quot; you have the astronauts , the scientists , the ex-sträfling and just together , and they can save them together .
but in our game , instead of just five people say , everybody &apos;s in the dream-team , and it &apos;s our job to create the future for energy , health , health and the future of social justice .
8,000 players would be played the game eight weeks .
they found 500 kinds of creative solutions that they can read when they &apos;re going to be superstruct .
and the last game we took out of the third , it &apos;s a game in collaboration with the world bank .
if you finish the game , you get the weltbank award of the world &quot; social &quot; abschluss .
we &apos;re working with universities in the very large , and they invite them to learn social disparities .
we have a comic comic . we have a great high high school , wissensvernetzung , wissensvernetzung , sustainability and ingenuity .
i want to invite you to share all of you , this game with young people , all the world , especially in entwicklungsgebieten , who are moving to the benefit of the world , to try to save their own social enterprises to save the world .
i &apos;m going to finish up .
i want to ask you something .
what do you think is going to happen next ?
we have all these amazing players , we have games that show us what we can do , but we haven &apos;t saved the real world .
well , i hope you agree that the gamers of human resources are the human resources that we can use to work in real life and that games have a big meaning for change .
we have these superpowers , glückselige productivity , the ability to knit , tight social networks , dringlichkeits-optimismus and desire to epischer .
i really hope that we play together together games to survive in this planet .
and i hope you &apos;ll play with me play with me and play .
if i &apos;m going to go into the next decade , i &apos;m sure myself in two things : that we can create any climate future , and we can play all kinds of games .
so i say , let &apos;s start the weltverändernden games !
thank you .
i would like to tell you something about what i &apos;ve been doing a few months ago for a artikels article for the italian wired .
i always got my synonym-wörterbuch synonym-wörterbuch , but i was done with the most of the genome , and i noticed that i &apos;ve never been in my life , which means &quot; disabled &quot;
i read you the post .
&quot; &quot; &quot; behindert , &quot; verkrüppelt , &quot; verkrüppelt , hilflos , zerstört , zerstört , impotent , impotent , impotent , impotent , impotent , impotent , impotent , impotent , nachgebessert , nachgebessert , erledigt , erledigt , erledigt , kaputt , siehe , siehe , motivations , nutzlos and weak .
antonyme : healthy , powerful . &quot;
i &apos;ve been to read this list to read a friend , and i had to laugh , and i was just not going to go to the &quot; and &quot; and couldn &apos;t stop and to read and i had to read and to read about this überfallartigen wortflut , and the verbundenden emotional shock .
of course , this was a ausgefranstes , old synonym-wörterbuch . i just thought that the copy has to be pretty old .
but in fact , it was a copy of the early 1980s when i started with the primary school and so that my own outside my own relatives is to build my own and forms , too , too much in other children and the rest of around me .
and god was not used to damals at the time .
would i take this time seriously , i would like to be born into a world that would be like me as a person , which is going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able
so i immediately had to tell the online-ausgabe of 2009 , and i expected that i find a ansprechenderen contributor .
here &apos;s the aktualisierte version of this eintrags .
and yet , you &apos;re not going to be much better .
especially , i was going to be the last two words under &quot; near &quot; and healthy . &quot;
but it &apos;s not just words .
it &apos;s about what we think about people that we describe with these words .
it &apos;s about the values that are in these words , and how we construct these values .
our language affect our minds and how we see the world and the people around us .
many of the societies , including the greek and the roman , really believed that the pronunciation of one has a big force has a big force because that &apos;s what you can do .
so what do we want to do is actually manifestieren -- a disabled people or a kraftvollen person ?
just for a human being , as a child , could be ausreichen , she &apos;s going to be einzuschränken and they &apos;re going to shake them .
wouldn &apos;t it be beautiful to open them to open ? &quot;
one person who opened me for me was a pediatrician at the a.i. institute in wilmington .
he &apos;s called dr. pizzutillo , a italo-amerikaner , whose name you can think , most americans don &apos;t really work correctly , so he was always called dr. p. p. .
and dr. p. p. was very , very colorful , and was for the work of working with children .
i found the time that i spent in this hospital , just a great thing -- to my physiotherapie .
i had to be a single biologist , infinitely scheinbar , elastischen bändern -- in different colors -- that &apos;s what you know , and i &apos;ve got these things to build my bein-muskeln , and i &apos;ve got it more than anything else . i hated it . i hated it . i hated them .
and imagine even as a child child with dr. p. p. p. and so trying to stop these kinds of übungen without stop success .
and one day , he got me in my investigations -- these drills were just tedious and gnadenlos -- and he said , &quot; wow , aimee , you &apos;re such a strong , powerful and young girl , you &apos;re going to have one day one day one day .
and if you make it , i give you a hundred dollars . &quot;
and this was just a very simple trick of dr. p. p. , so i want to do the übungen girl , who &apos;s got to be the aussicht girl in the hospital in the hospital , but he actually got me to see my daily übungs-horror with my daily eyes , and so that was a new and vielversprechendes experience .
and i wonder how much of my vision of me and powerful young girls have been shaped my own shaped , and i could imagine that as a nature of natural , powerful and atlethischen human being .
this is just one example of many , like adults in machtpositionen , the imagination of a child .
but as the already zitierten examples of the synonym-wörterbüchern , we don &apos;t have our language to make a sense of space , something that we would all agree to do , and they &apos;re giving any individual to see themselves as an individual people .
our language hinkt the social change in many cases that were triggered by a technological change .
from the medical standpoint , you can say that my legs , kniegelenke for titanium , kniegelenke aus for the grenzen , and the künstliche hüftgelenke of the body that allow them to be more natural , and they &apos;re trying to be able to be able to develop a own identity , and they &apos;re able to make sure that they &apos;re able to make a own identity ,
so , this technological change is that there &apos;s always a different truth , which is that every person who can be a very besonderess and very precise , and that the human ability to adapt to the human capacity , our human capacity .
the human ability to adapt to the human mind -- this is a interesting story , because people are always going to ask me to tell you , and i always felt very uncomfortable to me , and i always felt very uncomfortable to answer the questions of people , and i think , i think , i understand why .
this sentence from widrigkeiten &apos;s life , from the idea of the idea that success is to be a challenge , and happiness is to be a challenge , and as if my life were so successful , because i could see the kinds of life with a prosthesis , or whatever people are being with my disability .
but the truth is that we &apos;re changing , of course , we &apos;re not going to be able to do it , whether you physically physically physically , emotionally or even both .
and i claim that this is good .
widrigkeiten are not a barrier that we need to be umkurven to get better with our lives .
widrigkeiten are just to live in our lives .
and i tend to see it as my shadow as my shadow .
sometimes i realize that he &apos;s very present , sometimes he &apos;s hardly to see , but it &apos;s constantly constantly .
and i want to try to use the effect of the schwere of the human race .
there are in life and challenges , and the challenges are just real real , and every person &apos;s real , and every person &apos;s different , whether we get to widrigkeiten , or not , but how we get it .
so we &apos;re not just responsible for the people that we love to finance , but they also prepare it to make sure that it &apos;s right .
and we &apos;re not going to have our children to do if we give them feel that they can &apos;t adapt .
you have to separate two things to make sure you get the medical economy , and for the rest of the social mind , whether i &apos;m disabled or not .
and to be honest , the only thing and sustained disability , which i had to put apart to me is that the world is going to be the world , they would describe me to this definitions .
in our desire , people who are focused on the heart and they &apos;re going to give you the cold , and the cold , the cold , the kalte truth to the quality of your medical society , which they would expect to be able to make sure that we &apos;re not going to make the foundations that actually is actually being .
maybe the way is to be concept that just causes what &apos;s inside a broken , and how we fix this to each individual , a greater disability than the pathology .
if we treat people , not all of its forces and possibilities , and they &apos;re able to share the addition to the natural fight that you might need to be , a more disease .
we degradieren a human being to our society .
so we have to look beyond the patologie and look at all the human possibilities .
but most of the most important is , there &apos;s between the perception of our own and our great erfindergeist , a connection .
we should not be abwerten at the herausfordernden times or not , we should try to avoid them , and we should be able to get them under the carpeting , but it &apos;s about to see it in the widrigkeiten opportunities .
it may be more about trying to ensure that we don &apos;t need to be able to overcome widrigkeiten , but we &apos;re open to the hug , they &apos;re going to use to use the schopf to use a kampf-ausdruck and maybe even to dance with them .
and maybe we can do it , widrigkeiten as something natural and useful and feel like that , as a result , as well as a presence of presence , they &apos;re not so much .
in this year , we celebrate 200 , and the birthday of charles darwin and when he wrote about evolution , has written , darwin , in my eyes , in my mind , in a very simple way in human character .
i would like to be so much , not the most powerful of his body , and not the most fundamental of its kind of way , but the change that can adapt to the best .
from conflict , creativity .
not just darwin work , we know that the ability to survive and aufzublühen , from the fight of human mind is to be through conflict .
so again , change , change and adaptation are the greatest skill of human beings .
and maybe we just know we &apos;re about wood , when we &apos;re really going to be really going to be really passionate about .
and perhaps the sense of widrigkeiten , a sense of ichs , a sense of our own power .
we can give ourselves something like that .
we can give you a new meaning that goes beyond severe times .
maybe we can see the widrigkeiten as change .
widrigkeiten stand for change that we haven &apos;t yet haven &apos;t yet adapted to us .
i think the biggest damage we have to ourselves is to believe that we should be normal .
even though , who is normal ? &quot;
there &apos;s no normal .
there &apos;s the usual . it &apos;s the typical . and not the normal , and they would really want to learn , gray person really want to really be really ?
i think not quite .
it would be great if we could have this paradigm of the normalität or the strength , to be even slightly more dangerous to formulate , and so we can release the forces of very many children , and they invite them to be very special and valuable skills in society .
anthropolgen figures found that we &apos;ve always been always becoming the members of our members of our society , and it &apos;s useful to be able to be useful .
there &apos;s evidence that we have been concerned about 60,000 years ago , and people with severe injuries and the geschah of the verletzungen and the lebenserfahrung in the überlebenskampf of this people was in the community of this person was , for society .
they don &apos;t have these people as broken and useless , they were being treated as something and valuable .
a few years ago i went in the city i grew up in a lebensmittelmarkt in the nordosten zone in the northeast , and i was standing there in a scheffel tomato sauce .
it was summer , and i had shorts .
and i hear , like a guy behind me , &quot; well , if that &apos;s not aimee . &quot;
and i got to go around and see this older man . i had no idea who he &apos;s .
and i said , &quot; excuse , sir , sir , we know ? i can &apos;t remember it . &quot;
and he said , &quot; well , you can &apos;t remember me .
when i first saw her , i looked at her from your mother &apos;s belly . &quot;
oh , so that &apos;s .
and of course , it &apos;s done .
this was dr. kean , a man who had to knew my mom &apos;s day , because of course , because of course , totally , very typical , my birthday was two weeks .
the doctor for pränatale &apos;s diagnostik &apos;s mom was in vacation , and so my parents had the man who brought me to the world , not at all .
and because i was born without wadenbeine , and my feet were looking after you and i had a few toes on this and a few toes at the other hand , he had to be the bad news .
he said to me , &quot; i had to say you would never run to you , and never as you would never run your loved as other children , or you &apos;ve never been going to lead a life of life , and since then they just lie to me . &quot;
really , really , really , i found that he was going to have been my whole childhood childhood , whether i had my scholarship with the pfadfindern bei , and he had to be diese with the ausschnitte , and he used to teach these clips to teach his students , medizin-studenten to teach his students , medizin-studenten aus medical school and the hershey medical school .
and he called this part of his kurses to x factor , the potential of human human .
you can &apos;t just emphasize enough , how about this factor of this factor for the quality of one person .
and dr. kean told me , &quot; i learned that kids , if you &apos;re not going to get another different , and even if you get a little bit different , if you get kids to yourself , children can get a lot . &quot;
you see , dr. kean has changed .
he understood that the medical diagnosis , and how someone else is doing , two different things .
and i also had my thinking about the time in time when you asked me in the age of 15 years if i had my prostheses against the legs of meat and bones , i wouldn &apos;t have to have a second .
i wanted to have to be normal .
if you ask me today , i &apos;m not sure that i &apos;m sure .
and that &apos;s what happens because i &apos;ve experienced something about my legs and not despite this experiences .
and perhaps this change also could happen because i &apos;ve been so many people , i &apos;ve been given to the doors , instead of people who were trying to meet me , or i wanted to do a notion of mine .
you see , it really takes a human , you know , just a person who demonstrate them to be able to do their powers , and they &apos;re through .
if you can get someone to activate your own internal forces -- the human mind is so empfangsbereit -- if you &apos;re going to do that , and for someone in a critical moment , you &apos;re a very good teacher .
they bring them to open themselves .
the real meaning of the worts &quot; wurzelt &quot; in the word &quot; educe . &quot;
it means something that in one is the potential .
again : what &apos;s going to do is we want to get to the potential ?
in the 1960s , in the united states was done in britain , in the u.k. , in the united states was done in gesamtschulen .
they call this the &quot; streaming trials &quot; in the united states &quot; we call &quot; tracking . &quot;
the students are going to be brought to the grades .
and the most remarkable is mündlich schwerer , getting better teachers .
they have been talking about a dreimonatigen period of students with a &quot; ausreichend &quot; and &quot; the note &quot; well &quot; well , &quot; it was told you to be very clever , and after that three months they really wrote it .
and of course , it &apos;s a zerbricht to hear that the vice versa was told , they &apos;re just sufficient .
and it was , after the three months .
but only those who were still in school -- except from the students who had gone to school .
so , very important in this study was that the teachers were not eingeweiht .
the teachers didn &apos;t know that something changed .
and you just told them that the einser-schüler and that &apos;s the students with the note , and they &apos;re just going to give you something you and they &apos;re going to do .
the only thing is a gebrochener mind , a spirit that would have broken , has no hope anymore , and he doesn &apos;t find more schön. with our natural , kindliche neugier. and our innate capacity .
if we do it , the human spirit to help us hope , and continue to find yourself , and other people around them , and then we &apos;re going to find a lot of them , and then we really put our powers to be truly positive .
if a spirit about these qualities , we can create a new reality and new daseinsformen .
i want to end with a poem that was told by a persischen poet , and the poem is not told me , &quot; every child who knows the god of the fittest , not the god of the name , not the god of the namen , not the god of the namen , not the god of the namen , but the god , who &apos;s only going
come on , dance with me . thank you .
how would you want to be better than you &apos;re ?
suppose i said that , through few different changes , a better memory could have -- more and more and faster .
or want you to be fitter , stronger , more force .
would you want to be a little bit and more confident ? &quot;
how would it be , to live in good health ?
or maybe you &apos;re always going to be a lot of creativity .
which would you like to be in most of them ?
which would you like to have to have to have , if you could have one ?
creativity .
how many people would choose creativity ?
raise your hands . let me see . let me see .
a few . probably , like many of the things that there are creative people here .
it &apos;s very good .
how many would you choose to make a good memory ?
a few more .
how would it be about fitness ?
a few less .
what is about longevity ?
ah , the majority . the lsehe i like to say as a doctor .
if you could have one of them , it would be a whole different world .
is this all just conceit ?
or is it possible possible ?
evolution is a andauerndes subject here on the ted conference , but today i want to give you the idea of a doctor &apos;s theme .
the great geneticists in the 20th century , t.g. dobzhansky , who was a kommunikant in russian church , wrote a piece of paper , with the title of the title , &quot; nothing of the title of biology doesn &apos;t make sense of the lichte of evolution . &quot;
well , if you &apos;re given the evidence of those who are not the evidence of the biological evolution , you &apos;re going to take a very good time , you take your own kommunikationsgerät -- and maybe you can see a look at the permission of a kathryn book , which is about wrong , because nothing will be a sense of the talk to you .
but if you accept the biological evolution , it &apos;s just about the past , or is it about the future ?
is it for other geltend or something that is also about ?
this is another glimpse of the tree of life .
in this picture , i &apos;ve got a bush when a center of verzweigungen in all directions , because if you look at the edges of the tree , all the existing spezien in the tops of the branches are gehabt , they have survived , they &apos;ve got it ; it has its surroundings and starches .
the human part of this busches , far at the end , is that what we are most interested in most .
we &apos;re finding them all over a common ancestor to the modern one of the chimpanzees , about six or eight million years ago .
in this period , there may be 20 or 25 different kinds of hominids .
some of them have come and went .
we &apos;ve been around for about five years ago .
it seems like we were right from the other parts of the tree of life , but actually , in the most part , the fundamental mechanisms of our cells are pretty much equal .
is clearly that we can use it and the mechanisms of a common bacteria to produce the protein of human health care system that &apos;s used to treating the diabetic ?
this is not like humaninsulin ; this is the same protein that &apos;s chemisch ununterscheidbar from what &apos;s coming from the pancreas .
and we &apos;re talking about bacteria , is aware of that each of us in our gut is more bacteria than the cells in our gut , and the cells in the rest of your body ?
maybe 10 times .
i mean , if antonio damasio , after a antonio , you think about the bacteria ?
our gut is a wonderful gastfreundlichen environment for these bacteria .
it &apos;s warm , it &apos;s dark , it &apos;s a bit of gemütlich , it &apos;s very convenient .
and you &apos;re all going to all you nutrients that you might just give you without endeavor .
it &apos;s really a easier way to bacteria , with occasional gelegentlichen , jeodch gezwungen , jeodch to the exits .
but else , they &apos;re a wonderful environment for these bacteria , just as you &apos;re important for your life .
they help us to be the most of the essentiellen , and they &apos;re protecting them against certain diseases .
but what will happen in the future ?
are we in a kind of evolutionäres equilibrium in the form of a species ?
or we are also something different to become something -- something that might even better to the environment ?
now , we take a step back in the time of the big bang , 14 trillion years ago -- the first of the solar system , the first person of living , perhaps three billion years ago , perhaps much more than 800 or billion years , and then a billion years , and then the human species that will finally be finally in the last several years .
in this enormous big symphony symphony of the universe , the life on earth is just a short brief , the animal kingdom , like a individual stroke , and the human life , a little notenverzierung .
we were .
this is also the unterhaltungswert of this talk , so i hope i &apos;m going to have a d for you .
now when i was a neuling on college , i had my first biologiekurse .
i was fascinated by elegance and beauty .
i fell in the power of evolution , and i posed something very basic , in most of the things that are in einzelligen organisms , each cell , and all the genetic information will continue to be able to continue to be able to continue to the cell .
but at the time , as a mehrzelligen organisms , the things that make things .
sexual reproduction is going to be different .
and quite importantly , with the advent of sexual reproduction that will go back to the genome , the rest of the body will be .
in fact , you could say that the unausweichlichkeit of the death of our body &apos;s death in the same moment , in the same moment , the sexual reproduction .
now i have to confess , if i was a college-student , i thought , okay , sex / sex , sex , death , was pretty sensible , but with every year , it was to my whole challenge .
i &apos;ve come to understand the feelings of george burns , which is in las vegas in las vegas , his show in the &apos; 90s .
and one night , there &apos;s a pat on its hotelzimmertür .
he opens the door .
before he says a beautiful spärlich bekleidetes .
she looks at it and says , &quot; i &apos;m here for super-sex . &quot;
&quot; that &apos;s wonderful , &quot; george , &quot; i will take the soup . &quot;
i came to the realization as a doctor that i was a goal of the different way to the goal of evolution -- not necessarily an unsustainable .
i tried to preserve the body .
i wanted to be healthy .
i wanted to reconnect the health of a disease .
i wanted us to live a long and healthy lives .
evolution is all about the defensive of genome , the next generation , and we &apos;re going to survive generation .
from a evolutionary standpoint , they &apos;re and i designed to develop how booster rockets designed to send the genetic fracht to the next stage of the orbit to fall into the ocean .
i think we would all have the mood that would have to understand the woody , when he said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to immortality to achieve my work .
i want to reach it by not die . &quot;
evolution doesn &apos;t mean necessarily the longest lives .
it &apos;s not necessarily the biggest , the strongest or the fastest , and not even the brightest .
evolution priviligiert the creatures that adjust the best to their environment .
it &apos;s one of the test of survival and success .
on the reason of the ocean , bacteria are bacteria , the thermophil and the hot people are still in the hot people , if fish were there , they would have vacuum fish to the bottom , they have to have a bewohnbare environment for themselves .
so what does that mean , when we look at the back , what &apos;s happening in evolution , and how we think about the space of people in evolution , and particularly , as we &apos;re going to do it in the next phase , i would say that there &apos;s a series of possibilities .
the first one is that we &apos;re not going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be .
we &apos;ve achieved a kind of equilibrium .
and the reason that it would be that we &apos;ve been talking to us is , is to get a lot of genes that would be otherwise rausgewählt and from the population .
and secondly , we have to make our environment so we &apos;ve done it , that we &apos;ve done that they &apos;re going to adapt to us , and we &apos;re going to adapt to them .
and by the way , we went and the zirkulieren and we mix us so much that they can &apos;t say longer , isolation is necessary to be able to do it .
one second possibility is that it &apos;s a evolution of the traditional way of course , of course , the forces of nature .
and the argument here , here &apos;s the wheels of evolution , but they &apos;re unerbittlich .
and so far as far as we have a species of planet , it &apos;s going to be the isolierung and the change of the environment that make evolution in natural ways .
but there &apos;s a third option , a verlockende , fascinating and terrifying opportunity to do that .
i call it neo-evolution -- the new development of course , not just naturally , but led to us as a individuen. in the choices that we do .
now , how could that happen ?
how could it be possible that we &apos;re doing this ?
so let &apos;s look the reality that people are today in some cultures , in some cultures , in some cultures , are going to make decisions about their offspring .
they are , in some cultures , the choice to have more males than women .
it &apos;s not necessarily good for the society , but it &apos;s what the individual and the family &apos;s going to determine .
so think if it &apos;s not just possible to be able to choose the gender of your child , but also to the body of the genetic anpassungen that will heal the disease and the vorzubeugen .
what if you could do the genetic change to be diabetes or alzheimer &apos;s or alzheimer &apos;s or to eliminate the quality of the power or the form of the power or the strokes ?
would you wouldn &apos;t want to make these change in your genes ?
if we &apos;re vorausblicken , we will be able to be able to be more increasingly increasingly increasingly .
the final genome project began in 1990 , and it took 13 years .
it cost $ 2,7 billion dollars .
in the following year , when it was finished , they could do the same thing for 20 million dollars to four months .
today , you can give you a sequence of three billion basenpaare of the human genome , and in a price of about 20,000 , and in the space of about a week .
it won &apos;t take more long until reality , that it will be the 1,000 dollars of human genomes , and it will be more interested in everybody .
a week , the national academy of engineering academy prize prize prize , and willem stemmer , who are the natural process of evolution that encourage the natural process of evolution , and to lead to the wünschenswerte proteins in a very different way -- which is called the direkte arnold .
a few years ago , a few years ago , the lasker-preis shinya was awarded to his research , a fibroblasten , a fibroblasten , and through the manipulation of the zelle , to make them a living cell , a cell in the situation , is able to be able to become a cell in your body .
these changes are in the coming .
the same technology that can produce the human insulin in bacteria can do viruses that not only do not only protection , but also to the immunity that are also available against other viruses .
whether you believe it or not , it &apos;s a powerful study in gear , against the cells that are being used in the cells of a tabakpflanze .
can you imagine something good to be extracted from tobacco ?
this is all about reality and in the future , much more possible .
so , you just ask two other little changes .
you can change the cells in your body , but what if you could change the cells of your brain ?
what if you could change the sperm and eizellen egg , to give your children a better chance for a gesünderes life , the diabetes , the diabetes , the risk of cancer ?
who wants to be not going to be a healthier ?
and then the analytical technology , the same motor of science that can enable to avoid disease , could also allow us to adopt the krankheit , hyper-kapazitäten , hyper-kapazitäten -- the better memory .
why not the schlagfertigkeit of a ken jennings hben , especially if you can broaden it with the next generation of the watson-maschine ?
why not the fast muskelfasern , which allow them to be able to get them faster and longer to run ?
why not longer live ?
these are going to be unwiderstehlich .
and if we &apos;re going to be a site that we can pass on the next generation , and we can adopt the attributes that we want to be transformed by alt-stil evolution .
we &apos;re going to have a process that &apos;s going to take 100,000 years , and we can look at it for a thousand years -- and maybe even the next 100 years .
these are decisions with whom your grandchildren , or whose grandchildren have to be .
so we use this choice to shape the society that is better , the more successful is the subject ?
or will we have a zillion different attributes that we want to have to have some of us , and not for others ?
are we going to be a society shape and uniformierter , or robuster and vielseitiger ?
these are the kinds of questions we need to be .
and on the deepest , we ever will ever be able to develop wisdom and wisdom , and the wisdom is the wisdom that we need to make this decisions ?
in the good , like evil , and once you might think , that decisions will be on us .
thank you .
i want you to imagine something now , a portable robot , you can break your skills , or another , to go back and go back to the rollstuhlfahrern .
we call this robot exoskelette .
they &apos;re not something else that they &apos;re in the morning and the zusätzliche of them and the their velocity is going to increase and to help them to keep their balance .
this is actually the true of man and machine .
but not just that -- so that it &apos;s verschmelzen and connect with the universe and other devices out there .
this is not just a crazy idea .
so to show you what we &apos;re going to do is we start talking about american soldiers who carries about 100 pounds on its back and it &apos;s the request that they should wear more equipment .
of course , this leads to some of the major complications -- rückenverletzungen , 30 percent of them -- chronic rückenverletzungen .
so we thought that we would embrace this challenge and create a exoskelett , that would help us cope with this problem .
so let me introduce you to you -- or the human universal universal .
soldier : with the hulc-exoskelett , i can wear 200 pounds about verschiedenartiges terrain , many hours .
his flexible design enabled to sink and kriechen kriechen and highly wendige movements .
it feels what i want to do where i want to go and get my strength and make a difference .
we &apos;re far as far as our industriepartner , this device , this new exoskelett in this year .
so it &apos;s true .
now let &apos;s look at our view of the other , something that i &apos;m particularly passionate about .
there are 68 million people who sit in the world in the wheelchair .
this is about one percent of the control .
and that &apos;s actually a conservative estimate .
we &apos;re talking about very young people with rückenmarksverletzungen people who live in the blütezeit of their lives -- like , &quot; 30er , 40er -- from the fate of the schicksal and the wheelchair is the only option .
but it &apos;s also about the most people whose number of them .
and so pretty much the only option -- if it &apos;s a hirnschlag , or other complications -- is the wheelchair .
and so , it &apos;s been for 500 years , since , since , since , since , since i have to say , very successful introduction .
so we thought that we could start to write a completely new chapter in the field .
let me show you the elegs of amanda boxtel , who &apos;s been going to be a rückenmarksverletzung operation that has a rückenmarksverletzung that they couldn &apos;t have been able to have been able to have been able to have been able to be able to be able to be able to be more and to 19 years .
thank you .
as i said , amanda , amanda , unser .
it has sensors -- has sensors -- has sensors -- has sensors -- has sensors -- has sensors -- has sensors .
his fully non-invasiven sensors in the crutches , the signals that are attached to our onboard-computer , which is attached to this back .
here &apos;s batteriepackungen , the motorantrieb is in their hips , as well as the kniegelenken that they move forward to the very geschmeidigen and very natural gangart .
i was 24 years old and in bestform , when a monströser purzelbaum was a skiabfahrt purzelbaum during a skiabfahrt .
in the fraction of a second , i lost every feeling and every movement below my beckens .
not long after long after a doctor &apos;s visit , my doctor &apos;s office and he said , &quot; amanda , you never get again . &quot;
and that was 19 years ago .
it &apos;s a steel of any hope of my consciousness .
anpassungsfähige technologies have been able to learn to learn to go back to go back to climb and even to the hands .
but nothing was invented to go back to this .
thank you .
as you can see , we have the technology we have the platforms to make us and to discuss them .
it &apos;s in our hands , and we have the whole potential to change the lives of future generations -- not just for the soldiers , or amanda and all kinds of devices , but for everyone .
thank you .
at home in new york , i &apos;m an boss in the entwicklungsabteilung organization called the robin .
if i don &apos;t have poverty bekämpfe , i bekämpfe as a gehilfe of a volunteer löschzug on a volunteer löschzug .
well , in our city , in the volunteers , a hochqualifizierte berufsfeuerwehr unterstützten , you have to be pretty early on the brandstelle to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to
i remember my first fire .
i was the second volunteers of the brandstelle , i had quite good opportunity to be able to do .
but it was still a wettrennen against the other volunteers to reach the verantwortlichen and figure out what our jobs would be .
when i found the hauptmann , he had just been in a very serious conversation with the hausbesitzerin , which certainly had one of the worst days of their lives .
it was in the middle of the night , and she stood in the schlafanzug and sea ice under the strömenden rain , while her house was in flames .
the other volunteers , the jewish volunteers of me -- we call him lex luther -- to come to the hauptmann and the hund and the dog of the hausbesitzerin .
the dog ! i was lost .
there was a lawyer or vermögensverwalter , who was able to tell the rest of his life , the people who could tell the people that he was going to be a living organism to save a living , only because he was five seconds to be .
well , i was the next .
the hauptmann winkte me .
he said , &quot; well , you have to go into the house .
you have to go up to the top , on the fire , and then that woman &apos;s going to take a few shoes . &quot;
i swear it .
well , not exactly what i hoped , but i went to the real high line , the flur , the flur , the flur , which was so pretty much done in this moment , that was pretty much done in the bedroom to get a few shoes .
i know what you think now , but i &apos;m not a hero .
i was wearing my prey back to the bottom , where i was going to my head and the beloved dog .
we put our values out to the hausbesitzerin , where , not surprisingly , his much more attention than my own attention .
a few weeks later , the feuerwache feuerwache a letter of hausbesitzerin , where she was going to be in the tapferen of the rescue .
one of the most important , kindness , somebody else had a few shoes .
both in my career in my career as a volunteer als as a volunteer , i am witnessed by generosity and kindness in big scale , but i also see the nächstenliebe of the altruism and the muts of individual .
and you know what i learned ?
they &apos;re all important .
so if i see in this room and people see the either have a beachtenswerten success or on your path , i want to be following this following , i don &apos;t want to offer you .
don &apos;t wait for me to make a difference in the lives of a different , until they &apos;ve reached their first million .
if you give something , you give it now .
do you use in a suppenküche , and you put a park in the neighborhood , in the neighborhood , in the neighborhood , in the neighborhood .
they &apos;re a mentor .
not every day , each day will give us a chance to save lives , but each day offers us to change one .
so you get it ; save the shoes .
thank you .
bruno guissani : mark , mark , come back .
thank you .
i just come back from a community that &apos;s the secret of the human genome .
a place where women are going to lead to sex , and the game is the day -- where is a serious issue .
and no , it &apos;s not burning or san francisco .
ladies and gentlemen , your business .
this is the world of wild bonobos in the urwald of congo .
bonobos are together with chimpanzees living our closest living .
that means we have a shared ancestor , a evolutionary grandmother , which lived about six million years ago .
now , chimpanzees are known for their aggressivität .
but unfortunately , we have this kind of great überbetont in the human evolution .
but bonobos tells us the other side of the coin that are the other side of the coin .
during chimpanzees from high , fear einflößenden are led to be kerlen by ermächtigten females .
and they really have to come up with what &apos;s going to come up with a ausgesprochen society , in the deadly violence , in the deadly violence .
but unfortunately , the bonobos is the least known to the primates .
they live in the deep of the kongolesischen , and they &apos;re only hard to be able to be hard .
congo is a paradox -- a country of extraordinary biodiversity and beauty , but also the heart of darkness itself -- the third of the darkness of darkness , which has been in decades of decades and almost so many lives in the world .
it doesn &apos;t surprise that these destruction also are endangered in the bonobos .
fleischhandel and the decline of the baumbestandes lead that you could not even take a single person with the verbliebenen bonobos -- and even there &apos;s not that we &apos;re not sure to be honest .
and yet , in this country of violence and chaos , you can laugh a verborgenes laugh that the trees are shattered .
who are these related ?
we know them as &quot; love instead of war , because they have häufigen sex , also bisexuellen sex , with wechselnden partners , and rules and social disparities .
i &apos;m not saying , that would be the answer to all humanitarian problems -- because life is the most of the bonobos that &apos;s more than the kama .
bonobos -- like humans -- love it , like to play your life .
so , not just kinderspiele .
for us , and it &apos;s essential for the attachment of relationships and the care of tolerance .
and we learn trust and the rules of the game .
and the great scale of creativity and resilience , and it &apos;s about the diversity of diversity -- diversity of diversity , diversity of behaviors , diversity of connections .
and if you watch bonobos in the game , you see the evolutionary origins of human origins , dance and rituals .
play is the kitt that &apos;s beieinanderhält us .
well , i don &apos;t know how you play , but i want to show you some unique footage of the wild .
first of a ballspiel on bonobo-art -- and i don &apos;t think it &apos;s not about fussball .
so here we see a young female and males in a verfolgungsspiel .
look at what you do .
that could be the evolutionary origins of the evolutionary origins , &quot; she &apos;s got him to the eggs . &quot;
just that i think i like to think it &apos;s like , not true .
yes !
so sexspiele are spread , both of bonobos and humans .
and this video is really interesting , because it &apos;s really interesting , because it shows the ideenreichtum , with the ideenreichtum of the play -- like the testicles -- and also , how the game is both of trust both trust and the same thing that it &apos;s fun for the same time .
but the game is a formwandler .
and this is a formwandler , and it can be a lot of shapes that some of these things are quiet , phantasievoll , neugierig , maybe it &apos;s to find that .
and i want to show you this is fuku , a young female , and they &apos;re going to be healthy with water .
i think exactly what you play is sometimes we are alone , and we &apos;re loten beyond our inner and the worlds .
and it &apos;s this playful curiosity that lets us explore and interact and interact and the unexpected of the ones that we &apos;re forming , are the real nährboden of creativity .
this is just a little vorgeschmack on the glimpses of the einblicke , the bonobos to our past and present .
but they also true a secret for our future , a future where we need to adapt to the germs of our cities , through bigger creativity and druch verstärkte .
the secret is that the game is the key to this skills .
in other words , play is our anpassungsjoker .
so to look at successful , we have to adapt to a unbeständige world , we need to play .
but will we do this best from our decision-making system ?
play is not silly , not silly , not silly , not silly , not silly .
but it &apos;s essential .
for bonobos and people are not going to be the lives of teeth and claws alone .
just if it &apos;s hardly appropriate , maybe it &apos;s probably the nötigsten .
and so , my primatenkameraden , you let &apos;s just give this gift of evolution and together , while we &apos;re going to work the kameradschaft and the wonder .
thank you .
i want you to imagine two pairs of a little bit of paare , the same day , at exactly the same day , right , every single moment , right .
so two pairs of pairs , every single zeugt .
now i don &apos;t want to use the too much time to imagine the zeugung , because if you &apos;re going to introduce the whole time the zeugung , they &apos;re not going to listen to me .
so imagine that just a moment .
and in this scenario , you imagine that in a case , the sperma sperma is wearing a y chomosom that &apos;s hitting the x chromosome of the egg .
and in the other case , the sperma sperma chromosome is that on x chromosome .
both of these are überlebensfähig , both zünden .
we &apos;re going to come back to these people .
most of my activities i have two things .
under a hat i &apos;m going to talk to the history of anatomy .
i &apos;m a tropical historikerin , and in this case i study how people interacted with anatomy -- and human bodies -- as they &apos;re mit with körperflüssigkeiten , with körperkonzepten umgingen , like they thought about your body .
the other hat i &apos;ve carried in my work is the activist -- or , as i say sometimes , as a impatients -- of the time , the patients are the patient .
in this case , i &apos;ve been working with people who have körpertypen , who have social norms in question .
so , for example , i &apos;ve been working with people who are twins , two people in a body .
i &apos;ve been working with people with zwergenwuchs -- so people who were smaller than a transistor .
and very often , i &apos;ve been working with intersexuellen people whose gender atypisch is -- so people who are not the average male or female körpertypen .
and as general , we can use the word for the word .
intersexualität comes in many different forms .
i just give you a few examples of the kinds of geschlechtsvarianten that are not in the male or female .
in a case , you might have someone with a xy chromosomenbasis , and the sry gene of the y läßt läßt the protogonaden that we &apos;ve all been in the stadium to be hoden .
and so that &apos;s why the testicles is going to be on the fötalen stage .
but because this individual is missing missing lack to realize the testosterone , the body doesn &apos;t respond to testosterone .
and that &apos;s called androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so much testosterone , but no reaction .
as a consequence , the body has more conservative than the body of the typical female .
if the child was born , it looks like a girl .
she &apos;s a girl . she &apos;s going to be as a girl .
but it &apos;s mostly until they achieved puberty and their breasts and developing , but they don &apos;t get their period , until somebody comes to point that here is something different .
and they do some tests and find that they were instead of eierstöcken and uterus , in fact , in fact , it &apos;s a y chromosome .
and it &apos;s important to understand that you might think of this person , but they &apos;re not really .
women , as men , have in our body , something called adrenalindrüsen .
they &apos;re in the back of our body .
and the nebennieren represent androgene , which are hormones hormones .
most women , as i -- i think i &apos;m a typical woman -- i don &apos;t know my real chromosomenaufbau , but i think i &apos;m probably going to have the typical -- most women i &apos;m going to talk about .
we produce androgen and we &apos;re talking about androgene .
the consequence is that somebody like i actually has a brain , that more androgenen was born , when a woman who was born with testicles and a androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so , the gender is really complicated ; intersexuelle are not just in the middle of the spectrum of gender -- in a sense , you can be distributed about the whole range of the bandwidth , can be distributed to the whole range .
one example : a few years ago , i received the phone of a 19 man who was a girlfriend , when young was born , had had a girlfriend with his girlfriend , lived with his girlfriend , lived and he was just found out that he had eierstöcke and a uterus .
he had a extreme form of a innate nebennierenrindenhyperblasie .
he has xx chromosome , and in the womb , his nebennieren were so strong that they &apos;re essentially a male hormonumgebung .
and as a consequence , his genitalien männlich was born , his brain was exposed to the typischeren of the hormonenspektrums .
and when he was born , he saw a boy , no one was a boy .
and only when he was 19 years old , he got enough medical problems , actually , because he was innerlich , that the doctors found that he was in the inside of the inner age .
okay , just a quick example of a nuance of intersexualität .
some people with xx chromosomes , create something called ovotestis , which is called eierstockgewebe umhüllt .
we don &apos;t know exactly why .
so gender can occur in many different varieties .
the reason why children are mit with this kind of body -- it &apos;s zwergenwuchs or siamesische twins , it was intersexuell -- from surgeons to the norm of the norm , is not because that &apos;s because that &apos;s because that &apos;s because that &apos;s because that &apos;s because that &apos;s because of their physical health .
in many cases , these people are completely healthy .
the reason why you &apos;re often found very often in them are very different ways of being able to be able to be able to be able to threaten our social categories .
typically it &apos;s rooted on the idea that a certain word of ausprägung is a specific identity .
so we have the idea that a woman is called a female identity , a black person , means , angeblich , a african anatomy to have a african anatomy in terms of their history .
so we have this awful idea of this .
and if we faced with a body , for us , for us , we actually have something very different , but beyond that kategorisierungen .
so we have a lot of romantic ideas about individualismus .
and our nation is really based on a very romantic concept of individualismus .
now can imagine how to imagine it &apos;s when children are born , the two people in a body , in a body , are in a body , the two people in a body .
where i had been in my last time , the most südafrikanische läuferin was läuferin semenya last year , whose gender were in the leichatlethik season in berlin .
many journalists called me with the question : &quot; what are going to be , you &apos;ll make us feel whether caster semenya or the old age is ? &quot;
and i had to explain the journalists that this is not a test .
we know that gender enough , we need to admit that nature &apos;s complicated enough to us , and female and female and female and female and female and weiblich and intersexuell ; tastächlich , we are that these jets as natural .
so we have a situation where we have to get our science , we have to admit that these categories , that we had to be herstellten for the very basic anatomische categories that are very easy to create very simple zuordnungen , much more unschärfer than we &apos;ve imagined .
and that &apos;s not just about gender .
it also applies about race , which is as much more complicated than our terminologie has approved .
in our process , we &apos;re going to be in all kinds of unbequemen areas .
we &apos;re looking for the fact that we have at least 95 percent of our dna in our dna .
what shall we start with the fact that we &apos;re just going to tell you from a few nukleotide ?
while we continue to continue our science , we &apos;re going to be more in a zone of the unbehagens where we have to recognize that the most fundamental categories we had probably was .
we see this in all sorts of human life .
one of the areas we see this in the beipiel , in our culture , in the united states , in the united states , the fighting over the beginning and the end of life .
we have a difficult talking about what &apos;s a body to people , so that he &apos;s a different right to the other person .
we &apos;ve been very difficult to today , and we don &apos;t seem as much as as as as in medicine -- about the question , when somebody &apos;s dead .
our ancestors had never been hard to fight with the question when someone was dead .
you have a feather under the nose under the nose , and if they were moving , they haven &apos;t been buried .
if you don &apos;t even more moved to you , you &apos;ve got it to be buried .
but today we are in a situation where we &apos;re going to take people lebenswichtige organs and other people .
and as a result , we &apos;re going to ask ourselves in the fight with the real difficult question , when somebody is dead , and that &apos;s going to be able to do that in a really difficult way that we don &apos;t have to do more as simple categories like earlier .
now , you might think that the whole thing of the zusammenbrechen is going to make really happy .
i &apos;m politically progressiv , i &apos;m verteidige people with unusual bodies , but i have to admit , it &apos;s making me nervous .
too , to grasp that these categories really are much more insecure than we thought .
and it makes me an awful lot of the democracy .
so to tell you about this anspannung , i first first first first , i &apos;m hoping i &apos;m a big fan of the founding founding founding founding founding founding founding founding founding founding .
i know they were rassisiten , i know they were sexisten , but they were great .
i find that they were so tapfer and strong , and so radically , in what they did , i &apos;ve been doing all the schmalzige musical musical das das das 1776 , and it &apos;s not because of the music that &apos;s absolutely forgotten .
it &apos;s because of what &apos;s going to happen with the gründungsvätern .
the founding fathers were from my view of my view of the world &apos;s original activists .
what they had to be a anatomisches concept , and they &apos;re replaced by another , and beautiful , and it was beautiful for us , and 200 years for us .
and as you all remember our founding fathers the concept of monarchy , and the monarchy in the bottom of the reason that &apos;s been on a very weak concept of anatomy .
the most popular world had no concept based on dna , but they had a concept of the fittest .
they had a concept of blue blood .
they were the notion that people who had political power to have political power to have the political blutlinie of the grandfather &apos;s großvater to the father for the son and so on .
the founding fathers of these gründungsväter is going to come back and replaced them through a new anatomisches concept , and this concept said that all people were going to be creating .
it nivellierten the spielfeld and decided that they &apos;ve been able to see the similarities , not the difference , and that was very radical .
now they made it to part because they were part of a aufklärerischen system , in which two things in common .
the democracy grew up , but at the same time , the science is going to be .
if you look at the history of the founding gründungsväter , many of you were interested in science , and they were interested in a concept of a naturalistischen world .
they went away from a clear übernatürlicher way , and meadows things like a supernatural concept of power , back to where the transmission are based on a very egalitarian of geburtsrecht .
they moved to a naturalistischen concept .
and if you look at the declaration of the declaration , they talk about nature and the god of nature .
they don &apos;t talk about god and nature .
it &apos;s talking about nature of nature to tell us who we are .
and as part of them , they were going to take a concept of the anatomischen commonalities .
and so they &apos;ve been going to really prepared the future .
they haven &apos;t thought about it , but what they &apos;ve done for us was great .
so what happened after that ?
for example , the konzept of the founding gründungsväter , the concept of the founding gründungsväter , that &apos;s not enough , as a result , that we should have a uterus and we have to have a uterus and we have not enough to be significant enough to be the right to be in full of the full citizenship , which is fairly easy to have a fairly property
and women argumentierten the successful .
when the first civil war came , where we saw people saw as sojourner truth , who was like sojourner truth , who i am not a woman ? &quot;
we find men in the marschierenden rows of the bürgerechtsbewegung , who say , &quot; i &apos;m a man . &quot;
again , people are different color that are being transformed on gps gemeinsamkeiten , again , successful .
we see the same thing in the behindertenrechtsbewegung .
of course , the problem is that , as we start looking at all the similarities , we start asking ourselves in question , why we &apos;re going to start to sustain a particular trennungen .
well , i want to look at particular trennungen , anatomisch , anatomisch , in our culture .
i want to like to say , for instance , a fish not the same rights as a human .
i don &apos;t want to say that we should be going to be going to be completely different .
i don &apos;t want to say that 5-jährige should have to have the right to give her consent or to marry .
so there &apos;s some anatomic trennungen that make sense of me and think , and we think , i think .
but the challenge is to try to figure out what it are and why we keep them , and whether they &apos;re comfortable .
so we get back to these two creatures that had been gezeugt to the beginning of speech .
we have two creatures , both of the same time in exactly the same day .
imagine one of them , maria , maria , three months born , so she &apos;s been born on june .
heinrich , on the other hand , the geburtstermin is born , so he &apos;s at one of march , a march , born , born , was born on a march of 1980 , born .
and just because of the fact that maria three months was born , they all have three months of the rights of the three months -- the law of having a einvernehmlichen sex that was right to drink .
and the way to do all this is to wait for all of this , not because he actually has another biological age , just because of its birth .
we find other merkwürdigkeiten in what their rights are .
and the way you feel that he &apos;s in the age -- although i haven &apos;t told you that he &apos;s the mit mit -- because you &apos;re now , it &apos;s so that he can &apos;t be able to do that , and you can &apos;t make it worried .
maria , the maria &apos;s the same thing , cannot be able to see the same kind of law , the same in all states , and that &apos;s right .
and the way can marry a woman , but maria today only marry a woman .
so we have these dauerhaften anatomischen categories that are in many ways , and questionable .
and for me , the question is , what are we going to do , because our science of all kinds of the anatomy in the field of anatomy is that we have to get a point where we need to admit that a democracy that could be designed on anatomy , auseinanderfallen ?
i don &apos;t want to give the science , but at the same time it feels like that science is doing .
so where are we going ?
it seems like that would be a kind of pragmatic attitude , &quot; well , we need to pull somewhere a line , so we pull them somewhere . &quot;
but a lot of people are in a very strange position .
so for example , texas at a point , that a man means that you had not designed to marry that you have not designed to marry , and a woman , that you have a y chromosome .
now in practice , people are being tested in their chromosome .
but it &apos;s also very bizarre because of the history that i told you about the androgenrezeptor-defekt .
if we look at one of the modern democracy , dr. martin luther king , he offers us in his &quot; i have a dream talking to a kind of solution . &quot;
he says , we should not be asking people to your skin , but after the characteristic of your character , &quot; judge , and goes beyond anatomy .
and i want to say , &quot; yeah , that sounds like a really good idea . &quot;
but how do you do that in practice ?
how do you do people in your own charaktereigenschaften ?
i also want to point out that i &apos;m not sure that we should be engaged in the people to be involved in people in terms of people , because i have to admit that i would have to know a series of such golden , which probably would be more likely than some people that i know .
i want to argue that i &apos;m probably going to know some of the most bright labradorhunde , the fähiger , intelligentere and depth of the sexual decisions of their sexual relationships as some of the most innovative , that i know .
so how do we get the question after the properties of character ?
it turns out it &apos;s really hard .
and part of me wonder what if the content would be something that would be something that would be done in the future -- using the most fundamental of visible ?
we really want to go into this direction ?
i &apos;m not sure where we go .
what i know is that it really matters about the idea of thinking that the united states is being affected in terms of asking you about democracy .
in our wake , we &apos;ve done our right right now , and i think we would make our thing in the future .
we don &apos;t have the situation like this , like this , for example , for example , a man who feels to other men &apos;s unrelated , it &apos;s been a bereit to be able to plan to be a geschlechtsumwandlung to be in the case of life .
and the way that kind of the way that we don &apos;t exist .
i &apos;m happy to say that we haven &apos;t been able to do this , a surgeon who had been talking about a few years ago , a few siamesische twins who had to be a few siamesische twins to separate them , partly to make a name .
but when i was with him , and he asked him , why he was hoch surgeries -- was his antwort surgeries -- was his answer to his country , these children would become very badly , and therefore he had to do it .
i said , &quot; well , now , you have to use political asyl in the course of the course of a surgery , rather than dividing them ? &quot;
the united states provide incredible ways to allow people to be without the state of the state of the state .
so i think , i think , we need to be positive .
all right , just to finish , i want to notice that i &apos;ve talked about a lot about the fathers .
and i want to think about the possibility of democracy , or looked like , could have been a little more if we have had the mothers have been more thoroughly .
and i want to say something that is really radical , and i think that there might be different ways that there might be different ways of the different types of anatomy , insbesonders when people apply a gruppendenken .
for years , because i was interested in intersexualität , i was interested in research for research in the realm of the geschlechterdifferenz .
and one of the things that i really found is that the difference between men and women in regard to how they think and in the world .
what we &apos;ve learned from studies studies is that women , in average , in average , in average , but more importantly , complex social relationships and the most complex social relationships are being vulnerable to the group of people who are vulnerable to be very much attention .
and so , if we think about this , we have a interesting situation .
and years ago , when i was a 12-year-old , i was asked to my studienbetreuer , who knew my interest in feminism -- i looked at me as an feminist , so i &apos;m going to do it -- a really profound question .
he said , &quot; tell me what was the feminism . &quot;
and i thought , &quot; well , this is the dumbest question i ever heard .
and in feminism , it &apos;s about gender aufzulösen , so that &apos;s not the feminism .
but the more i thought about his question to be so more i thought there might be something more comfortable in feminism .
it &apos;s called , it could give something , in average , which is actually the female brains of male , which is what makes us aufmerksamer for hochkomplexe social relationships , and aufmerksamer for the schutzbedürftige .
so where the founding fathers are extremely protected to find out how individuals are going to be protected to the state , it &apos;s possible that if we have more mothers in this concept , we &apos;re just a concept of concept , not just as you are , but how we can do for each other .
and maybe it &apos;s that , where we have to go in the future , if we &apos;re democracy over democracy over anatomy -- less about the individual bodies , and more about relationships .
so that if we try to make a perfektere connection , we think about what we can do for each other .
thank you .
i &apos;m jessi and this is my suitcase .
but before i show you what i &apos;m going to do , i &apos;m going to make a very special confession , and this is , i &apos;m obsessed with outfits .
i love to find any chance to find another farbenfrohes , verrücktes , to wear a verrücktes , and to photograph and over time .
but i don &apos;t buy anything new .
i get all my clothes from the second hand and in second-hand-shops .
ooh , thank you .
second-hand-shopping allows me to reduce the impact of my garderobe on the environment and also on my purse .
i &apos;m all of all kinds of people , my dollars for a good purpose , i &apos;m pretty unique , and it &apos;s making it a very different schatzsuche .
i mean , what will i find today ?
will it have my size ?
i &apos;m going to like the color ?
will it cost less than 20 dollars ?
if all of the answers , i feel like i won .
i come back to my suitcase , and tell you what i &apos;ve made for this exciting week here at ted .
i mean , what does someone do with so many outfits with this ?
so i &apos;m going to show you exactly what i brought .
i brought seven and i brought seven and that &apos;s all .
and it &apos;s been a week for exactly a week that i did in my suitcase .
i have a sense that i would have anything else i might want to wear if i just go to the palm of the day .
and since you haven &apos;t heard about me than the woman who are sitting in ted in your underwear -- called this , i found a few things .
and i want to show you my outfits for this week .
sounds good ?
while i &apos;m doing this , i &apos;m going to show you some of the lessons i believe or not , from those abenteuern , nothing to wear new .
let &apos;s start with sunday .
i call this the smell tigers .
you don &apos;t have to spend a lot of money to make good .
you can almost always look at less for less than 50 dollars .
this whole thing , including the coat of the department of the coat of rock , and it was the most expensive piece that i &apos;ve carried in this week .
monday : color is something more powerful .
it &apos;s almost impossible to be bad , if you &apos;re wearing hellrote pants .
if you &apos;re happy , you &apos;re going to be happy to other people .
tuesday : now , it &apos;s going to be totally überbewertet .
i &apos;ve spent a lot of time to try to be myself , and i &apos;m going to be concerned about it .
just think who you are .
if you &apos;re surrounded with the right people , you won &apos;t understand it , you &apos;ll be able to appreciate it .
wednesday : hug your own child .
sometimes people say , i saw that i &apos;ve learned from the verkleiden &apos; s or i &apos;m going to go to your shoe .
i like to smile and say , &quot; thank you . &quot;
thursday : confidence is the key .
if you think you &apos;re looking at something good , it &apos;s almost secure .
and if you think that you &apos;re not good at something good , you probably have probably right .
i grew up with a mother that taught me for day .
but first when i became 30 , i really understood what that means .
and i &apos;m going to be very quickly for you .
if you believe that you &apos;re inside , and you &apos;re a wonderful person , there &apos;s nothing that you can &apos;t wear .
so there &apos;s no excuse for someone in this audience .
we should be able to rocken everything we want .
thank you .
friday : a universal truth -- five words : golden pailleten is working .
and finally , saturday , a own , unique style , is a great way to tell a difference about a little bit of a word without a word .
it became always over and over again , when i was going to get people to come to me , just because of what i was wearing . and i had some conversations .
clearly , it &apos;s not going to fit everything in my tiny suitcase .
so before i go home , i &apos;ll go back to it again .
because the lesson i &apos;m trying to learn is to learn that it &apos;s okay to let us go .
i have to do this stuff not anhaften , because the road is always going to be a different verrücktes , farbenfrohes , strahlendes outfit , that only me just waiting for me when i love a little love in the heart .
thank you very much .
thank you .
good afternoon , all together .
i have something i want to show you .
think of this as a bildpunkt , as a flying flying .
this is what we call in our lab , wahrnehmbares design .
let me tell you a little bit about it .
now if you take this picture -- i &apos;m originally italian , and every boy in italy , in this painting , with this painting in his bedroom , but why i show you this one in the formula , that &apos;s a very interesting thing in the last decades .
so , a while ago , it was so much that if you wanted to win a formula , they took their budget and put their budget on a good driver and a good car .
and if the car and the driver were good enough , they won it .
now , if you want to win a race , actually , something like this -- something that the car has been in real , some thousand sensors , the information that are going to pass on the system and then it &apos;s going to be able to make it back to the system and then change the car back and make things in real time .
this would you like , in ingenieurteams , a echtzeit-kontrollsystem call .
and basically , it &apos;s a system that &apos;s made out of two parts -- a spürenden part and a reagierendenteil .
what &apos;s interesting is what &apos;s interesting is the echtzeit-kontrollsysteme start in our lives .
our cities were given over the last few years , just with networks and electronics .
they &apos;re going to be in the free .
and as a computer in the free , you start to respond to other kinds of ways , they &apos;re perceived to be perceived and driven .
if we &apos;re cities , that &apos;s actually a big thing .
and by the way , i want to mention that cities only two percent of the land are the surface of the land , but 50 percent of the world population population .
they &apos;re 75 percent of the energiekonsums -- we &apos;re going to be 80 percent of co2 emissions .
so if we do something with the cities , it &apos;s a big thing .
over the cities , all of this stuff and drive in objects of everyday life .
this is from a exhibition that was paola antonelli for moma later , in the year , organized .
it &apos;s called &quot; high with me . &quot;
well , all of our objects , our environment , we start to talk to us .
in a sense , it &apos;s almost like any atom out there , a sensor and a antreiber .
and the changes radically radically the interaction that we have people out of our environment .
in a way , it &apos;s almost as if the old dream of michelangelo -- that &apos;s the old dream .
you know , when the fact that the moses is going to take the back of the end , it &apos;s the end of the hammer and it &apos;s on the end of the day -- actually , you can still see a little bit of stelle -- and said , &quot; perché non parli ? &quot; why don &apos;t you do ? &quot;
now , today , we start to take our environment for the first time , to answer .
i &apos;m just going to show you some examples -- again , with the idea of our environment and anzutreiben .
let &apos;s start with the way .
now the first project i want to introduce you is in fact , in fact , one of the first of our labs .
it was formed in italy .
and what we &apos;ve done was actually a new kind of network that was used to be used in the world -- and it &apos;s a mobiltelefonnetz -- and the refined information from this network , which is going to be collected from this network to understand the most betreiber , to understand how the city works .
the summer was a happy summer -- 2006 .
it was as a italy .
some of you will remember it was as a high school teacher , and then the end of the zidane , the kopfstoß .
and no matter how italy , in the end , the end has been completed .
now , you see what happened in this day , just the monitor of the activity that happens in the network .
here you see the city .
you see in the middle of the kolosseum , the fluß tiber .
in the morning , the game .
you see the timeline .
in the afternoon , people here and there , and there &apos;s the phone and move around .
the game starts to -- silent .
france makes a gateway . italy , a gateway .
halbzeit , people do a short call , go on toilet .
second halbzeit . the end of the normal state .
first verlängerung , second .
zidane , in a moment of kopfstoß .
in italy . yeah .
now , in this night , all the center went to celebrate .
they saw the big resource .
the next day , all the center went to the center to make the siegerteam and the prime minister of time .
and then everybody went down .
you see the image of the platzes massimo , where the most exciting time , the people who are going to go to celebrate -- to have a big party , and you see the bottom of the day .
now , this is just one example , as we can feel the city , a way we couldn &apos;t do it .
and yet , another example of feeling : this is not about people , but about things that we use and consume .
now , today , we know all of our things are coming from .
this is a map that tells you all the chips that a mac computer is , as they came together .
but we just know about this where the things go .
so we actually have a few little markers to follow the trash during the trash , as he goes through the system .
so we started with some volunteers that we have more than a year ago , in seattle , things that they &apos;re doing -- different kinds of things they can see -- different kinds of things you can see -- things that they would otherwise .
and then we have the little chips , the little brands , on the trash , and it &apos;s too tracking .
here are the results that we &apos;re just right .
from seattle ...
after a week .
with this information we realized that there are lots of ineffizienzen in the system .
we can do the same things in which we do with less energy .
the data was not available .
but that &apos;s a lot of unnützer transporte and complicated things .
the other thing is that we believe that if we see every day , that the cup we throw away , not simply , it &apos;s still going to be still sitting on the planet .
and the plastic that we still stay every day .
and if we were going to show the people , then we can change a behavior .
so this is the reason for this project .
my colleague at mit , assaf biderman , could you have much more about the results and the many other things that you can do with , but i want to talk to you about the second part , and that &apos;s the most fundamental of our environment .
and the first project is something that we &apos;ve done a few years ago in zaragoza , spain .
it started with a question of bürgermeisters , who came to us and said that spain and südeuropa had a nice tradition to use water in public places in the architecture .
and the question was : how could you connect technology , new technology has to connect to new technology ?
and one of the ideas that were in a arbeitskreis ermittelt , and they were going to be this one cell , and valves , magnetventile , valves , the open ones .
they &apos;re going to be like a wasservorhang with bildpunkten water .
if these bildpunkte are put on these bildpunkte , they can write them , can make patterns , text .
and you can get to the exercise , and it will open up to let them go to them as you can see on this picture .
now , we &apos;ve introduced the mayor of belloch .
it has been very loved .
and we got a building a building to design the expo of the expo .
we called it the digital water .
the entire building was made of water .
there &apos;s no doors or windows , but if you &apos;re going to get to the age , it will open up and open it up .
the roof was also covered with water .
and if you want to get the windig , you can get the spritzen , you can even use the roof .
or you could close the buildings and the whole architecture , you know , you know , this time , if you &apos;re going to see the roof , you get images from people who were there and say , &quot; they have the building . &quot;
no , you have no idea that building building , it &apos;s just that architecture is almost .
here you see how the building works .
you see the person who &apos;s asking in the inner mind .
and here i &apos;m looking at me when i tried to test the sensors that the water would be bent , not to become more .
well , i should tell you what one night was going to work on the night of every single official .
but actually , it was still a wider wider problem .
all of the children from zaragoza came to the building , because the way they played with the building was very different .
no longer a building that open to you , but a building that still still pausen and holes in water , you had to jump without any wet .
and this was , for us , very exciting , because as architects , engineers , as designers , we always think about how people are doing things that we &apos;re designing .
but the reality is always unpredictable .
and this is the beauty of doing things that are used to interact and interact with people .
so here &apos;s a picture of the building with the physical bildpunkten , the bildpunkten of water and the projections .
and this is what we brought to this project that i &apos;m going to show you now .
imagine that you could start to fly this bildpunkte .
imagine you could fly little spots through the air , and each of you with a little bildpunkt with a little bildpunkt with wechselndem light -- almost like a cloud that can move through the space .
here &apos;s the video .
imagine a helicopter , like the ones you saw earlier , which is moving with other moves .
you can have these cloud .
you can have a kind of flexiblen screen or ad , like this -- a gleichmäßige formation in two dimensions .
or not in three dimensions , where the light changes , the light is , not the position of the bildpunkte .
you can play with different ways .
imagine the screen in a screen , just just like to be in different formaten or a lot of different auflösungen .
but then this whole only one of the 3d cloud from bildpunkten , which they can and walk through the line that they can look from many , many directions .
here you see a real flyfire-steuerung that herabsinkt around the zuvor of a gleichmäßiges .
if you turn the light , it looks like this . so , as we saw it before .
imagine that every single person is controlled .
it could have any single individual bildpunkt that will have a impulse that is going to be from people , or something .
i want to show you a little bit of that .
we &apos;ve been working with roberto bolle , one of the best balletttänzer of our time -- the étoile theater in new york and the car in milan -- we &apos;ve taken his movements in 3d to use it as a impulse for the flyfire .
here you see the roberto dancing .
on the left , they see the bildpunkte , the different eingefangenen .
it &apos;s the same time and a bewegungsaufnahme .
so that they can make the whole movement .
you can do this all the time .
but then , if we all have bildpunkte , you can play with it and play with color and drehbewegung .
so that we want to use a kind of a different plan for the flyfire .
i want to show you the latest project that we &apos;re working on .
it &apos;s something that we &apos;re working on the olympics in london .
it &apos;s called the cloud -- the cloud .
the idea is , imagine that we &apos;re going to take people to do something about something and to change the environment -- almost as something like we call it , wolkenbewegung , like you &apos;re going to move a scheunentor , but with a cloud .
imagine that every one of a little nugget can give a little nugget for a bildpunkt .
i think that the remarkable of the last last years , the last decades , the last decades is that we &apos;re going to be a physical world .
that has all digitized , knowledge , and it &apos;s going to be available by the internet .
today , we can first -- and the campaign has demonstrated that -- we can change the digital world , and the kräften of the networks of the networks of the world .
that can be in our case that we use it to design and create a symbol .
that means something that &apos;s built in the city .
but tomorrow , to provide the challenges of challenges -- think about climate change or co2 emissions -- how can we change the digital world to the physical .
so the idea is that we actually do the people with the people in which they &apos;re doing things together , they &apos;re doing things .
the cloud is a cloud from bildpunkten , in the same way , like a real cloud of particles .
and these particles are water , while our cloud is a cloud of bildpunkten .
it &apos;s a very clever feature in london , but with bildpunkten .
you can move inside and different kinds of experiences .
you can actually look at it from underneath the bottom , the most important moments of 2012 and sharing and other parts , and it &apos;s kind of the connection to the community .
so both of the physical cloud in the sky and something on the top of the top , you can go to the londons new berggipfel .
you can go .
and a kind of digital leuchtturm in the night -- but as a allerwichtigstes , a new kind of experience of all the experience of all the experience .
thank you .
as artists , i &apos;m very important to me .
and by my work i try to express that people are not apart and that everything else is connected .
the first time i was in the beginning of the antarctica , i was going to be 10 years ago , where i saw my first two .
and i was curious to me .
my heart was my heart , i was schwindelig while i was trying to grab what was happening .
the stories around me around me 60 meters from the water , and i was just wonder that this was a snowflake on a different snowflake , year .
more eisberge born than a calf of a glacier or a indem from eisschollen .
each iceberg has its own individual personality .
they interact with different ways with their surroundings and their experiences .
some people have to come up and from the bitter , and then the bitter would be able to come back and forth in a anfall fashion , passion .
if you look at a sense , you think you &apos;re very isolated , separate and alone , and alone , as we see .
but the truth is far away .
while a iceberg schmilzt , i atme his vorzeitliche atmosphere .
while the iceberg is drinking water , he &apos;s going to release drinking water , which is a lot of physical .
i &apos;m going to go through my footage of this eisberge so i would do portraits of my ancestors , in consciousness that they &apos;re in these individual moments of these weise , and never going to be so appropriately .
it &apos;s not death if you melt ; it &apos;s not a end , but a fortführung of your pfades along the entire life cycle .
part of the ice in the eisbergen i &apos;m photographiere is very young -- a thousand years old .
and part of the ice is more than 100,000 years old .
the last pictures i want to show you , show a iceberg that i have in kekertsuatsiak in greenland .
very rarely , you &apos;re actually going to actually look in a rollenden iceberg .
here you see it .
on the left hand , you see a little boat .
this is about five feet long .
please pay attention to the shape of the iceberg , and where he &apos;s in the wasserlinie .
you can see here , he starts to roll , and the boat moves on the other side , the man .
this is the average size of a grönland-eisbergs .
it keeps about 120 feet from the water , or 40 meters .
and this video is in real time .
and just like , you show you the iceberg of his personality .
thank you .
my life is really extraordinary blessed by the work of a few of amazing projects .
but the coolest thing i &apos;ve ever been working on , it was about this guy .
his name is tempt .
tempt was one of the leading graffitikünstler of the &apos; 80s .
then one day , he came back from walking back and said , &quot; paps , my legs . &quot;
and that was the outbreak of being .
tempt is fully paralyzed .
it can only use his eyes .
i was to him .
i have a company that &apos;s design and animations , and so , a complex part of what we admire in the medicine and see .
we &apos;ve decided to be , tony -- tempt -- and his thing to support .
i met his father and his brother and said , &quot; we &apos;ll give you this money , &quot; we &apos;ll give you this money , &quot; we &apos;ll give you this money .
what are you going to do with it ? &quot;
and his brother said , &quot; i want to talk to tony .
i just want to talk to him , and i asked , &quot; wait , &quot; wait , i &apos;m not -- i &apos;ve seen stephen hawking -- can &apos;t all the people who communicate with these devices ? &quot;
and he said , &quot; no , only when you hear the higher gesellschaftsschicht and a remarkable insurance insurance can actually do that .
normal people are not available to these devices . &quot;
and i was like , &quot; how did you do ? &quot;
did anybody see the film &apos; film and taucherglocke ?
so you communicate -- so walking your fingers .
i staunte , &quot; very archaisch , how can that be ? &quot;
so i came with the need to do just a check and put a check out of a check and instead i got a check from the leiseste i couldn &apos;t know the smallest idea how i should be einlösen .
i &apos;m going to finish to the place and a father and his father -- &quot; well , my proposal is , &quot; well , my proposal is , &quot; tony is going to talk to him , we &apos;ll find a machine , and we &apos;ll find a way that he can make his art again .
because it &apos;s a farce that somebody who &apos;s going to do that in that , it &apos;s not comfortable . &quot;
so i was talking about a few months later .
i met these people from grl , science lab , and they have a technology that allows them to go through each other , and then draw with a laserpointer on the surface of the negative space .
so they pull and make them like this .
they say all things that are going up there , a complete consequences .
it starts with the innovators , then the schimpfwörter , the bush-verleumdungen and the final people are actually doing art art .
but there was always a life cycle in their presentation .
so i went home and ate my wife and ate her wife and ate her , and we thought , &quot; well , second , if you can use your eyes to control things , we should find a way that tempt can be owed that tempt can drive a laser , so that it would be a very simple thing . &quot;
that was the beginning of the journey .
and about two years later , a year later , a lot of organization and much of things , and then you get some things .
first , we have the insurance versicherungen , and actually , in fact , for tempt , you can have a device that he can communicate with -- a stephen hawking-maschine .
that was incredible .
and it &apos;s really extremely funny -- i call him yoda , because you &apos;re talking about him , or you &apos;re going to get a email , and i think , &quot; i &apos;m so unwürdig , this guy is incredible . &quot;
also , we have seven programmers from all the world -- literally from all the world of the world -- to us .
my wife , my children and i are into the garage , and these hackers and programmers and verschwörungstheoretiker and anarchisten have been able to collect our house .
many of our friends thought that we were beautiful stupid , that we &apos;re going to do and we &apos;re going to zurückkämen and all the pictures on the walls .
but for two weeks , we &apos;ve got programmed to the strandpromenade in venice , my children were scolded , my dog , and we were riding this .
it &apos;s called eyewriter and you can see the description .
this is a cheap sonnenbrille that we bought from the strandpromenade of venice , something kupferdraht and some things from the baumarkt and the elektronikhandel .
we took a ps3-kamera , they have a led-licht egg , and now we have a device that &apos;s available -- you can build it yourself , we can put the code that are able to download the code that can download it .
so we &apos;ve created a device that completely devoid of constraints is .
no insurance can afford to be querstellen , querstellen , querstellen , can &apos;t afford to be querstellen .
no hospital .
everybody can be used to be able to communicate with his eyes or draw .
thank you .
thank you very much , that was unbelievable .
at the end of the two weeks , we went back to tempts .
i love this painting because it &apos;s the room of someone else and that &apos;s his room .
and there &apos;s all of these rummel in the big unveiling of the great unveiling .
and after a year , two weeks , two weeks , nudelparties and durchgemachten nächten , drew tony , tony &apos;s first time for seven years .
and this is a computer painting because this is his life support , and he &apos;s going to see over his life .
we have geneigt his bed , so he can go out .
we have a chemical scan against a wall of the parkplatztes of the hospital .
and he drew back to the first time in his family and friends -- and you can only imagine what a feeling that was on the parking lot .
lustigerweise , we had to be in the parking lot of the parking lot , we felt that we were looking at a part of the sprüher-szene .
at the end , he was going to have a email with this : &quot; for the first time i &apos;ve been doing something for seven years .
i feel like i was going to go under water and finally got someone to go down and my head , and i can breathe . &quot;
is that not overwhelming ?
this is something like our kampfschrei .
that &apos;s what the private sector and we continue to continue to continue .
and we have to improve a lot of this device .
it &apos;s a amazing device , but it &apos;s a zaubertafel .
and somebody who has a such künstlerisches potential , deserves so much more .
so we &apos;re finding out how to make it better and stronger .
since this time , we &apos;ve got all sorts of recognition .
we won a few awards .
remember , it &apos;s free , no one has made us .
it &apos;s all coming from our own pockets .
so the critics were , &quot; oh , that &apos;s fantastic . &quot;
armstrong twitterte about us and then , in december , in december , we have been honored to the time-magazine of the greatest best invention of what was really great .
the coolste of this is -- and the sum of the circle -- that it &apos;s this april , the geffen moca in the inner-city of los angeles will give a show called &quot; kind of the world &quot; hero . &quot;
and there are probably going to be pretty much the toughest representative of the straßenkunstszene anwesend -- banksy , shepard fairey -- all these guys are going to be there .
tempt is becoming part of the show , which is pretty much .
so basically , you &apos;re going to see something that &apos;s impossible , it &apos;s impossible , then it &apos;s possible .
all in this room was impossible -- these stage , this computer , this computer , this microphone , this microphone -- everything was impossible .
do you it possible -- you all all here .
i &apos;m not a programmer and had never been to do anything with augenerfassungstechnologie , but i just got something and i &apos;ve got a little bit of people and i &apos;ve got to make a wonderful people , so we could put together something on the legs .
and this question should be asking each of you and to each individual day , and you can get something like that , if you &apos;re going to be able to get to you , if it &apos;s done , when i &apos;m not ?
thank you .
so i write for children , and i &apos;m probably most american meist gelesener .
and i say people always , i &apos;m not going to come like a scientist .
you can have me as a farmer , or in leather , but no one has ever chosen to ever .
today i want to talk to you about circles and it .
well , a enlightenment is for usually something that you &apos;re going to find out there .
you &apos;re about to block block and takes it as a revelation .
this is a painting of a circle .
one of my friends has done it -- richard bollingbroke .
it &apos;s the kind of complicated circle of what i want to tell you today .
my circle started back in the &apos; 60s in the high school in stow , ohio , where i was the klassenschwuchtel .
i was the one who was going to be a week in the jungentoilette green and blue was beaten until a teacher saved my life .
they saved my life by using me the toilet in the lehrerzimmer .
they did it secretly , they did .
she did for it three years for years .
and i had to go out from the city .
i had a thumb , i had 85 dollars , and i was struck by san francisco in california -- i found a lover -- and then i found it was a work in aids-organisationen .
about three or four years ago , i received a call from this teacher , woman , woman , who said , &quot; i have to see them .
i &apos;m sad that we never learned each other as adults .
can you get to ohio , and please come along with the man , i know you &apos;ve found it .
and i should mention i should mention that i have bauspeicheldrüsenkrebs , and i want you to say that you &apos;re going to be able to go . &quot;
now , the next day we were in cleveland .
we saw them , we laughed , we cried and we knew that she would be in an hospice .
we found one for them , we took them to them , and we gave them to her , and we gave them to her family because it was necessary because it was necessary .
it was something that we knew .
and just as a woman who wanted me to learn as adults , i was going to know , she was going to be a box of a box , and became a box in my hands .
what happened was that the circle had closed , it was a circle , and the revelation of i was talking about .
the revelation is , the death of life is part of life .
it &apos;s saved my life , and my partner and i was doing the same .
and you know , this part of life needs everything that needs everything that needs to change the rest of life .
he needs truth and beauty , and i &apos;m so happy that this is so often used to this .
it needs just the same -- he needs to love love and pleasure , and it &apos;s to us to give these things .
thank you .
imagine a major explosion , while they &apos;re on 1,000 feet .
imagine a plane in smoke .
imagine a little bit of a triebwerk , das , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack .
that sounds angst .
well , i had a unique space at this day ; i sat on 1d .
i was the only one who could talk to the flugbegleitern .
so i looked at them right , and they said , &quot; no problem , we have a few birds . &quot;
the pilot had the machine , and we weren &apos;t going to be so far away .
you could see manhattan .
two minutes later three things at three .
the pilot took the machine to the hudson river .
that &apos;s not the route .
it &apos;s got to take the tail .
imagine a geräuschloses plane .
and then he said three words -- the most emotionslosesten words i ever heard .
he says , &quot; bereitmachen for the aufprall . &quot;
i didn &apos;t have to talk to the bordpersonal .
i could see it in your eyes , there was a horror of the life .
i want to tell you three things that i learned about this day .
i learned that in a moment , it &apos;s all different .
we have these lebensplan , we &apos;ve got these things that we wanted to do in life , and i thought about all the people , and it didn &apos;t really did , all the zäune i wanted to do , all the experiences i wanted to do and never .
while i was thinking about this , i was a phrase to me , &quot; i collect bad wines . &quot;
because if the wine is as the wein and the person is there , then i open it .
i never want to be more about the life .
and this urgency , this goal has really changed my life .
the second thing i learned about this day -- and that was when we were the george washington bridge to verfehlten , so pretty much about haaresbreite -- da , i thought , &quot; wow , there &apos;s one thing that i really really do .
i had a good life .
in my own humanity , and with my mistakes , i &apos;m going to ask them , better , i &apos;ll be able to do anything in everything else .
but in my humanity , i &apos;ve been given my ego .
and i &apos;m going to bedauerte the time that i wasted for bedeutungslose things , with people who are something that means .
and i thought to the relationship with my wife , to people .
and then , when i thought about it , i decided to make negative energy from my life .
it &apos;s not perfect , but it &apos;s much better .
i &apos;ve gone to my wife , i &apos;ve been doing it for two years .
it feels great .
i &apos;m not trying to have a law , i &apos;m happy to be happy .
the third thing i learned -- and while the inner clock , &quot; 15 , 14 , 14 , 14 , 13 , 13 , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen , &quot; herunterzuzählen ,
you see the water .
i said , &quot; please flieg . &quot;
i don &apos;t want to be able to do this thing in 20 parts , as you know it .
and as we were doing that , i had this feeling , man , not terrifying .
almost like that , as we prepare for our lives .
but it was very sad .
i didn &apos;t want to go ; i love my life .
and this sadness formierte really is really in a thought that i just just one thing .
i just wish i could see my children grow .
so , about a month , i visited a performance of my daughter -- erstklässler , not much more künstlerisches for me ...
not yet .
and i &apos;m feiere , i was like a little kid .
and in the world , it &apos;s all a sense of interest .
i realized that by the time , i realize that the dots of each other , that it &apos;s just a great father .
more than anything , everything else is , my greatest goal in life , a good father .
i was being zuteil at the miracle of that day .
i got another gift to see the future and to live and different .
my call to all of you today , is , imagine that same happens on your flight -- but -- but imagine it -- but imagine it &apos;s sitting , and how would you change ?
what would you do you , you know , because you think they were forever for forever ?
how would you change your relationships and the negative energy in it ?
and more than anything else , they are the best parents that they can only ?
thank you .
the idea behind the stuxnet is quite simple .
we don &apos;t want to build the bomb .
the most important post there is there for development in the development of nuclear weapons , the uran-anreicherungs-einrichtung uran-anreicherungs-einrichtung .
the gray boxes that you see here , these are echtzeit-kontrollsysteme .
so if it &apos;s possible to kompromittieren the systems that drehzahlen and control control , we can actually get a lot of problems with the centrifuge .
these gray boxes are running with windows-software , they &apos;re actually based on a completely different technology .
but if we can do it , a effective windows-virus on a laptop einnistet who used to be used by a wartungsingenieur to konfigurieren this gray box , then we are in business .
and that &apos;s the planning behind stuxnet .
so we start with a windows-dropper .
the nutzdaten will be given to the gray box , the centrifuge and the iranian kernenergie-programm seemed to be the iranian verzögert .
this is a piece of cake , or ?
i want to tell you how we &apos;ve found that .
when we started our research to stuxnet six months ago , was completely unknown , what meaning and purpose was going to be the purpose of this .
the only thing we knew is very , very complicated , which is the windows- part , the dropper- part , and he made by collecting zero- day- .
and it seemed like something that was happening with these grauen , this echtzeit- kontrollsystemen .
the erregte aufmerksamkeit and we started a labor- project where we were dealing with our environment with stuxnet infected and then .
and then something weird happened .
stuxnet verhielt , like a laborratte that doesn &apos;t work on our cheese -- schnüffelte , but didn &apos;t want to eat it .
that was not going to make sense .
and after we had to come with different kinds of cheese , i was hoping that this was a gezielter attack .
and it &apos;s a completely bestimmtes .
the dropper streift aktiv aktiv on the gray box , when a special configuration was discovered , even when the special program , which it takes to the end of the target .
and if not , it &apos;s not anything .
so , that really is really interested in my interest and we started working around the clock , because i thought , well , we don &apos;t know what the goal is .
it could say we say , for instance , a us- american power , or a chemieanlage in germany .
so we should be able to figure out what the goal is .
so extrahierten and dekompilierten we found that it &apos;s in two digital warheads is a smaller and a bigger .
and also , in fact , they were very , very professional constructed , from people who are all the insider- information to the available information .
and they knew all bits and bytes that they had to attack .
and probably , you know , you know , even the schuhgröße of the maschinenbedieners .
so they knew everything .
and if you &apos;ve ever been faced , the most complex complex complex complex and high-tech is , let me tell you : the nutzdaten are a science for themselves .
it &apos;s much more than anything we ever ever seen .
here you see a clip from this angriffs- code .
we &apos;re talking about -- about 15,000 lines .
pretty much like how altmodische assemblersprache .
and i want to tell you how we were able to become the able to become a very clever smart .
so after the first thing we were , were systemfunktions- aufrufe , because we know what this will do .
and then we went to timern and datenstrukturen and trying to bring this with the real world in relation to the real world -- with potential goals in the real world .
so we needed theories about these goals that we could do or do .
so to get this theories , we call it hochgradige sabotage , it &apos;s definitely about hochgradige ziel , and it &apos;s probably in iran , because there &apos;s been a lot of the world .
now , in this area , there &apos;s not several thousand goals .
basically , it &apos;s going to go beyond the buschehr nuclear trains and on the urananreicherungsanlage .
so i told my assistant , &quot; i &apos;m going to give me a list of all of the experts for zentrifugen and kraftwerke . &quot;
and i called them and zapfte her to compare her to compare to compare to compare what we found in the code and the data .
and that worked very well .
so it was possible to bring the little digital digital sprengkopf with the rotorsteuerung .
the rotor is that moving part of the centrifuge , these black object that you see .
and if you tamper the speed of this rotors , then you actually actually have to crack the rotor and then even the zentrifuge .
what we found is that the goal of the attack was actually actually able to let it slowly and make really happen to make it happen -- obviously in the attempt to let the attempt to get to the occasion , so they wouldn &apos;t be able to get to get to the occasion .
the great digital sprengkopf -- we &apos;ve got a glimpse of a glimpse of what we &apos;re doing very much data and datenstrukturen .
so for example , the number of 164 is out of this code ; you can &apos;t overlook .
i started to think , scientific literature , about how these zentrifugen are built in natanz , and found that they &apos;re strukturiert , and every kaskade enthält is enthält .
so this made sense , it was fitting together .
and it was even better .
these zentrifugen are in iran , in the 15 , in 15 .
and guess what we found in the angriffscode ? &quot;
almost identical structure .
so again , that really was really good .
and this gave us a big confidence for that we &apos;re going to be here .
well , don &apos;t you get wrong with me , that couldn &apos;t just be that .
these results have been achieved by several weeks .
and we just had to put it into a sackgasse and had to collect us .
anyway , we found that both digital is in fact , in fact , in fact , a whole destination , but from different directions .
the little sprengkopf übernimmt takes a kaskade , and überdreht the rotoren and the large sprengkopf of them and the large sprengkopf of sechs with six kaskaden in interaction and manipulated .
so , in large and all , we are very confident that we actually have to be what the goal is .
it &apos;s natanz and it &apos;s just natanz .
so we have to worry about that other goals would be met .
here &apos;s something really cool stuff that we &apos;ve discovered -- has really taken out of the socks .
there &apos;s the gray box , and above , you see the zentrifugen .
now , what this thing is , is that it &apos;s the case of sensoren abfängt -- for example , for example , beispiel code , and it &apos;s stellt code that still has the attack , with wrong .
and in fact , this false thing is actually recorded from stuxnet before .
so it &apos;s just like in hollywoodfilmen , where the verfolgungsjagd überwachungskamera mit with vorher videoaufnahmen .
this is cool , isn &apos;t it ?
the idea of this is not just not just the maschinenbediener in the state .
in fact , it &apos;s still much more dangerous and more .
the idea is to be a digital sicherheitssystem .
we need digital sicherheitssysteme where a human maschinenbediener can &apos;t react to be fast enough .
so in a power , if the big dampfturbine is going to be too fast , you have to open up entlastungsventile within milliseconds .
of course , of course , this can &apos;t be done by a human maschinenführer .
so on this point , we need digital .
and if the risk are , really bad things happen .
the power plant can explode .
and neither of the maschinenführer , it &apos;s going to notice it .
this is frightening .
but it &apos;s still worse .
and what i &apos;m saying is very important .
think about it . this attack is generisch .
he has nothing to do with zentrifugen , with urananreicherung .
so he would work so well as well as a power plant or a plant in a automobilfabrik .
it &apos;s generisch .
and you don &apos;t need to -- as the attacker -- you have to not have the nutzdaten stick , and we &apos;ve seen it in a usb- stick , as we &apos;ve seen in stuxnet .
you could use it to use habitual technology technology .
you have to spread it as far as possible .
and if you do that , you get a cyber- massenvernichtungswaffe .
that &apos;s the implication that we have to ask .
so unfortunately , the greatest number of goals are not in the middle east .
they &apos;re in the united states , europe and japan .
so all these green areas , these are the zielreichsten environments .
we need to ask ourselves the consequences and we &apos;re going to make better .
thank you .
i have a question .
ralph , it became a lot of that , that people assume that the mossad is the hauptorganisation behind the hauptorganisation .
is that the same thing ?
okay , you want to really know ?
yes . okay .
i think , is the mossad involved , but the driving force is not israel .
so the driving force is the cyber- superpower .
there &apos;s one and that &apos;s the united states -- fortunately , fortunately .
because otherwise we &apos;re even bigger even bigger .
thank you , you &apos;ve got a heidenangst eingejagt . thanks ralph .
i spent the last few years to put me in situations that normally normally be very hard and at the same time .
i went to prison .
i &apos;ve been working in a kohlebergwerk .
i filmed in kriegsgebieten , hard and dangerous .
and i spent 30 days to eat nothing here -- and this is what this is going to eat here -- and a little bit of hard in the middle , very dangerous .
in fact , i actually had the biggest part of my career in fürchterlichen situations , and all of the things that we have to investigate is that the social theory of the same way that they are and hopefully , and hopefully , to a kind of sense of what they &apos;re doing for the audience of the audience and available .
so when i knew that i would come to the world in a tedtalk and looking at a tedtalk from branding and sponsoring , i knew i would make a little bit more different .
some of you may have heard about that i was going to put a few weeks ago in ebay .
i &apos;m going to give some facebook-nachrichten , some twitter-nachrichten , and i gave people the opportunity to erstehen the namensrechte of my tedtalk .
and really , some happy people and companies , erhielten and non-profit , explaining the unique opportunity -- because i &apos;m sure that chris anderson , you know , the namensrechte of the talk , you know , the namensrechte had never been to see the zeitpunkt , not a lot of the titel and not many evidence that would be really .
so what you got here : my name here : my tedtalk , from which you have to be a clue , and the one you could get the subject to the ears , especially if i could get their company to their beteiligung .
but this is what it &apos;s about , it &apos;s a very good opportunity .
you know how many people watch this tedtalks ?
a whole lot of .
this is just the only one .
so , despite this warning , i knew that anybody would buy the namensrechte .
if you had asked me this one year ago , i couldn &apos;t have been able to say this to you .
but in the new project i work , my new film , we investigate the world of marketing .
as i said , i &apos;ve been blown in a few terrible situations , but nothing couldn &apos;t prepare me anything to me anything , and so dangerous as much as it as a gefährliches as with these guys in a room .
you know , i had the idea of a movie .
what i want to do is a film about product placement , marketing and advertising , where all the movie funded is funded by product , marketing and advertising .
and the film is called &quot; the greatest movie sold . &quot;
and what &apos;s called the greatest movie ever sold , is that all of the top up to the bottom , the beginning to the end , is totally close to the end of the beginning , which you see in the movie , which you see in the movie , that &apos;s the brand that is the brand x. .
now these brand , the qualcomm stadion , the staples center , &quot; staples center .
these guys are connected to the movie in the same time -- forever .
and so the movie is going to study this whole idea -- that &apos;s what ? in eternity , for whatever ?
i &apos;m a redundante person .
that was more to the rest .
it was in eternity . &quot;
but we &apos;re not just the brand of x as a titelsponsor , but we &apos;ll make sure that we &apos;re going to be able to be able to be able to be in a possible category .
and so we may be able to do a shoe and it &apos;s going to be the greatest shoe that you ever have to have .
the greatest car that you ever have ever been the dangers , &quot; the greatest getränk &quot; , &quot; the greatest drink you &apos;ve ever had to have a aufmerksamkeit of the greatest movie sold . &quot;
so the idea is to show that brands are part of life , actually , actually , to get them to finance the movie ?
and we actually show the whole process of how it works .
the goal of all the film is transparency .
you &apos;ll see the whole thing in the movie of the movie .
so this is the whole concept of the whole film , from beginning to end .
and i would like to be happy if you help the ceg that would help .
you know , it &apos;s funny because when i first heard it first , it &apos;s the ultimate respect for the audience .
but i don &apos;t know how to be empfänglich .
have you just a perspective -- i don &apos;t want to use the perspective , because that has a negative konnotation -- but you know how to do that ?
how much money is needed to make it ?
1.5 million .
i think it &apos;s hard to meet you , but i think it &apos;s worth any case , some of the most creative brands .
who knows when the movie comes out , we might see how a horde vollidioten .
what do you think is going to be the answer ?
the answer is probably &quot; no . &quot;
but it &apos;s a difficult thing to be because of the movie or a difficult thing about me ?
jk : both .
so ... so , not so optimistic .
so , my lord , can you help me ? i need help .
i can help .
okay . okay .
fantastic .
we have to think what brands are .
yes .
if you look at the people with whom you have to do it with you .
there are some of those spots that we can apply .
imagine the camera .
i thought , &quot; imagine the camera for &quot; dignity , &quot; we wanted to lead a hintergrundgespräch .
it turned out that it was in reality , &quot; we want to do with your film . &quot;
and just so these are all these companies , one after another .
no one wanted to do something with the movie .
i was amazed .
they didn &apos;t want to do anything with the project .
and i was confused , because i thought , the whole concept of advertising , your product as many people as possible as much as possible as many people as possible as possible as possible .
especially in the world today , this intersection of new and old media and the zerstückelten media -- isn &apos;t it the idea of being the idea that the masses is going to be the massen .
no , that was what i thought .
but see , the problem was that my idea had a fatalen mistake , and that was .
actually , no , that wasn &apos;t the mistake .
that would be no problem .
that would be okay .
but what this picture is , is a problem .
you see , if you &apos;re transparency in the google-suche &apos;s , this is -- this is one of the first pictures that seems to be .
i like to really understand your way , sergey brin . now .
this was the problem : transparency -- unencumbered from deception and tücke , just to explore and durchschauen , and it &apos;s understandable to informationen , and the access to information , especially , what the last line is -- the last line is certainly the biggest problem .
you know , we &apos;re currently listening to transparency .
our politicians say , our president tells us , even our ceos .
but if it comes from , it &apos;s supposed to be changed something .
but why ? well , transparency is fear -- like this strange bear , the one of the most remarkable bear .
it &apos;s unvorhersagbar -- like this strange landstraße .
and she &apos;s also very risky .
what else is still ?
a whole dish of eating food .
this is very risky .
so when i started talking to the companies and tell them that we wanted to tell this story , they said , &quot; no , we want to tell you that you &apos;re going to tell a story .
we want you to tell you a story , but we just want to tell you that you &apos;re going to tell our story . &quot;
and you see , when i was a kid , and my father was going to me , and he &apos;s looking at this look at this look at this point -- he would say , &quot; my son , there &apos;s three versions of any three versions .
there &apos;s your version , there &apos;s my version , and there &apos;s the real version . &quot;
so you see , with this film we wanted to tell the real version .
but there &apos;s only one company , a agency , a agency , and also , because i was john bond and richard kirshenbaum since years , i found that i had to go to the mittelsmann and go to the companies with my team .
so what you suddenly started to understand -- or what i started to understand -- was that when you start talking to these companies that would be understood with these companies , the idea of how your brand is going to understand , a group of problem is .
i have friends , the big , giant hollywood-filme , and i have friends who do little independent-filme like me .
and my friends , the great , giant hollywood-filme , say , why your films are so successful , they &apos;re so successful , they &apos;re so successful , they have .
and then my friends say little independent-filme , &quot; well , how do we should be compete with these big , gigantic hollywood-filmen ? &quot;
and the movie is called &quot; the greatest movie sold . &quot;
so how are we going to see in the movie ?
whenever i go down to the path , and always if i put the medizinschrank , you &apos;re going to see them down .
and every time i &apos;m somebody who can say , i can say , &quot; are you fresh enough for this interview ?
are you going to be in ? you see a little nervous .
i want to help you to calm down .
so maybe you should have a little bit of this interview a little bit of this . &quot;
and then we offer one of these great düfte .
either &quot; floral fusion or a &quot; paradise winds , &quot; you &apos;ll have the choice .
we &apos;re going to be both for men as women &apos;s equipped -- fest , roll-on , or a stick .
this is the kurzfassung .
now i can answer all your questions and give them a ausfühliche version .
we &apos;re a smaller brand .
so as you &apos;ve talked about the smaller movies , we are as a brand .
so we don &apos;t have a budget like other brands .
so these things -- you know , reminds people at the ban -- that &apos;s kind of why we &apos;re interested in .
what words would you describe to you ?
ban is blank .
this is a great question .
woman : überlegene technology .
technology is not the way you describe something that someone else is doing under the achseln .
we &apos;re talking about the kühn .
i think &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; is a great word that these particular category really is doing , unlike a bekämpft smell and humidity . &quot;
it &apos;s like you .
how can we keep them longer , better fresh , more fresh , three times more .
these things have a positivere effect .
and this is a millionen-konzern .
what is about me ? what is about the druchschittstypen ?
i have to talk to the guy on the street who are like me , otto-normal-verbraucher .
they should tell me something about my brand .
how do you describe your brand ?
hmmm , my brand ?
i don &apos;t know .
i like to love beautiful clothes .
woman : &apos; 80s revival meets skaterpunk , except on the waschtag .
well , what is the brand gerry ?
unique .
i think the genre , the style i have , is probably &quot; dark glamour . &quot;
i like many black colors , many grautöne and so on .
but normally i have a accessoire , like sonnenbrillen , or a jewelry and a zeugs .
woman : if dan would be a brand , he would probably be a classic mercedes .
man 2 : the brand i am , is i would say , lässige fly .
woman 2 : the most part , partly yogi , the most part , part of the part -- i don &apos;t know .
man # 3 : i &apos;m the schmusetyp .
i &apos;m going to do a schmusetiere in the entire country .
so i think that &apos;s my brand .
this is my brand in my little , verzerrten industry .
man 4 : my brand is fedex because i was ausliefere .
man 5 : brand gescheiteter schreiberling .
that &apos;s what ?
attorney : i &apos;m a anwaltsmarke .
i &apos;m tom .
well , we can &apos;t all be the tom-marke , but i often see a lot of the interface of dark glamour and lässiger fly .
and what &apos;s noticed was that i needed a experts .
i needed someone who could work in my head , someone who really could help me understand what you call &quot; the &quot; markenpersönlichkeit &quot;
and so i found a company called olson zaltman .
they have companies like nestle , febreze , hallmark , hallmark , to explore these markenpersönlichkeit .
if you could do it for the things , they could also help me .
they &apos;ve brought their pictures , yes ?
i have this . the first picture is a picture of my family .
just tell me a little bit like that with their thoughts and feelings about it .
these are the people that shapes my worldview .
tell me about this world .
md : this world ? i think the world is the world in which you live -- like people around a around , the friends that live the way that you live in the way that you live in the way that you live in the way .
all of these things are going to come and start from a place , and for me and start to start with my family in west virginia .
what &apos;s next to talk about you .
the next thing . this was the most beautiful day of my life .
in which context , it &apos;s the thoughts and feelings about them ?
it &apos;s like i like to be .
i like things that are different .
i like things that are the ones that are sonderbar . i like things .
tell me about the &quot; why &quot; -- what does it take us ?
what is the machete ? in which puppenstadium are you &apos;re currently currently ?
why is it important , neuzustarten ? what &apos;s the red ?
tell me a little bit about this part .
a little more about you , that &apos;s not you .
what are the other metamorphosen have gone to you ?
... that must be no frightened . in what kind of rollercoaster are you ?
eeeeee ! no , thank you .
thank you for your patience .
yes . well . good .
yeah , i don &apos;t know what is going to happen .
there &apos;s a lot of crazy things happening .
the first thing i saw was that this idea was that your markenpersönlichekti had two fingers , but the morgan sides -- the morgan spurlock-marke is a achtsame / extrovert .
the next day is very good .
and i think there &apos;s almost a contradiction that &apos;s almost a contradiction .
and i think some companies are just focus on a strength , rather than both of them .
many companies tend to do -- and this is the human nature -- things that they &apos;re not sure are , they &apos;re going to avoid this elements , and they &apos;re actually going to be able to get them into something that &apos;s actually in something positive , and that &apos;s a geschickter schachzug .
what other brands are doing ?
the first one is a classic , apple . apple .
and you can see this here , also , target , wii , mini mini of mini coopers and jetblue .
well , there are verspielte brands and achtsame brands that come and go , but a verspielte , achtsame brand is quite strong .
it &apos;s a achtsame , verspielte brand . how is your brand ?
if somebody would ask you to describe their markenidentität , their markenpersönlichkeit , how would you be ?
you &apos;re a up-attribut ? are you something that the blood in wallungen is doing it in wallungen ?
or are you more like a down-attribut ?
are you something that a little bit , reservierter , konservativer ?
up-attribute are things that are playful , the playful verspielt , frisch , frisch , zeitgemäß , abenteuerlich , ausgefallen and lieblich like erol flynn , wendig and agile , profan , magisch and mystisch .
or are they more like a down-attribut ? &quot;
are you mindful and mondän like 007 ? &quot;
are they were established , traditionally , pflegend , beschützend , compassionate , compassionate ?
are they reliable , stable , familiär , sicher , sicher , heilig , heilig , and wise like the dalai lama or yoda ?
in the course of the film , we had more than 500 companies that were and down-firmen and the down-firmen and the &quot; no , &quot; they didn &apos;t want to be part of the project .
they wanted to do anything with this film because they don &apos;t have control , no control over the last product .
but what &apos;s found 17 markenpartner , the ready to make the kontrolle to the control that were going to do with someone and verspielt and the challenges that we don &apos;t have to tell stories , stories that we don &apos;t normally have to tell -- stories that would never support a werber .
they befähigten us to tell us the story of the neuromarketing , as we &apos;re using the story in this movie that you use today to be used to mris the lustzentren of the brain , both of the brain , both of the werbung and films .
we drove to sao paulo where the außenwerbung had been banned .
in the entire city , for five years , we &apos;ve been not a anzeigentafel , no poster , no flyer .
and we drove in the outside , where companies are going to be their way to bahnen in a lot of verarmte .
the incredible thing about me is that the projects i got to most feedback or where i had the biggest success , which are where i &apos;m going to be with things .
and this is what these brands did have done , they &apos;ve done these brands , which is done .
because they umgingen the mittelsmann , they umgingen the agenturen , and they said that the agencies may not be really interested in mind .
i &apos;m going to negotiate with the performer .
i &apos;m going to work with him and something else , something that people will think to think that our current world will .
and how did it be ? what it was successful ?
well , because the movie festival , the movie festival , the movie festival , we can look at this .
according to the burrelles , the most popular in january , and since -- and that &apos;s not even the whole thing -- there was 900 million of this movie .
and that &apos;s just a period of two weeks .
this is just online -- no press , no television .
the film was not yet done yet .
there &apos;s no even online . no streaming .
it &apos;s not in other countries .
well , finally , the film has a very big picture .
and this is not bad for a project that almost every werbeagentur , with the fact that we &apos;ve talked to the customers , the fingers of it .
something i think is that if you &apos;re a chance to make your chances , and you know , in these risks , you &apos;re going to be able to put in these risks .
i think if you &apos;re getting people to stand on it , you get it closer to failure .
i think if you look at his employees , to avoid risk , you &apos;re going to try to get the whole company to get a profit .
i feel that we have to encourage people to people , risk risks .
we need to encourage people to have afraid to have afraid of the ways that they might be verängstigen .
finally , in the process , we should be called the fear .
we should put the bear in the cage .
please welcome the fear . &quot; welcome to the risk .
and you have a big deal of full of the full , so we &apos;re going to welcome the risk of .
and finally , we should be called transparency .
now , more than ever before , a little bit of honesty .
and that &apos;s what i said , with honesty and transparency , &quot; i &apos;m going to welcome to my own talk , &quot; i &apos;m going to welcome to you , &quot; transparency &quot; by my good friends , the $ $ for the namensrechte .
big data will be transformed for organizations in the world in large opportunities .
emc presents &quot; to &quot; transparency &quot;
thank you .
now , morgan , in the name of transparency , what is that right now with the $ 100 7100 ?
this is a great question .
i put in my pocket in my pocket , put on the oberorganisation of the ted-organisation , the sapling-stiftung -- a check in höhe 7100 to finance my ted-auftritt in the next year .
my name is amit .
in front months ago , i took a different one at google , and i &apos;m going to regte to do something with museums and art , and my favorite chefin , which is now , to me , to me .
and it took 18 months .
a lot of spaßiger negotiations and stories that i can tell you , with 17 , 17 museums from 9 / 11 .
but i &apos;m going to focus on the demo .
there &apos;s a lot of stories about why we &apos;ve done this .
i think my personal view is very simple , and it &apos;s very simple to be explained with this slide .
i grew up in india .
i was a great education -- i &apos;m not sure -- but i had to have lots of museums and those aren &apos;t access .
when i went to then , and i was getting this museums , i started learning a lot .
and while i was working for google , i tried to make these longing -- art would be art -- with technology together .
we then then came together a team , a great depression , and we started .
i &apos;m going to start with the demonstration , and you tell you some interesting things that since the launch was happening .
so you &apos;re just too googleartproject.com. to googleartproject.com. too googleartproject.com. .
you can see in all these museums .
there &apos;s the uffizi , the moma , the hermitage , the rijks , the van gogh .
i even get one of my favorite , the metropolitan museum of the way in new york .
you &apos;re going to be in two ways of pure .
click , and wumms , is in this museum .
it doesn &apos;t matter where they are -- bombay , mexico , it doesn &apos;t make any difference .
you go and get it .
they want to orient in the museum ?
open the card , and then you put them on a click .
in the inside , you &apos;re like , you want to end up to the end of the gangs .
just keep . much fun .
so , she &apos;s going to do .
thanks , but the best part comes .
so i &apos;m going to have a meiner of my lieblingsbilder breugel breugel in the met .
i see this pluszeichen .
if the museum gave us the picture , click on it .
this is one of the pictures .
this is all the metadata .
those of you who are really interested in art , can be click -- but i &apos;ll go back to this now .
this is one of the pictures we have to have called the so-called gigapixel-technologie .
this image for example , for example , about 10 billion bildpunkte , i think .
and a lot of people ask me , &quot; what are you going to be about 10 billion points ? &quot;
so that &apos;s what i &apos;m going to show you now : i &apos;m going to show you now : i &apos;m going to show you now : i &apos;m going to show you now : i &apos;m going to show you now : i &apos;m going to show you now : i &apos;m going to show you now : i &apos;m going to show you now : i &apos;m
you can get very easy to go and rauszoomen .
you see something fun here .
i love this guy ; his expression is .
but then they really want to go deep .
and so i started to play around , and it turns out there &apos;s something happening .
and i thought , &quot; wait a minute , that sounds interesting . &quot;
i went to close and realized slowly , that these kids actually did something .
i was a little bit of a little bit of a known , and found out that it was a game called squail , which is a little bit of the fastnachtsdienstag on a stick with a stick .
it was quite popular .
i don &apos;t know why they did it , but i learned about it .
to really close close to you can go to the cracks .
just to give you the way i &apos;m going to see , so you can see what you get .
here we were , and this is the painting .
the best part comes out of it , but in a second .
let &apos;s quickly take a quick quick to moma again , again in new york .
another lieblingsbild of mine .
and the previous example , it was about finding the detail , the detail , the way it was to find the detail .
but what if you want to see the pinselstriche ?
and what &apos;s only if you want to see how van gogh that makes the masterpiece of the masterpiece ?
you &apos;re zoomed . you really go into .
i &apos;m going to zoom in a lieblingsteile of this image , until i really am at the rock .
this is sternennacht , never ever seen before .
now i &apos;m going to show you my greatest feature .
there &apos;s lots of other , but i don &apos;t have time .
this is really cool part , it &apos;s called collections .
each of you , every one of them -- you see whether rich or poor , whether you have a great house -- doesn &apos;t matter .
you can go and online your own museum -- from all these pictures , you can put your own collection .
just simply , you go into -- and i &apos;ve created this , it &apos;s called the power of the zoom -- you can umherzoomen .
this is the gesandten gesandten .
you can put anything with quotes , your friends , and so a conversation about what they &apos;re feeling when you &apos;re looking at this same masterpieces .
i think , finally , for me , the main thing that all the things are not here from google .
they &apos;re not going to look for the museums .
that should i should say .
they come from artists .
and that was a experience for me .
i mean , i hope we &apos;re going to be able to be able to be able to be in this digital medium of art , and it &apos;s just a sense of online .
and this is the greatest question that will be asked me , &quot; did you do that to replicate the experience of a museumsbesuchs ? &quot;
the answer is no .
it &apos;s supposed to be the experience .
that &apos;s what it &apos;s about . thank you .
thank you .
this is a rendering of your brain . your brain can be found in two halves .
this is the left half the logical side , and then the right half the intuitive side is the intuitive side .
if we had to measure a scale to measure any hemisphere , we could use your brain .
for example , this one is the completely logical logical .
this would be somebody who &apos;s completely intuitive .
now where would you be on your brain on this scale ?
some of us may have decided to be decided for one of these extremes , but i think most people in the audience , your brain looks like this -- with a high aptitute , the same at the same time .
it &apos;s not like if you &apos;re both of them or whatnot .
you can change and intuitively .
and so i see one of the people along with most other experimental quantenphysikern , which is a good fraction of logic to try to get complex ideas together .
but at the same time we need a good stake to actually take the experiments .
how do we develop this intuition ? well , we love to play with things .
so we go out and play it and see it , and then we look at it , and then we start to develop our intuition .
basically , they do the same .
so one of the the one which you &apos;ve developed over the years is probably that a thing can be at a place at the same time .
i mean , it can tell strange to think about that a thing is about the same time at the same time , but they were not born with this notion of this notion .
i remember a kid playing playing on a bodenschwelle playing .
he was still a toddler , and not very good at it and he was constantly going to go .
but i bet that it &apos;s a very precious lesson , a very high lesson , which is not just going to let you just leave it , and they &apos;re going to stay on a seat .
and this is a great konzeptionelles model of the world , so long , you &apos;re not a teilchenphysiker .
it would be a terrible model for a teilchenphysiker , because they don &apos;t play with bodenschwellen , but with these little rock particles .
and if you play with your particle , you &apos;re seeing all sorts of weird things -- how they fly straight straight through walls , or they can be at the same time at two different locations .
and so they wrote all of these observations , and then they called the theory of quantum mechanics .
this was the popular of the physics of several years ago ; you took me to describe a quantum mechanics around the little , tiny particle .
but you couldn &apos;t take them to describe the big public objects around us .
this has not quite gemocht , and maybe that &apos;s just because i don &apos;t have so often with the same games .
well , i &apos;m going to play with you , but not very often .
and i &apos;ve never seen them .
i mean , no one has ever seen a particle .
but my logical page has not appreciated it .
because if all of these things are made from particles and all these particles , the rules of quantum mechanics , then it &apos;s not just all the rules of quantum mechanics ?
i don &apos;t see why that should not be so that .
so i would feel better with the whole thing , if we could show that kind of thing that alltagsgegenstände are also the rules of quantum mechanics .
so i was doing a few years ago .
i created one .
this is the first object that you can see that was in the quantenmechanischen superposition .
so what we &apos;re looking at here is a tiny computer chip .
and you can see this green dot there in the middle .
this is the piece of metal that i &apos;m going to talk about .
this is a picture of the object .
here i &apos;m going to go back . we &apos;re looking at the center .
and here &apos;s a really big deal of this little stücks metal .
so what we look at is a little bit of metal , it &apos;s like a springboard , and it &apos;s about the edge of the edge .
so i made this thing on similar ways to make a computer chip .
i went to a kind of an amazing space with new siliziumscheiben , and rackerte for 100 hours to all of the major devices .
for the last few years , i had to build my own machine -- to try to get this as a swimming pool of hole and the thing .
this thing has the ability to be the ability to be the fähigkeit of the quantenmechanischen , but it needs a little help to do it .
look , let me give you an analogy .
you know how do it be in a crowded elevator ?
i mean , if i &apos;m in the elevator , i &apos;m going to do all kinds of things , but then you get the kinds of stuff , and i &apos;ll stop all of these things , because i don &apos;t want to be able to do it or frankly , you &apos;re verschrecke .
so quantum mechanics says that unbewegliche objects are just feeling .
the mitfahrer for unbewegliche objects are not just people , but the light that seems to you and the wind that would be on them , and the heat of them , the heat of the room .
and so we knew that if we wanted to see that this piece of metal is verhält , we had to be able to verhält the whole mitreisenden .
and we did .
we &apos;ve got the light , put it into a vacuum and saugten the entire air and kühlten it to the whole air , and it &apos;s just a whole thing to be in the elevator , was the piece of metal , to behave like it .
so we measured his movement .
we found that it really moves .
instead of that it &apos;s just quiet , it &apos;s vibrierte . the way it was like this , like it was about as much as this -- like a billowing and together ziehender .
in the process we gave a little bit of the way we could have it to vibrate it to the same time and not just to vibrate -- something that &apos;s only in quantum mechanics .
so what i &apos;m just telling you is what is truly awesome .
what is it possible for a object to the same time and not to vibrate ?
let &apos;s think about the atoms .
so the first case : all the trillionen of atoms from the stück of the metal is still quiet and the same time , same atoms and lower .
just to get the precise zeitpunkten of the stimmen .
the rest of the time are delokalisiert .
so that means that every atom at the same time is two different locations , which is the whole thing that the whole piece is in the middle of two different locations .
i think that &apos;s really cool .
really .
it was worth for all of this year in the sauberen room , because , you see that , the massstabsunterschied between a single atom and this piece of metal is about the same as the difference between the north and you .
so if a single atom can be at two different locations , this piece of metal can be in two different locations , why not they do ?
i mean , this is just what my logical page says .
so , imagine you would be at the same time at multiple locations , how would that feel like ?
how would you avoid consciousness that your body is in the room ?
there &apos;s another aspect of history .
when we aufwärmten it , the light anschalteten and the box reinschauten , we saw that the piece of metal always was in a piece .
and so i had to develop this new intuition that it looks like all the objects in the elevator in reality , are just quanten objects that are together in a small room .
they hear a lot of different thinking about how quantum mechanics says that everything is connected .
now , this is not quite right ; it &apos;s not quite right ; it &apos;s not quite right .
there &apos;s more behind it , it &apos;s still deeper .
it &apos;s so that these connections , their ties with all the things around them , literally define who they are , and that &apos;s the most tiefsinnige and the strange quantum mechanics .
thank you .
in 2007 , i decided we should think we should think about how we think about economic development .
it should be our goal to think about where they &apos;re living and work , and they want to work with them and work , between at least one hand , between the verschiedener of a different cities that are all in the soviet union .
so , we &apos;re far away from this goal .
there are billions of people in developing countries that don &apos;t even have a single city to the available to be called the sie .
but the amazing thing about cities is that they &apos;re much more worth than it costs to build them .
so we could just do the world with duzenden , maybe even hundreds of new cities .
now , this may sound absurd for you , you &apos;ve never thought about new cities .
and you just put the building of apartments from the homes of cities .
imagine half of people living in homes , they &apos;re doing this , but the other half of the other half .
you could try to extend the capacity of the existing apartments .
but you know what you would have to be there , in these homes and whose environment are making decisions about reducing reducing and ausbau .
so it turns out that it &apos;s very hard to get out of these extensions .
but you could go to a whole new place , a completely new new capacity , which is the laws of the laws there , and it &apos;s not allowed it .
so i suggested that governments are creating new surfaces , the enough space for a city and gave them a name to give you a name .
later , i found that , about the same time , javier and octavio over the challenge of a reform , and then we thought about .
they knew that every year in the country , they went to the united states , and they wanted to know what they could do to make sure that these people can stay in their country and exactly the same thing in honduras .
and at this point , javier said , &quot; what happens when we &apos;re going to have a unbesiedelte of our country &apos;s land , if we just want to go to a unbesiedelte of our country , and when we &apos;re going to go to the canadian and the people who are working on the canadian rules , and you can do it on the surface of the world
in the summer , the summer of 2009 was under a heftigen verfassungskrise .
the next planmäßigen elections , gewann lobo lobo in a turnaround whose program both neuerungen and schlichtung .
he asked to get octavio to become a stabschef .
in the meanwhile , i was going to put me on a talk to tedglobal .
by improvement , and through the study of consumers , i &apos;ve tried to reduce this complicated concept of the charter city of the elemente .
the first one is the importance of laws , laws that determine that you &apos;re not going to be able to do it .
we &apos;re going to have a new technologies , but for the progress of technology and the progress , and it &apos;s for usually laws that we have .
in the autumn 2010 , a friend of guatemala was octavio to the tedtalk .
the reason it was called him .
the two call me .
and they said , &quot; let &apos;s say that the opening of our country &apos;s best present . &quot;
so we met in december of the sitzungssaal of a hotels in miami .
i tried to make a clear like valuable cities to be much more valuable than how much they are .
and i used this graph to show you how valuable rohland is at a place like new york . think that one area in some cases is worth a meter in a few times per square meter of dollars .
but it was a pretty abstract discussion at a point when it was a recess , and i said , &quot; paul , &quot; paul , we might look at the tedtalk . &quot;
so the tedtalk was in very simple form , that a charter city is a place that is a gründungsvertrag , a gründungsvertrag , which is the laws of the laws that are going to be able to make the laws and the people to decide that either to make these rules or not .
so , i was asked by the president of the president who said that we have to realize that it &apos;s important , and that this is the way that we have to bring our country .
i became asked to come to come to come and even more and the fourth of a lecture .
so i &apos;ve been talking to the fact that i &apos;ve been talking to the facts of fakten talk , which has a chart like this , trying to demonstrate if you want to make a lot of value , it &apos;s a very big city .
this is a picture of the city , and the sketch is the new airport , which was built in denver .
alone alone has a surface of 100 quadratkilometern .
so i tried to convince the honduraner of them if you want to build a new town , you have to start with a field of mindestens quadratkilometern .
that &apos;s more than 250 thousand acres .
and then , all of the applaudiert .
the faces of the audience were very serious and alert .
the director of the congress came on the stage and said , &quot; professor romer , i thank you for your talk , but maybe we might look at the tedtalk .
i have him on my laptop . &quot;
so i was going to get to the hingesetzt , and they &apos;ve got the tedtalk .
and i was to the punch that a new city of people would provide new possibilities .
there were the opportunity to live in a city that would be in honduras instead of miles from north .
and a new city includes new ways of leaders .
the leaders of the government in honduras would have to depend on partnerländern , they could benefit from their partnerländern , they could benefit from the law of the law and support that , that everybody can trust that the charter really is really .
and the realization of president lobo , that the fact that the whole of the durchsetzung i thought was to bring the foreign investors to build and build this city for all parties in honduras , which has been going to be in many years of fear and mistrust .
we &apos;re in a field of dangers .
this picture is from this place .
it &apos;s got a thousand square kilometer .
and shortly after that , the 19th of january , they have been the congress for a change of the constitution to have a verfassungsgemäße attitude that is for specific entwicklungsgebiete .
in a country that has a strong crisis , was a real crisis , was convicted of the congress to be elected with 124 .
all parties , all the fraktionen of society , supported this .
and part of the constitution , it &apos;s also got to be authorized by congress .
february february , it was a stimme time to a voice .
so after this choice , between the 21st and the end of the day , i went to the end of the day , a delegation of about two locations of the world that were most interested in the business of the städtebaus .
one place is south america .
this is a picture of a big , new stadtzentrum , which is in south america , in south america than the stadtzentrum bostons .
all you can see on this picture , within four years , after it took four years after it took four years to get the way .
the other place that was very close to the very end .
it has been two cities in china and third is in preparation .
so if you think about this , it &apos;s where we stand today .
they &apos;ve already have a baugrundstück , and they already have this area for the second city .
it &apos;s been working on a legal system that managern allows us to be able to participate and it &apos;s also working on a virtual system .
a country has offered offered to provide his supreme court to provide the obersten of the dortigen of the world &apos;s greatest system .
also städtedesigner and -bauer are very interested .
they even get funding with a hybrid .
one thing you already know was , has been a bunch of mieter .
there are lots of betriebe that would like to be in america , especially in a place with a freihandelszone , and there &apos;s lots of people who would like to live there .
all over the world there are 700 million people who are willing to live in a different location .
one million people left in america and migrate in the united states .
many of you are väter , their families are forced to be manchmal to work on work , sometimes it &apos;s alleinerziehende mothers who need to make money to eat and clothes and clothing .
unfortunately , sometimes kids are trying to find their parents back to their parents , which they have been in some cases , since a decade , since you haven &apos;t seen a decade .
so what &apos;s a idea about thinking about this , to make a whole new city ?
or even duzende from these cities , or hundreds of thousands of the world ?
so what &apos;s a idea to insist that every family has a choice between several cities that are in the competition in the competition ?
this is an idea that could spread .
my friends from honduras to me , thank you .
you know how many decisions you do it on a typical day ?
you know how many decisions you meet them in a typical week ?
i &apos;ve been doing a survey with 2,000 americans and the average number of decisions that are angabegemäß a typical american american on a day , and it &apos;s 70. 70. .
and i was made a study with ceos , in a week , in which she was a week for the ceos .
and these scientists just have the different topics of the people who have documented these ceo of haben. and how much time they spend a lot of decisions that are communicating with the issues .
and they found that a average ceo is going to be in the week of 139 tasks .
each of these topics were of course , many of many decisions .
50 percent of their decisions were within nine minutes or less .
just for about 12 percent of their decisions they gave them an hour or more of your time .
think of your own decisions .
you know how many decisions you meet in the nine minutes of you are in the nine minutes of that you &apos;re going to be in an hour ?
how good , you think are you to make decisions about it ?
today today , i want to talk about one of the most exciting of our modern time , that &apos;s entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem .
i want to talk about the problem and over some possible solutions .
well , if i talk about this problem , i &apos;m going to ask you some questions , and i want to know your answers .
if i ask you a question , raise your own , because i &apos;m blind , just the hand , if you want to burn some calories .
i mean , please , if i ask you a question , and your answer is , so my first question for today is , are you ready to hear something about the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem ?
thank you .
when i was a abschlussstudent at stanford university , i went to this very much very much , very much , at least , at least he was really exclusive .
it was a shop that was called draeger .
this business , it was almost like a vergnügungspark .
they had 250 different kinds of mustard and essig and over 500 different species of fruit and vegetables and more than two dozen different species of water -- and that was actually a time when we actually had a time .
i loved it to this business , but i &apos;ve asked to a moment , well , what &apos;s it &apos;s going to happen to you that you never ever do anything ?
here &apos;s the olive gait .
they had been olivenöl over 75 different varieties of olive , including whom were locked in the north of the north , the tausend of old olivenbäumen .
so i decided to visit the leader , and i asked the ladder , &quot; works that they really really would be able to do all of these possibilities ? &quot;
and he showed the busladungen of tourists that came to every day and usually had their cameras .
we decided to do an experiment , and we chose to our experiment for our experiment .
here &apos;s your marmeladen gait .
they had 348 different types of marmelade .
we have a little verkostungsecke right on the entrance of the geschäfts .
we &apos;ve got six different flavors or 24 different flavors marmelade , and we &apos;ve looked at two things : first , i suppose , i would like to make more people stand up and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try
it &apos;s more people standing when it was 24 , if it were 24 percent , when it was six percent , about 40 percent .
and then we looked at ourselves in the case of the people , the people were going to be a glass of marmelade .
now we looked at the &quot; decisive effect . &quot;
and the people who were standing there were 24 , just three percent actually a glass of marmelade .
from the people who are there are actually six than six , now , we saw that 30 percent of you actually bought a glass of marmelade .
now if you &apos;re going to calculate it , people bought the people six times a glass of marmelade , who they had six to choice when they had 24 24 .
now , not to entscheiden glass marmelade , probably probably good for us -- at least it &apos;s good for our waist -- but it turns out that the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem is going to affect us very much choices .
we don &apos;t decide deciding even if it &apos;s going to be against our own best interests .
so for the theme of the day , they save themselves .
i &apos;m going to describe you a study that i &apos;m talking about gur huberman , emir kamenica , wei durchführte , where we &apos;re going to have the decisions of almost a million americans for almost about a million americans in the entire united states .
and what we looked at was whether the number of fondsangebote that were a rentensparplan , the 401 plan , the probability that will be able to be able to be saved if tomorrow &apos;s tomorrow .
and we found that it was a correlation in fact .
so in these plans , we had about 657 plans that people had to use two to two to different code .
and what we found was that the more fonds offered were offered that in fact , the participation was increased .
if you look at the extreme , the plans that have two fonds , had a teilnahmerate in the &apos; 70s -- still not as high as we want .
in the plans , almost 60 fonds , the teilnahmerate now is going to be on the sechzigsten prozentanteil .
now , it turns out that even if you get entschliessen , if more choices , even more choices , it has negative consequences .
so the people who decided to participate , more likely to be more choices to them , the more time you have to choose it and choose to vote .
the more choices you have to do , the more they are more likely they put their money in pure geldmarktkonten .
none of these extremes decisions is to be heard of the decisions that someone would recommend if you would be important for granted .
now , in the last 10 years , we &apos;ve observed three essential consequences of negative consequences that are going to be more likely to provide more and more choices .
they pin the decision -- push it on , even if it &apos;s interested in your own best interest .
they make more likely decisions -- to be called the financial financial and worse medical decisions .
they decide more for things they &apos;re doing less happy , even if you make it better .
the main thing is that we might have to make this enormous regale full of mayonaise , mustard , essig and marmelade , but we don &apos;t really draw the comparison and the limiting and then actually make something from the fantastic supply of the fantastischen .
so what i want to suggest today is four simple techniques -- techniques that we have to have different types and different kinds of forschungsorten -- they simply run in their business .
first of the first thing .
you &apos;ve heard it before , but it never been true as today , that less more than today .
people are always concerned when i say , &quot; beschränken . &quot;
they always worry about it , they &apos;re losing losing losing .
but in fact , we &apos;re always more and more and more , and more and more unwichtigen are going to be able to go and go to the unwichtigen possibilities , then there &apos;s a increase of the obesity , it &apos;s the cost of the obesity , it &apos;s the cost of the obesity , it &apos;s the cost of the obesity , it &apos;s the cost of
as a proctor and gamble , the various head and shoulders species of 26 reduzierte on 15 , they would have a increase in half a million percent .
when the golden corporation corporation , they loswurde their 10 corporation verkauften loswurde loswurde , they were , they were able to be 87 percent of the verkaufszahlen -- a result of the rise of the total and reducing costs .
you know , the average supermakrt today , today , 45,000 of them , 45,000 of them .
a typical wal-mart will give you 100,000 products .
but the neuntgrößte supermarket , the today &apos;s largest supermarket in the world today , and they &apos;re offering them just to just a mere more rational -- a kind of tomato sauce in the doses .
now in the world of the sparens , i think of the best examples that are recently in the market , which is the auswahlmöglichkeiten auswahlmöglichkeiten , which is something that david laibson was very heavily mitgestaltet , it &apos;s a program that &apos;s going to be offered in harvard .
every single harvard employees takes automatically to a lebenszeitfond part .
and the ones that really want to meet a choice , 20 fonds offered , not 300 or more .
you know , like the people say , &quot; i don &apos;t know how to do it .
it &apos;s all important opportunities . &quot;
and the first thing i ask the employees is , &quot; tell me how the possibilities of each other different .
and if your employees can &apos;t auseinanderhalten it , it can &apos;t be able to do it . &quot;
now before we started today , i had a conversation with gary .
and gary said that he would be willing to be willing to give people in this audience to offer a all-inklusive in the most beautiful road in the world .
here &apos;s a description of the street .
and i want to read you .
and now i &apos;ll give you a few seconds to read and then you ask me to clap to clapping if you &apos;re willing to do it for the supply of the supply .
okay . everybody &apos;s ready to adopt a angebot .
are all of these ? are all of these ?
okay , let me show you something more about it .
they knew it was a trick , or ?
now , who &apos;s ready for this journey .
i think i &apos;ve heard more hands .
all right .
in fact , it &apos;s really clear to the first time more information than the second time , but i would dare to guess it , you know , it &apos;s a second time to do it .
because the pictures had to be aware of you .
and what excites me to the second technology that helps them to deal with the problem of the entscheidungsüberlastung , it &apos;s the konkretisierung .
it &apos;s about understanding people to understand the difference between opportunities to understand what consequences are associated with the individual choices , and that &apos;s what these consequences are going to be vivid and vivid and vivid .
why are people average about 15 to 30 percent of 30 percent , if they use a ec-karte or a card , when they were at risk ?
because it &apos;s not the money that we &apos;re doing .
and it turns out that if you make it something that something feels like , it &apos;s a very good tool that you have to save the people to save more .
so we &apos;ve made a study that i made with shlomo benartzi and alessandro previtero , and we &apos;ve been doing a study with the people of ing -- and these people were all in a meeting in the neighborhood in which they have their participation in their own rentensparplan .
and while this session , we &apos;ve got this gathering just as she always was , just we added a little added .
the little bit that we &apos;ve been doing gefügt , that we were asked to think of all the positive things that would happen to their lives if they were saving money .
in the way we did this simple thing , there was a rise of the world &apos;s most of the people of the people who were willing to save or a increase in the amount of the amount of money they were willing to pay for the sparkonto .
the third technology : kategorisierung .
we can better deal with more than more than with more choices .
here &apos;s for example , a study that we did in a zeitschriftengang .
it turns out that it &apos;s going to be in the wegmans supermärkten and down in northeast , varies variiert between different species of magazines to 664 .
but you know what ?
if i show you 600 magazines and you show them in 10 categories , or i show you 400 magazines , and i think that i &apos;ve given you more choice and a better auswahlerfahrung , when i gave them the 400 given to you if i gave them the 600 bed .
because the categories tell me how i can keep it apart .
here are two different types of vials .
one is called &quot; jazz &quot; and the other &apos;s called &quot; swing . &quot;
if you think that the left is anzeige swing , and the ad on the right is jazz , then you clap into hands .
okay , there &apos;s a few .
if you think that the left on the left is jazz and the right on the right side , then please clap .
okay , a few more .
now it turns out that they &apos;re right .
the on the left is jazz and the on the right is swing , but you know what ?
this is a great unnützes kategorisierungsschema .
the categories have to say something something that is not the choice .
and this problem , you often see , if you look at the long bullet lists of these things .
who cares you want to do ?
my fourth technology : the premise of complexity .
it turns out that we can deal with more information than we think we have to do .
we need to increase complexity slowly .
i &apos;ll show you an example of what i mean .
let &apos;s take a very , very complicated decision : the purchase one of cars .
here &apos;s a german autohersteller , which gives you the opportunity to konfigurieren your car .
you have to make different decisions to design your car .
now , these decisions are going to be able to provide the number of choices that you can make a decision .
autofarben , außenfarbe of cars -- i &apos;ve 56 .
engines , the gears -- four possibilities .
what i &apos;m doing now is , i change the order of the choices .
half the customer will go from the many ways of the geringen autofarben , four ways of four .
the other half of the customers is going to be the low possibilities , four of the 56 , many possibilities .
what i &apos;m looking at ?
how are you .
if you &apos;re constantly constantly able to use the standardauswahl in the decision , that you &apos;re going to be paralyzed , and i &apos;ll go .
what you find is that people are going to go from the geringen to the geringen auswahlmöglichkteiten and over again .
we lose them .
and you go to the little choices to the many , you stay .
it &apos;s the same information . it &apos;s the same amount of possibilities .
the only thing i &apos;ve done is to change the order of that information , is going to be given that information .
if i start with the simple , learn like i &apos;m going to do .
even even though the gears select , i don &apos;t know about my preferences in the interiors , it &apos;s still going to be on me .
it also makes me feel like this , in excitement , the big product i &apos;m going to do , and so i &apos;m willing to motivate me to be interested in the interest .
let me wrap .
i told you about four techniques , the problem of entscheidungsüberlastung mildern -- -- are you going to go -- konkretisieren -- they &apos;re real real , kategorisieren -- we can do better with more categories , fewer opportunities , on complexity .
each of these techniques that i &apos;m thinking about today is to help you manage the opportunity -- good for you , you can use them for themselves , good for people whom they &apos;re caring .
because i think the key to the best choice is that you &apos;re wählerisch to find the choice .
and the more we are more picky , the better we are going to be able to practice the art of choice .
thank you .
hi . i &apos;m kevin allocca , trends-manager at youtube . i guess i &apos;m going to look at the youtube-videos .
that &apos;s true .
today we want to talk about how videos are viral , and then , why that &apos;s all important .
we all want to be a real , berühmtheiten , singer , comedians -- when i was young , it was so much difficult .
but webvideos have enabled that we all have to be able to all of our creative activities , and all of our creative activities are going to be famous in a part of the culture .
every single one of you could be about the internet to the next saturday .
but at youtube , more than 48 hours a minute .
again , it &apos;s just a tiny percentage of the percentage of viral and thousands of times and so on the cultural moment .
so how does this work ?
three things : tastemaker , teilnahmecommunities and the unexpected .
well , we want to .
oh my god . oh my god .
oh my god !
woah !
ohhhhh , wowwww !
last year , bear vasquez dieses this video that he had his house in yosemite national park .
in 2010 , it was 23 million times .
this chart shows how it was when the video was introduced to the first time for the first time .
actually , there &apos;s no virales video .
he just wanted to share a rainbow , sharing a rainbow , sharing a rainbow .
because you just want to do that , if you &apos;re called the yosemite mountain .
he had a lot of naturvideos .
and this video was actually been in january .
what &apos;s happened here ?
there was jimmy kimmel .
jimmy kimmel sendete the tweet that took the video last week .
because tastemaker like jimmy kimmel makes us new and interesting things and show you a big audience .
it &apos;s friday , friday . . everybody get on on on . everybody forward to to . gettin &apos; on . gettin &apos; on . you didn &apos;t know that we would lead these conversation without talking about this video .
rebecca blacks &quot; is one of the most popular videos of the year .
it was almost 200 million times .
that &apos;s what the chart looked like .
just like &quot; double rainbow &quot; seems to be there .
what is happening in this day ?
well , it was friday , it &apos;s true .
if you want to know , these other tips are also freitage .
but what &apos;s about this day , this particular friday ?
well , tosh.0 gabelte , it started to write a lot of blogs about it .
michael j. nelson nelson cole was a first of the first that i made about it .
and so important , that a person or a group of tastemakers can be a viewpoint with a big audience , and it &apos;s beschleunigte and the process .
then this community came from people who shared this big insiderwitz , and began to talk about it and to be playing with it .
now there &apos;s 10,000 parodien of &quot; friday &quot; at youtube .
in the first seven days , there was a spoof for every single person .
unlike the most popular conversation , the participation of the community is going to be our way to become the phenomenon of this phenomenon -- either we &apos;re going to spread it or something new .
&quot; nyan cat &quot; is animation and music .
it &apos;s very simple .
this year was almost 50 million times .
and if you think of crazy , you know , you know , there &apos;s a dreistundenversion that &apos;s been looking for four million times .
even cats look at this video .
cats are looking at cats , looking at this video .
important is important , creativity , the creativity that &apos;s in the internetkultur of the techies and geeks .
there was a bunch .
somebody made a drink version of it .
and then it became international .
a whole remix-gemeinde fired from the ground , which it was made by a brilliant joke , which we can all participate .
today we don &apos;t just find out of something we do . we do .
who would have lost it all ?
who would have &quot; double &quot; or rebecca or black black &quot; ?
what drehbücher can be used to write their drehbücher , which is that kind of drinsteht ?
in a world where every minute two days has uploaded two days , just really unique and unexpected hervorstechen like the kingdom .
i was not interested in a friend of mine when i was a friend , i would like to watch this great video , over a guy who was in new york for a strafzettel .
i got a ticket because i &apos;m not on the radweg risks , but often there are some of the challenges that are not going to go on the radweg .
there &apos;s been completely surprisingly and humorous , was casey , was going to be witzige , and his argument would be five million times .
this approach is true for everything we do creative .
and this is all the way to us , to the one big question ...
what does that mean ?
ohhhh .
what does that mean ?
tastemaker , creative teilnehmergemeinden , completely unexpected , the features of a new kind of media and culture , to everybody else has been supported and in the audience .
like i said , one of the most currently born -- justin bieber -- made his beginning to youtube .
no one has to give your ideas to make light .
and today we &apos;re all secretly to do as a eigentümer of our culture .
and these are not the properties of the old media , and they also don &apos;t even affect the media of today , but they &apos;re going to determine the conversation of the future .
thank you .
how can i talk about three of women who are talking about three generations , and as the amazing strength of the verbundenheit are sitting in a little boot , and the amazing strength of his baby &apos;s life , and a child in the life of this little girl , and never just disappeared , and never disappeared , this little girl , now , this little girl ,
the story is not yet .
it &apos;s a puzzle that &apos;s still going to be .
i want to tell you about some of the puzzlestückchen .
imagine the first piece : a man who &apos;s going to be verbrennt .
he &apos;s a poet , a writer , a man whose whole life of the simple hope of oneness and freedom of his home .
you think it &apos;s sich in saigon in saigon , wondering how it has to be eingestehen , that his life was a only one waste .
the words , so long , his friends , spotteten .
he moved back into silence .
he died , broken through the history .
it &apos;s my grandfather .
i never met him personally .
but our lives are so much more than our memories .
my grandmother has never forgotten me to his life .
i had to worry that it wasn &apos;t free , and it was my job to learn that the history was trying to zerdrücken us , we were going to be .
the next puzzleteil puzzleteil shows how a boat in the early 1930s , leise on lake ausläuft .
my mom may be 18 when her father died -- already in a arrangierten marriage , already with two little girls .
for you , for her , you had a job to say , the escape of your family and a new life in australia .
it was completely excluded that they could fail .
after a vierjährigen and filmreifen saga , a boat still on the lake , as a fischerboot .
all adults were aware of .
the biggest fear had to be in front of rape , rape and death .
and most adults , my mom was wearing a little giftflasche .
in a gefangennahme , my sister would have just my sister and i , and my grandmother was going to drink it .
my first memories are from this boat -- the stetige tuckern of the engine , the clapping of a every wave on the edge , the vastness and empty horizon .
i remember the pirates that came to the local , but then from the todesmut of the men &apos;s men &apos;s men &apos;s men &apos;s men &apos;s own boot , or at the ausfall of the engine , the six hours of the engine .
but i remember the lights of the ölplattform vor , and the young man who was sitting in the jungen , who was the end of the voyage , and i was the taste of the first apfels , who gave me one of the men sitting on the platform .
no apple has ever been going to happen again .
after three months in a refugee camp , we landed in melbourne .
and the next puzzlestück is about four women in three generations that build together a new life .
we went to footscray , one of the arbeiterklasse bewohnten of vorort , whose population is made of immigrantenschichten .
unlike the alteingesessenen mittelklassevororten , their existence was totally unknown to me , there was no anspruchsdenken .
the red came from the world &apos;s largest coming from the world .
and the most harrowing gebrochenen wurden were between people who had a thing , and they started to reinvent .
my mother worked on farms , then on a assembly line , a fließband , six days , doppelte .
it was kind of the time to find the time , and it-qualifikationen .
we were poor .
and everybody was given to the other education and the math , and i was allowed to put in other education , no matter what we had to do , and mostly the new things that came out of the second hand .
two of these types of strümpfe for school , every time to have the holes in the other .
one schuluniform to the knöcheln , because they had to pass six years .
and there were the rare chöre of &quot; schlitzauge &quot; and here and here , and there &apos;s a asiaten , &quot; patient , go home . &quot;
home home ?
something else is inside me .
there was a meeting to reconciliation and a ruhige voice said , &quot; i &apos;ll go out of the road . &quot;
my mom , my sister and i slept in the same bed .
my mom was every night , but we told each other to our day , and i heard the movements of our grandmother in the home .
my mom suffered from the boat .
and it was my job , every night every night , until her alpträume came to her , so i could aufwecken them .
she opened a computergeschäft , then a kosmetikerausbildung and then got a business .
and the women came with their stories about men who don &apos;t ertrugen and unflexibel and unflexibel , and sorgenerfüllte children , between two worlds .
loans and sponsors were .
in the field .
i lived in parallelwelten .
in one , i was the classic asian asian asian school , the unerbittliche demands itself .
in the other , i was in the other life , the tragic european scars of violence and the insulation .
but many of the people have been talking about the years .
and because of this aid , i became in my last year last year as a boy , junge australierin .
and i became a puzzlestück to the next year , and the edges of the edges of it wasn &apos;t .
tan le le , nun bewohnerin , flüchtling le , flüchtling and social activist that had been invited to the vorträgen of whom you had never heard of , and in a city , whose existence had never imagined .
i was not familiar with the etikette .
i didn &apos;t know how to use the besteck .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about wine .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about anything .
i wanted to come back to the routine and the bequemlichkeit of life , a grandmother , a mother and two daughters , who had been told each other , and they were told each other , and they &apos;re told each other , and they &apos;re still going to get three to the same bed .
i told my mom , i wouldn &apos;t do it .
she remembered me that i was so old as she was at the time when we had the boat .
no , no one had been a way .
&quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; she said , &quot; she said , &quot; and it &apos;s not what you &apos;re not . &quot;
so i was talking about jugendarbeitslosigkeit and training , and the vernachlässigung of marginalisierten and entrechteten .
and the more i talked about , the more i should tell .
i met people in all the lebenslagen , so many of you did what they loved , lived in the borders of the possible .
and even though i had graduated from my degree , i realized that i couldn &apos;t actually put on a career in the middle of a while .
it had to give another puzzlestück .
and i realized that it &apos;s okay to be a maverick to be a maverick to be a maverick in the picture -- and not just fine , but something you need to be grateful , maybe a gift of the fittest .
because dazuzugehören can lead to collapse of the horizons , so easily means that you &apos;re supposed to be accepted the assumptions of the surroundings .
i &apos;m now enough from my bequemlichkeitsbereich to know that , yes , yes , the world auseinanderbricht , but not as you do it .
the ways that couldn &apos;t have been allowed to have been called explicitly .
there was a energy , a unerbittlichen optimism , a strange mixtur of humility and the wagnisses .
so i was going to my gut .
i collected a little team of people around me for the schublade , &quot; not a unwiderstehliche challenge .
a year we had no one .
at the end of a race , i had a huge set of soup that we shared .
we were to go to the night .
most of our ideas were crazy , but it was a few brilliant , and we managed to the breakthrough .
i met the decision to pull in the united states , to pull the united states .
just to one journey .
my gut again .
three months later , i was moved and adventure .
before i talk to the talk , i want to tell you about my grandmother .
it grew up to a time , in the konfuzianismus social norm and the local people of the world &apos;s most important person .
life has been changing .
her father died soon after her birth .
your mother had gone on .
with 17 , she was a second woman to a forger whose mother was inside .
without the support of your man , she was worried for a sensation , by gericht him and anklägerin in her own case , and a bigger sensation than they won .
&quot; don &apos;t &quot; erwies &quot; as a unwahr .
i &apos;m just going to talk in a hotel in sydney when they died . 1,000 kilometers away in melbourne .
i looked through the duschtrennwand and saw it on the other side .
i knew she had come to himself .
my mom called me a few minutes later .
a few days later , we went into a buddhist temple in footscray and sat around her .
we told her stories and versicherten her , that we were still in their own .
so to midnight , the monk came out and said he would have to close the patient .
my mom asked us to give us her hand .
she asked the monk : &quot; why is your hand so warm and the rest of your life ? &quot;
&quot; because she was in the morning , &quot; he said .
&quot; they don &apos;t have to be . &quot;
if there &apos;s a band , it &apos;s a band , then it &apos;s through the women .
you see , who we were and how life has been formed , we can now see that the men who might have come in our lives , perhaps in the quere .
the defeat was too easy .
now i &apos;d like my own children , and i think it &apos;s still the boat .
who would ever be a wish ?
yes , i &apos;ve been afraid to be afraid , especially before , berechtigungsanspruch .
can i give you a bug in your life , the courageous wave of the wave , the unbeirrte , stetige tuckern of the engine , the vast horizon , the weiten of the engine that doesn &apos;t give you ?
i don &apos;t know .
but if i could do this , and you could make sure that i would do it .
and also , tans &apos;s face is now in the fourth or fifth row .
i &apos;m here to share my photography with them .
is it even photography ?
because of course , this is a picture of the picture that you can &apos;t pick with your camera .
and yet , my interest in photography when i was going to be my first one , at age 15 years .
i put it with my former predilection to draw , but it was a bit different , because it was a bit different , because the use of the camera was actually going to be able to do it in planning .
and if you pick a picture with a camera , you end up with the process , when you put on the trigger .
so for me , it seemed to be more difficult to go to the right place to be right at the right time .
i believed that everyone could .
so i wanted to create something different , something that starts to be the process , when the trigger will go .
pictures like this : a construction road along a lot of light .
but it has a unexpected twist .
and behaltet is a realistic plane .
or pictures like this -- dark and farbenfroh , but all of the shared goal , to keep a realistic level .
if i say reality , my favorite .
because of course , it &apos;s not something you really can really get , but i want to look like that , as if you could have that , on a photograph .
pictures , where you have to think about a moment , to find the trick .
so it &apos;s about this idea of a notion of a moment .
but what &apos;s the trick that does it look like ?
it &apos;s about the details or the colors ?
it &apos;s about light ?
what does the illusion ?
sometimes the perspective is the illusion .
but the end of the end of the way we interpret the world , and how it can be made on a two-dimensional surface .
it &apos;s not about what realistic is , but what we think about .
so i think the essentials are very simple .
i see it as a puzzle of reality where you take different pieces and put together to create a alternative reality .
and let me show you a simple example .
we &apos;ve got three of the perfect vorstellbare in the developing world objects that we can all identify in a three-dimensional world .
but in a certain way , you can create something that &apos;s still going to be able to do it as if it could exist .
but at the same time , we know that that &apos;s not possible .
so we &apos;re so eager to our brains , because our brains don &apos;t really want to do it really , really makes sense .
and i see the same process in the future of pictures .
it &apos;s really about just to combine different realities .
so the things that look like a picture of a realistic , i think it &apos;s the things we don &apos;t think about us in our everyday everyday .
but if we combine photographs , it &apos;s really important to think about it , because otherwise you just look at it .
so i would say that there are three simple rules to get to get a realistisches outcome .
as you can see , these are not three special pictures .
but you can combine something special like this .
so the first rule is that these are the new pictures should have the same perspective .
secondly , we should have kombinierte pictures of the same beleuchtungsart .
and these two pictures are going to meet these two demands -- from the same height and the same beleuchtungsart .
third , it &apos;s about to tell it impossible to distinguish where the individual pictures start and end by connecting them .
so , it makes it impossible to say , how the photograph was actually done .
so you &apos;re going to paint color and helligkeit and the rändern of the rändern , fotografische mängel , entsättigte colors , and störungen , we can look at the limits between the different images and let them look like a single photograph , although a picture of a hundred of the planes can contain hundreds of levels .
here &apos;s another example .
you might think that this only one is a framework , and the bottom of the bottom has been manipulated .
this image is actually completely completely composed of the different places .
personally , i personally personally is to create a place that it &apos;s easier to create a place , because you don &apos;t have to have a compromise to your ideas in your head .
but it requires a lot of planning .
and when i had this idea at the winter , i knew i would have to get several months to plan them to find the different locations for the pieces of the puzzle .
for example , the fish was shot on a anglerausflug .
the waterfront one comes from one place .
the unterwasser-teil is from a quarry .
and yes , i even have the house on the island of red umgefärbt to make it look like .
to reach a realistisches outcome , so it &apos;s going to be seen from me .
i always start with a sketch , a idea .
and then it &apos;s about the combination of different images .
and here &apos;s a piece of very good at all .
and if you do good footage , the outcome can be pretty beautiful , and also quite realistic .
so it &apos;s all the tools , and the only thing that we have to do is our imagination .
thank you .
i would like to talk to you about why so many electronic gesundheits-projekte .
and i think that the most important point is that we stopped stopped with our patients .
and one of the things we introduced to the radboud-universität , was a haupt-zuhörer .
it &apos;s not particularly scientifically -- you &apos;re going to be a cup of coffee or tea and i ask the patients , families , families , relatives , &quot; how do you go ?
how can we help you ? &quot;
and we think we want to think that this is one of the most important , why all of the electronic gesundheits-projekte fehlschlagen : because we stopped listening .
this is my wlan-waage . a very simple thing .
she has a button of / extrovert .
and every morning i &apos;m going to do it .
and yeah , i have a job , as you might recognize .
i have my job to 95 pounds .
it works very simple : every time i put on the pump , you can put my data on google .
and there are also going to be abgerufen from my allgemeinarzt abgerufen , so that my favorite gewichtsproblem is , and not just in the moment , where i &apos;m going to do kardiologische , or so , it &apos;s also going to be able to do with a glimpse of the past .
but there &apos;s something .
maybe you &apos;ve known this , i &apos;ve got about 4,000 follower on twitter .
so every morning i &apos;m going to do it on my wlan-waage and people talk to me before i sit in the car , &quot; for lunch , i just hold a little salad today . &quot;
but this is the netteste , which is what &apos;s going to happen , because this is the gruppenzwang , gruppenzwang , because that could be used against obesity or it could be the smoking smoking .
it could also be used to get people from their own chairs and to bring them to make some kind of play in order to play their health .
next week , this is going to be on the market .
it &apos;s going to be this little blutdruck-messgerät , which you &apos;re going to put on a iphone or something like that .
and it will allow people to measure their blood pressure to send him to their physician and to share it for some of them , for something more than 100 dollars .
at this point , the patient &apos;s going to come back to the game , you can &apos;t just take the control , but also to help us in your own ship , but also to help us , in the challenges of challenges that are facing us , and the kostenexplosion of the health , even demand and so on .
and do it , you &apos;re looking for use , and they start to hug patients in the team .
and that can be done through these techniques , but also by catching .
and one of the things we &apos;ve done , i want to share with you with a quick video .
we all have navigationssysteme in our cars .
maybe even in our mobile phones .
we know exactly exactly where all the atm geldautomaten around the world .
we know one thing , where all the stations are .
and sure we can find fastfood-ketten .
but where the next aed are going to be the next to help this patient ?
we have herumgefragt , and no one knew it .
no one knew where the next lebensrettende is lebensrettende aed in this moment .
so what did we do ? we did have been wrong .
we have a website and a menschenmasse , and if you see a aed , please share it , please share it , where he &apos;s on , &quot; because sometimes he &apos;s in geschäftszeiten , of course .
and over 10,000 aeds were reported in the netherlands .
the next step was to find the apps for that .
and we have a ipad-app designed .
we &apos;ve developed a app for layar , extended reality to find these aeds .
and if you &apos;re in a city like maastricht and somebody else , you can use your iphone , and within the next weeks , you can save the next aed to try to save the next aed .
and then we want to just like this to this , not just as a aed4u , like the product itself , but as a aed4us .
and we want to bring this to a global level .
and we &apos;re asking our colleagues around the world , from other universities , to help us to behave like knotenpunkte , to be able to defend these aeds on the world .
and if you are in holiday and somebody else , it &apos;s your own business or anyone else , you can find a aed .
the other thing we want to ask is that companies all over the world is helping us in the world of these aeds .
these may be kurierdienste , or for example , for example , just to make sure that the gemeldete is still going to be on its location .
please help us and try and try to improve health , but to take it into the hand .
thank you .
today i &apos;m going to report from unexpected discoveries .
i work in the solartechnologie-branche .
and my little startup would want us to make us feel secure by doing it ...
... it &apos;s about the southwest mall .
here &apos;s a quick video about what we do .
oh . a moment .
it may be , until it &apos;s gone .
now -- we can just go out and just -- i &apos;m going to just get to the video of the video of the video box .
no .
that &apos;s not ...
okay . okay .
solartechnologie is ...
oh , my time is over ?
okay . thank you .
so a few years ago , i &apos;ve started to get a program to get the science in technology and design , a year and work in a environment that &apos;s pretty much everything that they &apos;re actually going to do , we &apos;re going to work in government .
the program means &quot; code of america &quot; and it &apos;s a little bit like the friedenscorps für .
we choose every year from some of the year , and we &apos;re going to work with stadtverwaltungen .
instead of sending them into the third world , we send them in rathäuser .
and there was a great adaptation to work with urban employees .
but what you really do is to show what &apos;s going to be today with technology .
so they hit al .
al is a hydrant in the city .
here &apos;s what it looks like , as he &apos;s looking for a date , but what he really is looking for , is someone who &apos;s eingeschneit , because he knows , he &apos;s not very good at the brandbekämpfung if he &apos;s a meter of the snow .
how did he came to this particular way to look for ?
we had a team of fellows in boston in boston in the following &quot; code . &quot;
they were there in february , and it has last february .
and they realized that the city never had to schaufelt this hydranten .
but a particular fellow , a man named erik michaels-ober , who was another thing , and that was that the residents were going to be the sidewalks freely frei , right .
so he did what any good american would do , he wrote a app .
it &apos;s a nice little app where you can adopt a fire hydrant .
you stimmst to schaufeln it , if it &apos;s schneit .
if you do that , you can give him a name , and he called the first al al .
if you don &apos;t do that , it can take you away .
so there &apos;s a nice little game .
this is a very humble little app .
it &apos;s probably the slightest of the 21 applications that have written the fellows in last year .
but she does something that doesn &apos;t do any other regierungstechnologie .
they &apos;re looking at the rasant .
there &apos;s this guy in the i.t. hall of the city department of the city who &apos;s seen that this app could use , not for snow , but that the citizen will adopt .
it &apos;s very important that these tsunami-sirenen work , but people steal the batteries .
so he got the citizen to check it .
and then i decided to use the app to get the citizen to clean the verstopften .
and chicago has just introduced them to do the people who schneit the buergersteige , when it melts .
we know nine cities , the planning to use this app .
and she has been focused on , of course , of course .
if you know something about regierungstechnologie , you know that it &apos;s not going to be that .
the beschaffung of software takes a few years .
we had a team that last year was working in boston , for three people , for three people .
it was about a method to find out with the parents , which are the right public school for their children .
and later , it was told that if it would go over the normal channels , it would have been going to have two years , and it would have been over two million dollars .
and that &apos;s not anything .
there &apos;s a project in california &apos; 80s that has the taxpayer given two billion dollars in the california of two billion dollars .
and there are projects like this in any level of government .
so a app that &apos;s written in a few days , and then from selbt , is a kind of a shot that &apos;s going to be a shot of the institution government .
you see how the government could work better -- not just like a regular company , how many people think they should .
and not even like a technik-unternehmen , but rather like the internet itself .
and that means free access to open and productive .
and that &apos;s important .
but more importantly about this app is that they &apos;re going to be a new generation that &apos;s the problem of government -- not as the problem of a verknöcherten institution , but as a problem of collective .
and this is a very good news , because it turns out that we &apos;re very good at all sorts of technologies with digital technology .
now there &apos;s a big community of people who are making the tools that we need to make things together .
it &apos;s not just the code for america , &quot; we &apos;ve got hundreds of people in the entire country that are getting up and regierungs-apps , every day in their own communities .
they don &apos;t have the government .
they &apos;re fürchterlich frustrated with you , but they don &apos;t complain about it .
and these guys know something that we lost from the eyes .
and that &apos;s when you all of your feelings about politics and the snake in the arbeitsamt and all the other things that we really upset about is , in the core , is , in the core , the words of tim o o , &quot; what we can do , &quot; what we can &apos;t do . &quot;
today , a lot of people have given the government .
and if you &apos;re one of the people , please please , you know , you &apos;re going to be able to do it , because things change .
politics doesn &apos;t change ; government is in the change .
and because the government finally finally , the force of us -- erinner : &quot; we &apos;re the people ? &quot; -- how we think about this , what &apos;s going to happen to be what is going to happen .
i didn &apos;t know much about government when i started this program .
and as many people , i thought that there &apos;s been a lot of the government that people are going to choose to choose to be a office .
now after two years , i &apos;ve got to the conclusion that it &apos;s about to kommunen , to kommunen .
that &apos;s the call-center for service and information .
and you get the way you get out of your town , if you anrufst in your city .
if you ever have to have a chance to work in your städtisches , the most powerful scott of the fellow , how our fellow scott scott are -- you &apos;re going to see that the people who are facing the government of different problems , including , including that a beutelratte in your house .
so scott , this is the anfruf .
he &apos;s called &quot; beutelratte . &quot;
and he didn &apos;t really have an idea . he starts with the tierfänger .
and finally , he says , &quot; look , you can just open all the doors in your house and see very loud music , and see if that &apos;s the cattle abhaut ? &quot;
and that worked . applause for scott .
but that wasn &apos;t the end of the beutelratten .
and boston has not just a call-center .
it has a app , a web- and handy-app , called &quot; citizens connect . &quot;
we didn &apos;t written this app .
this is the work very smart people in the office in the office of the new york city .
one day -- this is a well-known report -- this is the rein in my mülltonne , can &apos;t say whether she &apos;s dead .
how do i get it away ? &quot;
but what &apos;s happened with &quot; citizens connect . &quot;
scott , human face to human .
but on &quot; citizens connect &quot; is all public , so that everybody can see .
and in this case , it was a neighbor .
and the next one we got was , &quot; i went there , found the mülltonne behind the house .
beutelratte ? yeah . alive .
turned the mülltonne on the page . went home .
good night , süße . &quot;
pretty simple .
this is great . here &apos;s the digital physical .
and it &apos;s also a good example of how government is in the last thing .
but it &apos;s also a great example of the government .
and i don &apos;t mean necessarily a technical definition of platform .
i &apos;m talking about a platform for people to help themselves and help to help others .
a citizen helped a different citizen , but the government played here in a central role .
they were given these two people .
and you would have to connect them with staatlichen performance if these need would be , but a neighbor is a far better and billigere of the federal government .
if a neighbor of the other helps help our communities .
let &apos;s call the tierfänger , it costs a lot of money .
one of the most important things is that we have to think that government is not the same thing .
and most people understand that , but they believe that one of the input of others .
that our contribution to the system is vote .
how often do we chose a political guide -- and sometimes we &apos;ve been able to choose a lot of energy to choose to choose a new political leaders -- and we expect to be able to make sure that the government , our values and our needs , and then we don &apos;t have a lot of change ?
this is because the government is like a farther and politics that are the supreme 15cm .
and what &apos;s underneath is what we call shame .
and we use this word with such contempt .
but it &apos;s this one that we own , and for the we &apos;re going to have to pay something that &apos;s going to work on us , something that works , something else , and then we &apos;ll do ourselves ourselves .
people seem to think politics is sexy .
if we want this institution for us , we have to make sure sexy sexy .
because that &apos;s where the actual regierungsarbeit is going to happen .
we need to be a maschinerie of government .
so the occupythesec-bewegung has done it .
have you seen these guys ?
it &apos;s a group of besorgter citizen that has written a very detailed bericht report that &apos;s a answer to the sec-memo of the gesetzesvorlage .
this is not politically active active , which is bürokratisch active .
now , for those of us who have been given the government , it &apos;s time that we &apos;re going to think about that , about the world that we want to leave our children .
you need to imagine the enormous challenges you need to ask .
we really believe that we have to reach what we need to do without improve institution , which can actually do all the way that we can do ?
a government is absolutely necessary , but it &apos;s got to be more efficient .
the good news is that technology makes it possible to make the function of government changes in a way that actually can reach a little bit of things that i can do with it .
and there &apos;s one generation that grew up the internet internet , and the knows that it &apos;s not so hard to do things , you have to build the only systems .
now the average of our fellows is 28 , so i am , unfortunately , almost a generation of older than most of them .
this is one generation that grew up with that , their vote and to see her voice .
they don &apos;t fight this battle , which we all fight , to fight who you &apos;re talking about . they all talk to you .
you can take your mind , to every day , and you do it .
so if you faced with the problem of government , you don &apos;t care about it , you don &apos;t use your voices to use .
they use their hands .
they use their hands to write applications that improves the work of government .
and this apps is using our hands to improve our communities .
this could be a fire hydrant , unkraut , unkraut , a trash mülleimer with a beutelratte .
and sure , we would have these these days to freischaufeln all the time , and many people do that .
but these apps are like small digital memories that we are not only consumers , and we not only have consumers of government that are paying and excellence .
we are more than that , we &apos;re citizens .
and we &apos;re not going to improve the government until we improve the citizenship .
so the question i &apos;ve all of you here : if it &apos;s the great , important things that we have to do together , all together , we &apos;re going to be a lot of voices , or will we be a lot of the hands ?
thank you .
and usually , my role is to explain the people who are the new technologies that are the most difficult , and i thought , &quot; and i &apos;m going to tell you what i really think about , and also , i think , and i think , and i think , and i think , and i think , and i &apos;m going to try to understand what
i &apos;m going to start to you just a single , boring slide .
... you could just show you a little bit of the slide .
this is a slide that i chose from my folder .
it &apos;s not about the details of the slide , but rather than the generelle shape .
this slide is a analyse data from us about the performance of risc processors compared to the performance of a local area .
the interesting thing here is that this slide , like this , like this , what we often do is often in our field , a kind of way of a semi-logarithmischen curve .
in other words : every step here is a potency in the leistungsskala .
and this is a very important thing that we have to use this guy to use a semi-logarithmischen curves in the field of technology .
something very strange happens here .
this is essentially what i &apos;m going to talk about here .
so if you ask the lights back again .
even a bit of time , because i &apos;m going to draw something on the paper here .
now , why do we draw graphs in the technology ?
the reason i would like to draw it to a normal curve , where we say this is the years here , so the timeline is the years of a kind of way , and this is a very complicated mass of technology , which i want to be in a graph , which is going to be the graph of a graph .
that &apos;s what you see .
and that &apos;s not a lot .
so if i want to be a different technology , we say a transporttechnologie , which would be very daherkommen at the semi-logarithmischen scale , very unvernünftig , in shape .
but if something like this , it changes the qualitativen circumstance .
so if the transporttechnologie rate was as quickly as the mikroprozessor-technologie would be fortschreiten , we could put it in a taxi and in 30 seconds , we would be in tokyo .
but that &apos;s not so fast .
that was never before in history of the technologie-entwicklung , this kind of rekursivem growth , which is the size of the world &apos;s paar .
the question i want to ask you is if you look at these exponential curves , you see , you don &apos;t go to forever .
it &apos;s not possible that everything is forever and forever , as much as now as well as now .
there are two ways : there are two ways : there are two choices : there are two ways : there are two ways : there are two ways : there are two ways : there are two ways : there are two ways : there are two ways : there are two ways .
either it &apos;s going to be a classic s-kurve like this , until something completely new , or it will happen .
that &apos;s in about something .
now , i &apos;m an optimist , so i think i &apos;m going to have something like this is going to happen .
it &apos;s really , that &apos;s what we &apos;re in right now in a transition .
we &apos;re here in this line , in a transition from the new world , to a new kind of world .
so the question i want to ask and i also ask myself to myself , is to be the new world ?
what is this new state that &apos;s going to move the world ?
because the transition seems very , very confusing when you &apos;re in there .
when i was a kid , there was the future somewhere in 2000 , and people often talked about what was happening in 2000 .
now , here &apos;s a conference where people talk about the future and you realize that the future still is still in 2000 .
beyond the way we don &apos;t .
so in other words , the future of a year is a year , i &apos;ve been around the world .
i think the reason is that we realize that something that is something in the room .
the transition happens . we can all feel it .
and we know that there &apos;s no sense to try and look at 30 or 50 years to look at the future , because everything is so different that we &apos;re going to be a simple hochrechnung of what we don &apos;t make sense .
i want to talk about what might be that , that transition we &apos;re going to be .
so to make this , i &apos;m going to talk about some other things that really don &apos;t really have to do with technology or computers .
because i think that i really can understand this , we need to go back and look at the thing on a page of a page .
and this is what i want to look at this on the earth &apos;s life of life .
i think the first thing that makes sense , if you &apos;re going to be in some milliarden-schritte .
so we go back and to get 2.5 billion years , and the earth was a big , steriler steinklumpen with lots of darauf chemikalien .
if you look at the way that chemicals were organized , then there &apos;s a pretty good picture about how they anstellten .
i think there are theories that are starting to understand how everything we started with rna with rna , but i &apos;m going to tell you a simplified story of what that time is that at this time , that time , that time , that are different kinds of rezepten herumschwebten .
some of these öltröpfchen took a special combination of chemicals that allowed them to integrate and grow into the aussen of the outside and growing .
all of the ones that were so , they were .
these little öltröpfchen were in the sense of the primitivste zellenform .
but these weren &apos;t about a lebendig in today &apos;s life , because every single one of them was just a little bit of chemicals .
and every time it divided , it turns out , they have befindlichen the darin of the chemikalien .
so every tröpfchen was a little bit different .
in fact , the tröpfchen tröpfchen , which takes a growth of the growth of optimalere and integrated more and more chemicals and more chemicals and the faster .
so these tended are to survive longer and they &apos;re eating in grösserem .
so this is just a very simple chemical form of life , but more interesting is it &apos;s more interesting when these tröpfchen had a trick about abstraction .
on any way that we don &apos;t even understand , they have this tröpfchen capacity to erlernt information . information is information .
they &apos;ve learned the recipe of the cell as information as a specific chemical form that we call dna .
in other words , you &apos;ve found a way of a way of found that you allowed to , you know , niederzuschreiben them , so they could be stored and being copied .
the amazing thing about this is that these kinds of information is about to store the time of 2.5 billion years , where she was born .
in fact , the recipe for us , is our genes , from the same code and the same notation .
and that &apos;s why every living organisms that exactly the same letter and the same code .
we &apos;re far , that we can only write the vergnügungszweck , to write in this code .
and i have 100 mikrogramm of a white pulvers , which i &apos;m trying to do in airports in airports .
in fact , what i did is -- what i did is , i &apos;ve taken this code -- the code is made of normal letters that we use to symbolisieren -- and i wrote my visitenkarte on a piece of dna , and it &apos;s going to take it 10 ^ 22 times .
so if somebody &apos;s a hundred million copies of my visitenkarte , i &apos;ve got enough for anyone to do for anyone in this room and even for everybody in this world , and it &apos;s right here .
i would have been a egoist , i would have written it on a virus , and in the room .
so what &apos;s next to step ?
the dna niederschreiben of dna was a more complicated step .
and the veranlagten of these cells -- that made them happy for another billion years .
but then another thing happened , very interesting step , where things were completely different , and so , in the things that are completely different , and we started communicating that cells and share that communities of cells .
i don &apos;t know if you knew that , but bacteria can actually transform your dna .
that &apos;s why the consistency is growing to antibiotics .
some bacteria have found how they can grow from penicillin , and they &apos;ve written this information together with other bacteria and now we have a lot of bacteria that are resistant to penicillin , because the bacteria are communicating .
so this communication has now been to bring the reasons of communities in the same boat , they were synergetisch .
so they either survive , or they were combined , and they meant that if a community was successful , all the individuals were repeated and the individuals were repeated and from evolution .
the übergangsstelle is now where these communities are so close to close that they &apos;re determined to write the recipe for the entire community to the dna .
and the next interesting thing about this is about another billion years .
at this point , we have mehrzellige communities , communities of many verschiedlichen zellentypen , which together as a single organism .
in fact , we &apos;re also a kind of mehrzellige community .
we have lots of cells which not just to be on themselves .
your skin are useless , nutzlos without herzzellen , muscle , hirnzellen and so on .
so these communities began so that the level of evolution , which was the evolution of the evolution , not the only cell , but the whole thing we call organism .
the next step is now happening within this communities .
the zellengemeinschaften began to come back to information .
and they developed specific structures that nothing else did not have anything else in the organism .
and these are the neural structures .
so the neurons are the informationsverarbeitungsapparat that have built these zellengemeinschaften .
they started specialists in the community , special structures that were responsible for learning , understand and that &apos;s kind of information .
and this was the brain and the nervous of these communities .
this gave you a evolutionary advantage .
because at this point , a individual -- learning about the average of a single organism , rather than that evolutionary period .
so a organism could learn to eat a certain little fruit , because they &apos;re sick , and it &apos;s sick , and it made him sick , the last time he has had .
this could be a single organism in the lifetime of a single organism , whereas hundreds of thousands of years ago , because these information had learned from the individuals , because of these frucht died , because these informationsverarbeitungsstrukturen were not there .
so the nervous system has the evolutionsprozess of this particular informationsstrukturen because the evolution could have been able to do within a small .
it could be taken inside a decade in a decade .
what happens is that the individual organisms found a way to communicate each other .
so , for example , the raffinierteste version of us is the human version of this 30-year version of this kommunikationsart .
it &apos;s a pretty amazing invention when you think about it .
i have a very complicated , unordentliche and i &apos;m going to see in my head .
i &apos;m sitting here and i &apos;m basically looking at töne notes of me , in the hope of a similar to create a similar to the idea of the eurem idea that has a certain resemblance to my original idea .
so we take something very complicated , it &apos;s in sound , to create a sequence of sound , and produce something very complicated in the heads of others .
so this allows us to work on a unified organism .
and what we actually did is we &apos;ve been humanity , is to have to launch .
we are the same stages that have been durchgemacht , which is the abstraction of our methods , how we have to capture data , and it &apos;s about data , it &apos;s more likely to be .
the invention of language was a little step in this direction .
telefonie , computers , videobänder , cd-roms , cd-roms and so on our specialized mechanisms that we built in our community to be able to perform this information .
and it connects us all together to something that is much bigger , and also , as well as we have to develop faster than we were far .
so today , evolution can happen in the back of microseconds .
you &apos;ve seen a little bit of little evolutionsbeispiel , which is a little bit of evolution in &quot; convolution program , right front of your eyes .
so we have the zeitskalen erneut .
the first steps of history , which i told you about , dauerten a billion years .
the next steps , like the nervous system and the brain , dauerten several hundred million years .
then the most complex steps , like language and so on , less than a million years .
and these next steps , like electronics , seem to be very few decades .
and the process of itself and it &apos;s going to be so , and i think , auto-katalytisch is the word for that , if something its änderungsgeschwindigkeit .
the more changes it changes , the faster changes .
and i think that &apos;s what we see here in this explosionsartigen curve .
we see the process that can rise itself .
i live in the building of computers and i know that i &apos;m using the mechanism to build computers , not using computers , without the recently of the computertechnologie .
my current activity is in creating objects with such a high complexity complexity that it &apos;s impossible to be able to design this in traditional sense .
i don &apos;t know what any single transistor in the verbindungsmaschine .
it has billions of them .
what i do instead , and what the designer of your thinking machines is , we think of the designer of the machine and the machine makes it , and the machine makes something that our skills is going to make the ability to make our skills , better and faster than we could ever do it .
and it makes it partly with the techniques that we don &apos;t even understand .
a method which is particularly interesting , and which i &apos;ve been used in last time , is the evolution of itself .
and we install a evolutionsprozess in the machine that &apos;s in the mikrosekunden-bereich .
so to give you an example of the most extreme cases , we can create a program that &apos;s developed from random .
we say , &quot; computers , generiere , generiere bitte .
now , please all the randomly chosen gewählten of the zufällig , all the programs , and i just want to say , the ones that are my wife . &quot;
so in other words , i first want to first what i want .
let &apos;s say , i want to be able to get a little bit of the way that i &apos;ve been using it .
so find programs that can be on the most efficient .
of course , the chance of randomly gewählten instruktionen instruktionen , they &apos;re going to be a little bit of coincidence , so they don &apos;t have to make any of the instructions .
but one of those like that , with something like something else , two numbers in the right order .
now i say , &quot; computers , you take those 10 percent of the sequences that i &apos;ve got to the next few people .
and this is what &apos;s been doing this , lösche , lösche .
now , all of the übriggebliebenen , all the übriggebliebenen that have been in the best .
and that &apos;s what a method of rekombinierens , to the reproduction . &quot;
take two programs , and they produce children through the exchange of their subroutinen , and the kids vererben the properties of the two strands of the two strands of the two strands .
so i have a new generation of programs that emerged through combinations of programs that have been closer to the past , which has become a different way .
well , let &apos;s say , &quot; please , &quot; please . &quot;
bewerte again .
maybe some mutations .
and try and try to the whole generation of another generation .
all of these generations only need to be just a few milliseconds , just a few milliseconds .
and so i can run a evolution over millions of years in the computer , or in a couple of hours , a few hours .
finally , i get programs that can be perfectly perfect .
in fact , these programs are so much more efficient than any program i ever have to write .
if i look at these programs , i can &apos;t say how they work .
i tried to understand them .
it &apos;s verworrene and strange programs .
but they &apos;re going to do the job .
i know and i &apos;m sure that they &apos;re going to do the job , because they &apos;re from a series of hunderttausenden programs that have done the job .
because your life depended off it , whether they were doing the job right .
i sat in a 747 with marvin , ale er , he ale a card hervorholt and says , &quot; oh look . look at that . look at that .
there , this aircraft is made of hunderttausenden kleinteilen , which together to make a better safer , make it not zuversichtlicher ? &quot;
we know that a entwicklungsprozess isn &apos;t necessarily a sense when it &apos;s too complicated .
so we start to rely on computer , for a process that &apos;s different from the classical source of the moon .
he allows us to make things with a much higher complexity than it would be the normal way .
and yet , we don &apos;t understand the possibility of it .
gewissermassen überflügelt us , so that &apos;s what technology .
we use these programs to make the computer much faster , so that we can be able to do this processes to go faster and to do this .
so it &apos;s a rückkopplung .
it &apos;s going to faster and faster and i think that &apos;s why it seems so confusing .
because all these new technologies from today are feeding themselves .
we raise it down .
we &apos;re at a point , the analog is to be developed at the time , when einzeller-organismen evolved .
so we are the amöben and we can &apos;t quite all , what we &apos;re doing in the hell of the world .
we &apos;re in this übergangpunkt .
but i really think that &apos;s going to be something that comes back .
i find it very hochmütig from us to say that we are the endprodukt of evolution .
and i think we &apos;re all part of the creation of what &apos;s always going to be next .
now , the lunch is going to stand before and i think i &apos;m going to hear it right now before i &apos;m going to be going to go .
my story starts right here in rajasthan , about two years ago .
i was under the middle of the time in the desert with sufi-sänger ali .
we talked about that nothing has been changed since the time of the ancient indian epos . &quot;
if we wanted to travel back in the back , we put in a car and schwirrten over the sky .
now we &apos;re doing this with airplanes .
at the time , when the great indian indian kriegerprinz had durst , he took a bow , fired into the ground and water .
now we do this with bohrern and machines .
we came to the conclusion that magic and magic , by machines .
and that made me really sad .
i got a little freaked out of technology .
it was afraid i could lose the ability to lose the sunset without camera and without going on my friends .
i found that technology should be able to do this , and not kill .
when i was a little girl , my grandfather gave me his little silberne taschenuhr .
this piece of 50-year-old technology was technology for me to be the magischste thing for me .
it became a goldener access to a world of pirates and verunglückter ships and pictures in my performance .
i came to the fact that we could send our fancy clocks and kameras them off .
they kept us from being inspired by being .
and so i went to the world of technology to see how i could use them to kill the magic .
with 16 , i started to illustrate books .
when i saw the ipad , i saw it as a device to storytelling , the readers of the readers around the world .
it can know how we hold it .
it can know where we are .
it &apos;s got pictures and text together , and animation and touch .
the storytelling is always going to be more sense .
but what do we do ?
i just go to khoya , a interactive ipad app .
here , here &apos;s : &quot; let &apos;s move your fingers on every light . &quot;
and so -- this is &quot; this box belongs ... &quot; i write my name . &quot;
and from me , it &apos;s a character in the book .
and again , a letter to me , and the ipad white knows where i live -- that &apos;s really right .
the child in me is really excited about this .
i &apos;ve talked about magic .
i mean , i mean , i mean , it &apos;s not a magician and kites , the magic of childhood , which we all had to be as children .
fireflies in a jar , i found that i was very exciting .
so you have to put this up on the ipad , and the fireflies .
and the way the site is going through the rest .
another idea that fascinated me as a child is that a whole galaxy can put in a single murmel .
and so , every book and every single book , and each world is a little murmel , which i &apos;m wearing here in the device .
and this opens a map .
fantasybücher had always been cards , but these cards were static .
this map grows and lights and serves for the most of the most of the book .
it turns out to be the other places of the book .
i &apos;m going to go in here .
and also , it &apos;s important to me , something that is also very zeitgemäß .
this is the apsaras .
we &apos;ve all heard of feen and nymphen , but how many people outside india know their indian colleagues , the apsaras of the indian colleagues ?
the poor apsaras were thousands of years in indras , in a old muffigen book .
and we bring them back to a contemporary story for children .
one story that is looking with new issues like the umweltkrise .
so to the subject , a big problem of the last 10 years is that children are sitting in their rooms in their rooms , on their own rooms , on their own computern .
but now , with disruptive technology , we can use our children into the natural world with its technology .
in a interaction of the book , you &apos;re sent to a search for a search . you have to cut out and with the camera of the ipads of the ipads of the ipads .
as a child , i had collections of stöckern , rocks and muscheln .
somehow , the kids don &apos;t do it .
this is kindheitsritual zurückgebracht . you need to cut out to a chapter a photograph of a flower and tag .
in a different chapter , you have to fotographieren a piece of baumrinde fotographieren .
so you actually create a digital collection of photographs that you can put online online .
a kid in london shows the image of a fuchses and says , &quot; oh , i &apos;ve seen a fox . &quot;
a kid in india says , &quot; today i &apos;ve seen a monkey . &quot;
this creates a kind of social network around a digital collection of pictures that you actually have .
there &apos;s a variety of ways of magic , the world and technology .
and in the next book , we planning a interaction where you use video of the ipads and through augmented , a animation of the elfen looks like a plant on a plant .
on a site , the screen with leaves .
you have to do the scarf of the winds , and you &apos;re reading and reading the rest of the book .
we all move around a world where the highest of technology are going to come and can come into the magic and the technology can be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to
we use the energy of the sun .
we bring our children and closer to the natural world and the magic , and it &apos;s fun and the love of our childhood through the simple medium .
thank you .
this is really a really extraordinary honor for me .
i spend most of my time in untersuchungshaft , gefängnissen , or todeszellen .
i spend most of my time with the social weakest in the sozialbausiedlungen and places where there are lots of hopelessness .
here at ted , to see and hear how to do this , i &apos;ve given me a lot of power .
in the short time , i was given one of the time : ted has a identity .
you can say things that have influence .
and sometimes if something about ted , it gets meaning and strength that it doesn &apos;t otherwise .
i say that because i think identity is very important .
we &apos;ve seen some amazing presentations .
i think we &apos;ve learned that the words of a teacher has a very big experience , but the words of a dedicated lehrers will be particularly physical .
as a doctor can do good . &quot; as a fürsorglicher doctor , you can do more .
and so i want to talk about the power of identity .
i didn &apos;t have to learn the way of my work as a lawyer .
i learned that from my grandmother .
i became a big groß in a family , a traditional afroamerikanischen household , who was dominated by a matriarchin dominated and this matriarchin was my grandmother .
she was a taffe , strong woman , she had done .
she had the last word in every familienstreit .
it was also the starting of the origin of many people in our family .
she was the daughter of a sklavenfamilie .
their parents were born in the 1840ern in virginia .
it was born to nurse , and the experience of slavery shaped their interest .
my grandmother was strong , but she was also also liebevoll .
if i met her as a kid , she came to me and umarmte me .
it struck me so that i could barely breathe . then i let me go .
one or two hours later , when i came to her , she came up and said , &quot; bryan , you feel my body nor my body ? &quot;
and if i said , &quot; no , i &apos;ll say , &quot; if i said , &quot; yes , let me put me in quiet .
and her was something that was going to be always going to be in her .
the only problem was that they had 10 children .
my mom was the youngest of her 10 children .
sometimes , if i wanted time to spend time , it was hard to get your attention .
my cousins around around .
i remember , i have to be eight or nine , i &apos;ve got to be a morning and i went to the living room , all my cousins .
my grandmother sat at the end of the beach and staring at me .
first , i thought that this was a game .
i looked at her and smiled , but she looked very serious .
this was so 15 or 20 minutes , and then she stood up and came to me , and she took me at the hand and said , &quot; come on , &quot; come on , and i have to talk . &quot;
i remember it was a yesterday .
i &apos;ll never forget it .
she took me out and i said , &quot; bryan , i &apos;ll tell you something , but you have to promise you &apos;re not going to be weitersagst . &quot;
i said , &quot; i promised , grandmother . &quot;
she said , &quot; ehrenwort ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
she sat down and looked at me . she said , &quot; i want you to see that i have seen you . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you &apos;re special . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you can do anything you want . &quot;
i never forget that .
then she said , &quot; you have to give me three things , bryan . &quot;
i said , &quot; ok , grandmother . &quot;
she said , &quot; first of me , you &apos;re always going to love your mom . &quot;
she said , &quot; your mom is my baby and you have to have to do with promise you &apos;re always going to take care of them . &quot;
i got my mother , so i said , &quot; yes , grandmother i &apos;m going to do . &quot;
and then she said , &quot; as next ted , you always do the right thing , &quot; even if it &apos;s hard to do that right . &quot;
i thought , &quot; yes , grandmother . i promise it . &quot;
and then she said , &quot; the last thing you &apos;ve got to promise me is that you &apos;re never going to drink a alcohol . &quot;
well , i was nine years old and so i said , &quot; yeah , grandmother . i promise it . &quot;
i grew up on the country , in the old , rural south , and i have a brother who &apos;s a year older , and a year of younger sister .
when i was about 14 or 15 , one day my brother came home and took this sixpack beer with his sister and me and went to the forest .
we just put it in there as well as otherwise .
then he took a schluck beer and offered my sister &apos;s sister , and she took me to it , and then she &apos;ll give me one .
i said , &quot; no , no , no . ok . you just want to be a beer . &quot;
my brother said , &quot; well , i &apos;m going to do it , now we do this , you do whatever we do .
i had what sister had had , and go , and go , trink . &quot;
i said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to . make it only . &quot;
my brother had me .
he said , &quot; what &apos;s going on with you ? &quot;
and then he saw me in the face and said , &quot; oh no , you don &apos;t always do it , but not really crazy for the conversation ? &quot;
i said , &quot; what are you talking about ? &quot;
he said , &quot; grandma tells all of the grandchildren that they &apos;re special . &quot;
i was devastated .
i &apos;ll give you something .
i should probably do that .
this is going to be a public health system .
i &apos;m 52 years old , and i was gestehe that i never had to drink a drop of alcohol .
i &apos;m not saying that because i think it &apos;s tugendhaft . i say that &apos;s because identity does .
if we can create the right kind of identity , we can tell people around us , things that they don &apos;t believe .
we can get them to do things that they thought they couldn &apos;t .
of course , my grandmother would say all of their grandchildren , they &apos;re going to be something special .
my grandfather was during the prohibition in prison .
my uncle died in alkoholinduzierten disease .
and they believed that this is the topics that we have to take care of .
i tried to say something about our justizsystem .
this country is different than 40 years ago .
in 1972 , 300,000 people were 300,000 people in haftanstalten and prison .
today , there are 2.3 million .
the united states have today the highest world of the world .
seven million people are being discharged in our own or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
and i think , in my opinion , we have changed our world .
in social weak and black parts of the population of despair and hopelessness , because of this change .
one of three male male is black in the middle of 18 and 30 is in prison , in the prison , on a bewährung or mit .
in urban communities , in the country -- los angeles over philadelphia , the baltimore to washington -- are 50 percent of all the young men in the prison , in prison , in the prison , on a bewährung , or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
but our system is not only shaped by questions that have to do with rassenzugehörigkeit , it &apos;s also being driven by poverty .
we have a justizsystem that you &apos;re getting better than you and guilty and guilty and innocent .
vermögen , not verschulden , affected the outcome .
but still , we seem to be pleased to be satisfied .
a politics of fear and anger has convinced us that these problems are not our problems .
we lost the contact .
i find this interesting .
there &apos;s a few more hochinteressante .
my home alabama , entzieht to them permanent wahlrecht when they &apos;re being convicted .
here and today , in alabama , 34 percent of the male population had lost their lost .
we prognostizieren that in 10 years , the quote of the bürgerlichen ehrenrechte so as high as front of the wahlrechtsgesetzes .
and that &apos;s the silence .
i &apos;m going to feed children .
many of my favorites are very young .
the united states of america are the only country in the world , the dreizehnjährige children in prison .
in this country , there are für lebenslängliche haftstrafen without bedingte .
we &apos;ve been going to run a lot of things .
the only country in the world .
i &apos;m vertrete people in todeszellen .
the question of death is a really interesting question .
we believe it &apos;s so much that the real question is : has a human being , for a human being , to die of a crime ?
this is a very simple question .
but you can think differently about how we see our identity .
the other one is not : somebody who earns a crime , but we &apos;re earned it , and we &apos;re going to get it to kill ?
i find that fascinating .
the death penalty in america is defined by the way .
on nine people that we have executed , one of the people we have to be used for innocent , who was discharged and from the death .
a amazing fehlerquote . one of the nine innocent innocent .
i find that fascinating .
we would never let someone fly with a plane , if you have nine planes , the right , the abheben .
but somehow we can do it , we can &apos;t fix this problem .
it &apos;s not our problem .
it &apos;s not our burden .
it &apos;s not our fight .
i &apos;m talking about this question .
i talk about race and the question , whether we have to kill the right .
and it &apos;s exciting because i &apos;m going to talk my students to my students , i &apos;m talking about slavery .
i &apos;m talking about terrorism , the time against the end of the permian , to the beginning of the second .
we don &apos;t really know much about it .
but for the time in this country , it was a time of terror .
in many areas , people had to be afraid of lynchmobs , lynchmobs , lynchmobs .
or bombs .
it was the fear of terror that they were doing .
these older people come to me and say , &quot; mr , stevenson , you &apos;re talking about , you know , you &apos;re talking about , you know , you should stop , that we have to do it for the first time in the history of our nation , &quot; after 9 / 11 . &quot;
they say , &quot; no -- they say , &quot; they say , &quot; they &apos;re going to be that we grew up . &quot;
and after terrorism , the rassentrennung and decades of the rassistisch warrior unterwerfung and defeating .
and yet there &apos;s a dynamic , we don &apos;t like to talk about our problems .
we don &apos;t like to talk about our history .
and so we don &apos;t really understand what meaning our actions in historical context .
we &apos;re going to be the time .
we &apos;re always creating new tensions and conflict .
it &apos;s hard to talk about race , and i think that &apos;s because we &apos;re not willing to be willing to be able to be able to be able to get the truth of truth and reconciliation .
in south africa , people understood that the rassentrennung couldn &apos;t overcome the rassentrennung without the willingness to truth and reconciliation .
even after the genocide in rwanda , these willingness to these things , but not in this country .
i &apos;ve been a few talks about the death penalty .
it was fascinating , because one of the scientists stood after my talk and said , &quot; you know , it &apos;s deeply deeply deeply to hear . &quot;
he said , &quot; in germany , there &apos;s no death penalty .
and of course , it can never be in germany . &quot;
it was still still . then a woman said , &quot; with our story , it &apos;s impossible to be impossible to kill us to the systematic killing of people .
it would be gewissenlos from us , consciously and people &apos;s menschen . &quot;
i thought about it .
as it turns out , it would feel like to live in a world where german state is made hinrichten , especially if you were a lot of jews .
it would be unerträglich .
it would be gewissenlos .
and yet , here in this country , in the states of the old südens , we &apos;re going to be able to get people to get the risk of murdering to the death , 11 times higher , when it &apos;s black , when it &apos;s black , when it &apos;s black , the victims is black and the victims -- in the same states , the body of
and yet there &apos;s this mental abkopplung .
i think our identity is threatened .
if we &apos;re not dealing with this , with these difficult topics , the positive and wonderful things is also affected .
we love innovation .
we love technology and creativity .
we love entertainment .
but ultimately , this is the realities of suffering , abuse , missbrauch , ausgrenzung .
i think it &apos;s important to unite them .
because we &apos;re talking about that we need more more engagement , more engagement , more commitment to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be
for me , for me , this time , i mean , for me , this time , to talk about the poor , the poor , who never become at ted .
but thinking about a way that is integrated in our own lives .
we all have to do at least the last thing that we can &apos;t see .
we do this . so we &apos;re also so rational we are so wrong .
innovation , creativity , creativity and development , not just from our heads .
they come from ideas that are driven by the belief in our hearts .
it &apos;s this kopf-herz-verbindung , from which i think they &apos;re trying to do is not only to be open to all the time for all of the bright and begeisternden things , but for the dark and problematischen .
vaclav havel , the great tschechische politicians , once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said
&quot; when we fought in eastern europe , we wanted to figure out everything , but what we needed most was , was hope , a spiritual orientation that willingness to be in the bereitschaft of hoffnungslosen places .
this is the most amazing orientation is the core of what i think is that they have to engage in that .
there &apos;s no way to have technology and design that allows us to be very , very human and to be very human , and as long as we don &apos;t have eyes and ears and have been healthy .
i want to warn you . this kind of identity makes a lot more of us than when we don &apos;t care about it .
it will be deeply touch .
as a young lawyer , i was the big privilege to meet pink parks , pink parks .
woman came back to the parks , and again , two of her oldest friends friends , the older women , johnnie carr , a tremendous afroamerikanerin -- and virginia durr , a white , a white , whose husband , clifford durr , dr. king vertrat .
so these women were committed to come and turned out .
and then finally , and then finally , and i said , &quot; well , &quot; bryan , woman comes into the city . we want to talk . we want to talk .
want to dazukommen and listen to listen ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; yeah , i like to love . &quot;
she said , &quot; and what are you going to do when you &apos;re here ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m going to listen to listen . &quot;
and i went over and listened to .
it was always so inspiring , so evocative .
one day i sat there and i heard this women , and after a few hours , woman turned to me , &quot; now , &quot; well , i &apos;m saying , &quot; well , what &apos;s the best thing to be in the same time is known as a cancer .
what do you try to do ? &quot;
i started talking about my presentation .
i said , &quot; we &apos;re trying to have a ungerechtigkeit .
wr want people to help people who were convicted .
we want to fight and discrimination in the strafvollzugssystem .
we want to lebenslängliche lebenslängliche without bedingte strafaussetzung for children .
we want to do something about the death penalty .
we want the number of prisoners .
we want to abolish masseninhaftierungen . &quot;
i stopped my usual talk , and then she looked at me and said , &quot; mhmm . &quot; mhmm . &quot;
she said , &quot; that &apos;s going to be very tired . &quot;
then ms. carr , he was sitting on my face and he was a finger on my face and said , &quot; and so , you need to be very , very tapfer . &quot;
and so i think that the ted ted-gemeinschaft should be .
we need to reframe ourselves to reframe these challenges : this kind of suffering .
because ultimately , our humanity , of our humanity , from all humanity .
in my work i learned very simple things .
i learned a few simple things .
that we all are more than the worst thing we ever done .
i think that &apos;s true for everybody &apos;s planet .
if somebody lying , it &apos;s not just a liar .
if somebody takes something , it doesn &apos;t hear it , it &apos;s not just a burglar .
even who kills someone is not just a murderer .
and because this is so basic human dignity that has to respect the law .
i also believe that in many parts of this country , and certainly in many parts of the earth , the opposite of poverty is not wealth .
i don &apos;t think that .
i think that in many places that is about poverty justice .
and finally , i think , even though it &apos;s so dramatic , so beautiful and so small , so that we &apos;re not going to be measured at the end of our technology , not at the things that we develop , not to our intellect and minds .
and finally , it &apos;s not measured a society of how they have their rich and powerful and privileged , but it &apos;s like that , as you &apos;re talking about the poor , the verurteilten , the inhaftierten .
because in this context , we start to realize the truly amazing things that we make us .
sometimes i walk the balance . a story to end .
sometimes i &apos;ll see a very much .
i &apos;m tired of how we all .
sometimes these ideas are going to think of our ideas , in terms of important .
i vertrete these kids who were convicted of being very hard in the very hard .
i &apos;m going to go to the untersuchungsgefängnis and visit a computer , who might be 14 years old , and the adult should be supposed to be .
then i ask myself , how could that happen ?
how can a judge someone transform into something that doesn &apos;t have to be ?
the judges looked at him as adults , but i see a child .
one night , i stayed to a long time and thought my god , if a judge can transform us into something else , then he must have zauberkräfte .
right , bryan , the judge has zauberkräfte .
you also have to do whatever .
and because it was late , and i couldn &apos;t think properly , i started to work on a correct stage .
i had a 14jährigen , poor young boy .
and i started to this one . the headline said , &quot; hey , my arms , 14jährigen , schwarzen , wie , white , white , white topmanager .
in my writing , i explained that , that was fehlverhalten , the fehlverhalten of the staatsanwaltschaft and the police .
there was a crazy line about that in this country , nothing more rechtens is that there &apos;s only more misconduct .
the next morning i woke up and didn &apos;t know whether i was doing this crazy , just to be in it , or actually writing him .
and i had not just written it , but i was sent it to the court .
a few months went , and i had forgotten everything .
but i decided to , my god , i have to be in the dish , and this crazy case .
i went to the car and was really overwhelmed -- overwhelmed .
so i went to the court .
and i thought that &apos;s going to be so hard to painful .
finally , i stepped out of my car and went to the staircase .
when i was the staircase to court , there was a elderly , black man , who was going to be in the dish .
when he saw me , he came to me and he said , &quot; who are you ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m a lawyer . &quot; he said , &quot; you &apos;re a lawyer ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
he came to me and umarmte me .
then he took me to the ear .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m so proud of them . &quot;
and i have to say , there was a force .
it &apos;s also a little bit deeply deeply in me , identity , the ability to create something very important to a community , to a perspective of hope .
well , i was going to put up the gerichtssaal .
once the judge i saw me , the judge i saw me , the judge .
he said , &quot; mr. stevenson , you have to put this crazy thing ? &quot;
i said , &quot; yeah . &quot; and then we started to debate .
people came to people in the way , just because they were angry , because they were angry , they were angry .
that i wrote this crazy thing .
polizeibeamte came to come and stellvertretende staatsanwälte and büroangestellte .
in the handumdrehen , the gerichtssaal full of people who were angry , that we talked about skin languages , about poverty , over inequity .
from my augenwinkel , i saw the janitors and go off .
he was seeing again through the window and could hear the whole tohuwabohu .
he went and down .
and finally , this older man was black with a very besorgten gesichtsausruck in the gerichtssaal and sat down behind me , almost on the verteidigungsbank .
ten minutes later , the judge was going to be a break .
during the pause came a polizeibeamter , it &apos;s the störte that was being in the gerichtssaal .
this deputy ran back to the older black .
he said , &quot; jimmy , what do you do in the gerichtssaal ? &quot;
the older man stood on , he looked at the deputy , and he said , &quot; i &apos;m thankful to say this young man , lose the goal of the eyes , don &apos;t lose the goal . &quot;
i &apos;ve come to ted , because i think many of you understood that the moral pendulum of the universe far far away , but that it &apos;s the justice zuneigt .
that we &apos;re not completely designed as long as we don &apos;t care about human rights and grundwerte .
that our children &apos;s survival to survive every single individual .
that we have our visions of technology and creation , and creativity , to creativity , to be with humanity , mercy and justice .
and especially , i want to see the most of you that just see the thing , just say , lose the goal out of the eyes . don &apos;t they .
you have to see in this audience , this community to be seen and heard of , and to help them and do something .
what can we do ?
bryan stevenson : now , there &apos;s all over there .
if you live in california , there &apos;s a volksentscheid in this spring in this spring , where it &apos;s about to do a effort , something of the geldstrom umzuleiten , which is going to be in politics .
here , in california , you will be in the next five years , you will have a billion dollars for the death penalty dollar .
and yet , 46 percent of all tötungsdelikte doesn &apos;t end with a verhaftung .
56 percent of all vergewaltigungsfälle are not going to court .
here &apos;s the opportunity to do something .
this referendum is going to suggest that money will make money in more sicherheitskräfte and safety .
i think there &apos;s opportunity .
during the last three decades , the verbrechensrate in america is declining .
this fact is often put into a context with the elevated inhaftierungszahlen .
what would you say someone who &apos;s going to say that ?
now , in fact , the number of gewaltverbrechen isn &apos;t very much .
most of the most popular masseninhaftierungen in this country was not really in the class of the gewaltverbrechen .
it was the fehlgeleitete kreuzzug against drugs .
so the dramatic numbers are high numbers in the home .
we have hinreißen from the rhetoric of the punishment .
now we have drei-verstöße « -gesetze , the people for forever , for always gitter , for a fahrraddiebstahl , for the theft of the theft of the theft of good good , rather than you &apos;re going to take them off the sacrifices .
i think we need to do more to help people who are victims of a straftat , not less .
and i think our present will help give you the present .
i think that &apos;s what we need to change .
bryan , you really have a string to the end .
they &apos;re a inspirational personality .
thank you for ted . thank you .
and i &apos;m about death , a erhöhtes gefahrenrisiko .
two : famine in somalia . three : spray of police .
4 : bösartige kartelle . watch five .
6 : social networking . watch 65 .
eight : tsunamiwarnung . speaker , cyber-attacken 9 : cyber-attacken cyber-attacken .
different speaker : drogenkrieg .
recession . gridlock . stillstand . syria .
crisis . death .
oh my god .
so this is just a few of the clips that i collected over the last six months -- it would have been the last six days , or the last six years .
the fact is that the media companies prefer to show us negative topics because our minds are going to be able to talk about this whole lot of attention .
and there &apos;s also a very good reason for it .
every second one every day , our senses will start to be more information than our brain ever ever .
and because of us , nothing important is more important than our survival , is the first one for all of the information that we &apos;re doing is part of our temporallappens , the amygdala .
so the amygdala is our own belief system .
it &apos;s called and durchkämmt the entire information on the search for the search of risk in our environment .
so if we see the news , we prefer it to keep negative news .
and the old adage , &quot; if it blutet , the demand is very true .
now with all of our digital devices that gave us seven days of days , 24 hours of all the negative news , it &apos;s not a miracle that we &apos;re pessimistic .
it &apos;s not a miracle that everybody thinks that it &apos;s always worse .
but possibly that &apos;s not the case .
maybe that &apos;s the reality .
and perhaps the enormous progress that we &apos;ve done in the last century , that we &apos;ve made a series of forces that will allow us to be able to create the next three decades , to create a world of abundance .
well , i don &apos;t say we don &apos;t have any big problems -- climate crisis , artensterben , wasser- , water and energieprobleme -- that we have .
and as humans , we &apos;re much better in a very long way to go back to very long , but they &apos;re going to be able to overcome it .
and we &apos;re looking at what we &apos;ve reached in the last century , so we can have to be able to form the development .
in the last 100 years , the average life expectancy is more than doubled , the inflation , the inflation &apos;s angepasste durchschnittseinkommen has tripled .
child mortality has a 10th efficient .
it &apos;s coming that the ernährungs- , elektrizitäts- transport- and kommunikationskosten to be a physical scale .
steve pinker has shown us that we &apos;re currently living in a very peaceful time in the menschengeschichte life .
and according to charles bonnet kenny is the alphabetisierungsquote rate of 25 percent of 25 percent in 80 percent .
we live in a really extraordinary time .
and many people forgot this .
and we &apos;re going to continue our expectations .
in fact , we have poverty .
remember , a lot of the americans who live under the poverty , access to power , water , water , toilets , thick , thick , thick , mobile , mobile and cars .
the richest capitalists of the last century , the imperatoren of the earth , would never have to be able to have any additional luxusgüter .
and the basis of this is a lot of technologies , and these are growing growing .
my good friend ray kurzweil has shown us that every tool that will be macht on the curve of moore &apos;s kurve , and the preis-performance-quotient of the 12 to 24 months .
so , it &apos;s about the mobile phone in your pocket , less than a supercomputer faster than a supercomputer .
now look at this curve .
this is moore &apos;s law for the last hundred years .
so , you notice two things on this curve .
first of how neurotic it appeared -- in good times , in bad times , war or peace , recession , depression and hochkonjunktur .
this is the result of the infinite computers , the end computers .
they &apos;re slowed in any of our big problems .
and also , despite her logarithmic verlaufs on the left , she &apos;s going to cut them .
the growth itself itself is accelerating .
and on this curve , on the back of moore &apos;s law , we find a series of technologies that are available to all the time .
&quot; cloud-computing &quot; , &quot; something that my friends in autodesk &quot; is called &quot; sensoren , &quot; robots , 3d-drucker , 3d-drucker , synthetische manufacturing , synthetic biology , &quot; but the persönliche of our planet , &quot; and impfungen , digital medicine , digital and artificial intelligence .
how many of you have the victory of ibms watson , &quot; in &quot; jeopardy ? &quot;
that was what was happening .
i &apos;ve got the newspapers and looked for the best headlines i could find .
i love this : &quot; watson &apos;s bezwingt menschlichen . &quot;
&quot; risk &quot; is not a simple game .
it &apos;s about understanding the edges of language .
imagine that this artificial intelligence is given to each other , a mosquito owner .
four years ago , ray kurzweil , and i &apos;m here at ted university , the singularity university .
we bring our students all these technologies with , with a lot of focus on the same focus , as these used to solve the great challenges of humanity .
and every year we ask the students , companies and services , to create services , within a decade of human being in a decade of people .
think about that , a group of students today can affect the lives of people .
thirty years ago , this is ridiculous .
today we can start to be a dozens of companies that were done right .
if i think of it , if i think , i mean , i mean , i don &apos;t mean a life full of luxury for everybody in this planet ; it &apos;s about a life of a full of opportunities .
it &apos;s about to create a human goods .
and it &apos;s the only thing that &apos;s kontextbezogen , and technology is a resource force .
here &apos;s an example .
this is the history of napoleon iii. in the center of the 1700s .
he &apos;s the guy left .
he has the king of siam to dinner .
napoleons soldiers got silber-besteck , napoleon himself .
the king of siam , though , bekam .
and it was a time of the most valuable metal in the planet , valuable , valuable as gold and platin .
this is why the dome of the washington-monuments was made of aluminum .
although , as a result , the aluminium percent of the erdmasse aorta is not as a reines metal .
it &apos;s being connected through oxygen and silikate .
but then technology was developed and made the technology of the telecommunications revolution , and made aluminiumherstellung so that we use it to our wegwerf-mentalität .
then let &apos;s take this analogy into the future .
we think about energieknappheit .
ladies and gentlemen , we live on a planet with a planet that &apos;s more energy than we consume every year .
16 terawatt energy , all of the 88 is going to be on the earth .
it &apos;s not about scarcity , the problem is .
and there &apos;s good news .
in this year , you &apos;ve got the first time to reduce the cost of building in india to reduce 50 percent of the diesel-stroms -- 8.8 rupees in 17 rupees .
the cost of solar energy is over 50 percent .
last month , this is a study that shows that until the end of the decade , the ende of the united states in the united states had six cents a year in the united states , compared to 15 cents in the national average .
and if we have a energieüberschuss , we will have water in the abundance .
let &apos;s talk about wasser-kriege .
remember , carl sagan that voyager-raumfahrzeug 1990 when it was at saturn , back to the saturn , back to earth ?
he took a famous photograph . how did it happen ?
&quot; a &quot; a pale blue system . &quot;
because we live on a wasserplaneten life .
we live on a planet that &apos;s been covered by a 70 percent of water .
yes , it &apos;s 97,5 percent of survival , two percent are vereist , and we &apos;re fighting about 0.5 percent of the water on the planet , but there &apos;s also hope .
and there are new technologies , not in 10 or 20 years , but now .
it &apos;s new nanotechnologien on the road .
and from a gespräch today , a innovatoren of the western it , i want to share with you -- he gave me the permission -- his technolgie , the slingshot , and the many of you may have heard of , and from many of you may have heard about it , it &apos;s the size of a kühlschranks in the studentenheim .
it can produce a thousand gallons of clean drinking water from different sources -- whether it &apos;s a salzwasser , contaminated water , and all that for less than two cents a liter of a gallon .
the president of coca-cola has just eingewilligt a big test-projekt with a hundred units in developing countries .
and if all of all , and i &apos;m very confident , it &apos;s going to be the coca-cola of the world &apos;s population globally in the whole world .
this is technologieunterstützte innovation that there are today .
and we &apos;ve seen this in mobile phones .
you know , my god , we &apos;re going to get the 70 percent of survival in developing countries to the end of 2013 .
just think that a massai-krieger with a mobile phone in the middle of kenya , a better mobil-kommunikation has been a better reagan reagan .
and if you look at your smartphone on google , you have more access to knowledge and information than president clinton , 15 years ago .
they live in a world that have information and communications in the abundance of how no one could ever have .
and it &apos;s better than that , things that you have spent , and i &apos;ve spent several thousand dollars -- gps , hd-video and photograph , technology , technology , technology , technology -- are now literally entmaterialisiert and cheaper in your mobile phone .
and the best part is that we might expect to be in the field of health .
last month , i had the pleasure , with the qualcomm-stiftung that so-called genannten millionen of x prize .
we &apos;re going to be the teams of all the teams in the world , all these technologies in a mobile way to connect with the device that it &apos;s equipped with the device , you can test it or your blutwerte .
and to win , the device has to be a better diagnosis than a team of ärzte .
imagine this device . in a developing country where there &apos;s no doctors , but 25 percent of the krankheitslast and 1.3 percent of the staff of the corporation .
if this device is a rna- or dna-virus sequenziert , who isn &apos;t known to , it &apos;s the gesundheitsbehörde and it &apos;s a pandemic before her .
but now , to the biggest force that will lead to us in a world of abundance .
i call them &quot; the next billion . &quot;
the whites are standing in population for population .
we &apos;ve just crossed the 7-milliarden-marke .
and only by the way , the largest absicherung against a population is a better education and nutrition in the world .
in 2010 , we had just been so much connected online .
we &apos;re going to increase from 2020 , we &apos;re going to increase two billion on five billion .
three billion new minds that we never heard before , will be connected to global communications .
what need these people need ?
what are you consume ? what are you going to go ?
and instead of a wirtschaftlichem of stillstand , i see one of the most great economic anschübe .
these people represent multiple trillion dollars that are being brought into the global economy .
and they &apos;re going to be gesünder by the use of the tricoders , and they &apos;re going to be trained by the khan-akademie and they &apos;re going to have the opportunity to get 3d printers and infinite , and so much more productive than ever before .
so what can be three billion growing growing , healthy , gebildete , productive members of the menschengemeinde ?
how it would be with a sentence , never before .
how would it be the oppressed , wherever you are , a voice to make a voice to make up and make change , to the end ?
what are these three billion people ?
how would it be with beiträgen that we can &apos;t even predict ?
one of the things i learned through x prize is that small teams that are through passion and the focus , extraordinary things , things that are able to create the big companies and governments in the past .
i want to conclude with a story that really excites me .
there &apos;s a program that some might have already known .
it &apos;s a game called foldit .
it was developed at the university of washington .
and it &apos;s a game where people can take a sequence of amino acids to explore how the protein is going to develop .
and depending on his behavior , we can predict the structure and function .
and this is very important in the medizinforschung .
so far , this was a problem for supercomputers .
and this game was played by universitätsprofessoren .
and it &apos;s hundreds of thousands of people who have played the game online .
and it showed that today &apos;s future will be the protein to the protein as the best .
and when these people came and looked at who &apos;s the best protein-ordner of the world , it was no caltech-student , no one was from england , a woman who was working in a assistentin of the geschäftsleitung in a reha-klinik working in a reha-klinik working in a reha-klinik working in a reha-klinik working in a reha-klinik working day in the world .
ladies and gentlemen , what are the enormous trust in our future is the fact that we have more power than individuals to provide us more than individuals to provide us to provide the big challenges of our planet .
we have access to the tools with exponential technology .
we have the passion of a diy-innovatoren .
we have the capital of the techno-philanthropen .
and we have three billion new minds that we can work online to be able to master the new challenges , and to do what is necessary .
we expect a few remarkable college .
thank you .
i think we have to do something about a verändernswertes piece of medical culture .
and i think it &apos;s a medical problem , and i &apos;m .
and maybe i &apos;m already long enough to be in business as i can allow me to give it a piece of my own fake prestiges to make this .
but i &apos;m going to get to my talk about my blog , let &apos;s start with a little baseball .
hey , why not ?
we are close to the saisonende and move us to the weltmeisterschaft .
we all love baseball , or ?
baseball baseball is full of statistics .
and there &apos;s hundreds of them .
&quot; moneyball &quot; and turns out to be statistics and to use this great baseball team .
i &apos;m going to talk to a statistic of me that most of you have heard of you .
it &apos;s the durchschnittsleistung of the schlägers .
we &apos;re talking about a 300 when a bat tolls .
that means that the player &apos;s probably safe of 10 to 10 beats .
this is called the ball in außenfeld , he &apos;s not caught , and who tried to throw the ball to the first time , didn &apos;t get to the time and the runners was in safety .
three dimensions of 10 times .
you know how to call a 300ter in baseball ?
well , really good , maybe a all-star .
you know how you call a 400ter ? &quot;
this is one of the rest of the rest of the rest of 10 .
legendär -- like ted williams -- the last major spieler , spieler spieler , was a regulären season at 400 times .
let &apos;s go back to my world of medicine , in which i feel to feel some of some of some comfortable or maybe a little less than i talked about with you about it .
imagine you have a blinddarmentzündung and you &apos;re going to be a operateur überwiesen , whose durchschnittsleistung 400 is 400 .
somehow doesn &apos;t work , or ?
imagine it &apos;s in a particular remote area and they have a beloved man with verstopften herzkranzgefäßen and her hausarzt überweist to a kardiologen , whose durchschnittsleistung is at the gefäßdarstellung of 200 .
but , you know what ?
it &apos;s much better . it &apos;s on the aufsteigenden branch .
and they &apos;re eating a 257 .
somehow doesn &apos;t work .
but i &apos;m going to ask you a question .
what do you believe like the durchschnittsleistung for a kardiologen or a nurse or a orthopäden , a geburtshelfer , a rettungsassistenten rettungsassistenten ?
1,000 , very good .
the truth is that no one in the whole medicine knows what a good surgeon or doctor or rettungsassistent should be .
what we do is that we &apos;re all of them , including me , to be the world &apos;s greatest perfect .
never do a mistake , no one is doing , but it &apos;s really , but it &apos;s going to be able to think about the details as this .
and that &apos;s the message i ingest in the checkout .
i was a beautiful obsessiver student .
in high school , a bit told that brian goldmann would learn to learn .
and so it was .
and i learned in my little dips in the sisters in the sisters at the toronto , at the toronto , general , unweit .
i learned everything .
in my anatomievorlesung , i learned the origins and the tail every single arterie , every single one of each artery , which is derived by the aorta , obskure and gewöhnliche differentialdiagnosen .
i even knew the differentialdiagnose differentialdiagnose to classify renale tubuläre .
and the time i &apos;ve collected more and more and more knowledge .
and i was good , i was making a schloss laude .
and i left the idea of the idea of this , if i knew everything , and everything knew , or at least as much as possible as possible as possible as possible that i was going to be immune to the process of mistakes .
and it worked for a time , until i met her wife .
i &apos;m residierte in a lehrkrankenhaus here in toronto as a woman , frau printer in the notfallabteilung of the hospital .
at this point , i was at the kardiologischen layer in the kardiologischen service .
and it was my mission when the notfallpersonal kardiologischen was trying to investigate the notfallpatienten .
and get to my oberarzt .
i was growing up , and she was in atemnot .
and when i was her , she made keuchende sounds .
and when i was a chest with the stethoskope abhörte , i could hear a knackendes sound on both sides , which told me that they were under kongestiver heart failure .
this is a state in the heart , instead of pumps the entire blood vessel , and a part of the orchestra in the lung is stuck and filling these into the boat , so that &apos;s where the kurzatmigkeit .
and that was not a hard diagnosis .
i hired them and made me to care .
i gave her aspirin . i gave her medicine to take the pressure from the heart .
i gave her medicine that we call diuretics , water , so that they &apos;re going to ausschied the liquid .
and over a period of a half , two hours to feel it .
i felt really good .
and i made my first mistake ; i sent them home .
actually , i was doing two mistakes .
i sent them home with my oberarzt .
i didn &apos;t take the way and did what i would have had to have been a call to my oberarzt , and he would have been to do it with him , so that he would have a chance to make a chance of a whole picture .
and he knew she would have been able to beizusteuern additional information to their beizusteuern .
maybe i did it with good reason .
maybe i didn &apos;t want to be the hilfsbedürftige doctor .
maybe i wanted to be successful and so able to take the responsibility that i was so respected and so i would have to be able to make it happen to my patients without having to be able to do it .
my second mistake was worse .
so i sent them home home , i gave a very quietly voice in me , trying to say , &quot; goldman , not good idea . &quot;
in fact , it really cares about me that i was asked to the nurse that i was going to have to be a woman &apos;s krankenschwester , &quot; believe that it &apos;s okay when you go home ? &quot;
and the nurse thought about it , and i said to the nurse , &quot; yeah , &quot; i think it &apos;s going to go . &quot;
i remember being yesterday .
so i unterzeichnete the entlassungspapiere and a new and rettungsassistenten and came home .
and i went back to work .
the rest of the day , the night i had this nagende feeling in my stomach .
but i was working on .
and at the end of the day , i packed my things , &quot; the hospital and went to the parking lot to go home home , when i did something else .
i went through the notfallabteilung home .
and there was another nurse , not the sister &apos;s home and the woman had seen the woman , but another three words , and these three words are fürchten most of the most of the most notfallärzte i know .
other medical mediziner are being afraid of this as well , but the notfallmedizin is especially especially because we see the patient &apos;s going to see that patient .
the three words : remember ? remember ?
&quot; remember it &apos;s the patient she &apos;s going to go home ? &quot;
and asked the nurse .
&quot; so she &apos;s back , &quot; she said in this particular tonlage .
so she was back .
she was back and in die .
about a hour after it , after i went home after it was home , she had to go home and the family &apos;s called 911 , and the rettungsassistenten took them back to the notfallstation , and that &apos;s a dangerous schockzustand .
they hardly atmete and was blue .
the notfallpersonal zog all the strands .
they gave her their blutdruckerhöher .
they put them on the beatmungsmaschine .
i was shocked and to the insides .
and i &apos;m going to see these rollercoaster , because she came after the intensivstation and i hoped that they would recover .
and after two , three days , it was clear that she never would ever get again .
she had not a behandelbaren gehirnschaden .
your family .
and over the course of the next eight or nine days , you &apos;re going to be the geschehenen .
on the day day , she liesen them -- ms. printer , a woman , a mother and grandmother .
you say that you never have the names of the versterben .
and that was the first time i learned this .
the next weeks i did was i got to have been the first time the unhealthy shame that were in our medical culture -- i felt myself , isolated , not the kind of healthy shame that you &apos;re talking about because you can &apos;t talk about the colleagues .
you know all the most healthy shame , if you have a secret of the best friend , and then you get a geheimnis and then you get a schrecklich and my schrecklich friend &apos;s and my awful discussion , if you &apos;re a terrible discussion , if you &apos;re going to do the bad conscience , and you &apos;re going to feel that you &apos;re never going to do
if you take a wiedergutmachung and never do it again .
this is the kind of lehrreicher shame .
the ungesunde way i &apos;m talking about is that &apos;s making a im sick .
it &apos;s the one that tells you that it &apos;s not what you did poorly is badly , but you &apos;re bad .
and that was what i felt .
and it wasn &apos;t on the reason of my oberarztes , he was very gentle .
he was talking about the family and i &apos;m sure he was the wogen glättete and sure that i couldn &apos;t get sued .
but i asked myself to me that .
why did i ask the oberarzt ? why do i get them home ?
and then in my worst moments , how could i make such a stupid mistake ?
why am i left in medicine ?
but slowly it &apos;s safe .
i started feeling better .
and then on a bewölkten day , there was a hole in the clouds and the sun broke , and i told me , i can feel better .
and i was like , i was like , if i &apos;m going to get my efforts to perfection , and never ever beging a mistake that the vote might be verstummen .
and she did .
and i was working on .
and then it happened again .
two years later , i had been smuggled in the notfallstation in notfallstation in a kommunalen hospital in toronto , and i was begutachtete for a 25 year-old man with gereiztem rachen .
it was a lot , and i was in a hurry .
he always showed me here .
i looked into the rachen , and it was a little bit of pink .
and i gave him a prescription for penicillin and sent him .
and even when he went out of the door , he showed his rachen .
two days later , i came to my next notfalldienst and my chefärztin asked me to a conversation in her office .
and she said the three words : remember ?
&quot; remember you &apos;re going to talk to the patient &apos;s day ? &quot;
it turned out that he &apos;s a streptokokken-infektion .
he had a potentially lebensgefährliche disease called epiglottitis .
you can get the counter , but it &apos;s not a infection of the rachens but the upper atemwege and causes the verschluss of the atemwege .
and fortunately he didn &apos;t die .
he got intravenöse antibotica and recovered a few days later .
and i went through the same tortur of shame and self-doubt , felt a befreit and went to work on the work again and again and again .
in a notfallschicht , i have two times a blinddarmentzündung .
there &apos;s been a lot of it , especially if you think you &apos;re working in a hospital that &apos;s only 14 patients at that time .
in both cases , i didn &apos;t get them home , and there were no imperfections in your treatment .
and one of one was to be a thought i was supposed to have nierensteine .
i &apos;m going to investigate the x-ray of kidneys , when the shirtless was befund , my colleague was fest at the wiedervorstellung of the patient &apos;s wiedervorstellung , and called the operateure .
the other one had been strong .
i ordnete fluide to rehydrieren and asked my colleagues to be too .
and he did , and he was when he &apos;s doing a verhärtung in the right sector , he called the operateure .
in both cases , it was operierte and it was fine .
both cases of my nagten , fraßen me .
and i would be happy to tell you that my worst mistake was only in the first five years , what many of my colleagues are , but it &apos;s about total baloney .
some of my favorite years was happening in the last five years .
alone , and i found without support .
here &apos;s the problem : if i &apos;m not going to finish my fehlern and talk about it , if i &apos;m going to tell the quiet voice that really can &apos;t find , how can i do it with my colleagues ?
how can i teach them my mistakes , so that they don &apos;t have the same ?
if i &apos;m in a room -- like now , now , i &apos;m just going to have a clue what you &apos;re thinking about .
when you &apos;ve ever heard the last time from somebody about fehlschlag over fehlschlag over fehlschlag ?
oh yeah , you go to a cocktail party , and there &apos;s a lot of other doctor listening to any other doctor , but you won &apos;t hear someone about your own mistake .
if i was going to have a room full of colleagues and to ask them to tell you what i &apos;m going to ask you about , i would not tell you the end of the second story before it would really lead to you before someone would change a joke , they would change the subject and forgetting the rest of the rest .
and in fact , if i knew my colleagues or my colleagues , i had someone who had the wrong person in my hospital , then you believe me , i would have to look at it in the eyes .
that &apos;s the system that we live in .
it &apos;s a totally verleugnung of mistakes .
it &apos;s a system in which there are two basic positions -- those who do mistakes and those who are not doing , and those who are doing the schlafmangel and the people who are doing the schlafmangel and the limitation that with bad results and the good results .
it &apos;s almost a very ideologische response to the antibodies , which is a man .
and there &apos;s the idea that if we make the people that make mistakes from medicine that we can see a system that &apos;s going to be true .
but there are two problems .
in my health care of the medical engineering and journalism , i have a personal medical study about medical error and wrong treatments for so much for me to do anything for me to the toronto star , &quot; white , &quot; black . &quot;
and what i learned is that mistakes are absolutely razor-sharp .
we &apos;re going to have a system in the every day in every day , in which a 10 medikationen either is either wrong or wrong , and always will be carried and getting and verwüstung or dead .
in this state , you &apos;re dying about 24,000 canadians of umgänglichen .
in the united states , the institute of medicine is the number of medicine .
both of these are strong untertreibungen , because we don &apos;t look at the problem as we should .
and is the crux .
in a krankenhaussystem in the medical course , all of the two to three years , we can &apos;t keep it .
schlafmangel is ubiquitous .
we can &apos;t get rid of it .
we own cognitive error , so that we can use a perfect krankheitsverlauf for a patient with a patient with chest .
then i suppose the same patient with brustschmerz , making it verschwitzt and geschwätzig and give a slightly more alkoholisierten breath and suddenly , the story is the story of contempt .
i don &apos;t take the same stuff .
i &apos;m not a robot ; i don &apos;t always do things .
and my patients are not cars ; they don &apos;t always tell me their symptoms in the same way .
all of these are inevitable inevitable .
so if you take the system , as i was taught it , and all the fehlerbehafteten gesundheitsexperten , the end of the end , then one of the end is going to end up .
and you know the leier about people who are not talking about their worst cases ?
in my show , &quot; white coat , &quot; i would say to the habit of the angewohnheit , &quot; this is my worst mistake to say , &quot; this is my worst mistake , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , &quot; what is it to be with your microphone . &quot;
and then they expand their pupils , they &apos;re sitting in front of the head , and they look down and make a lot of stories .
they want to tell their stories . they want to share their stories .
you want to be able to be able to say , &quot; look , don &apos;t make the same mistake i &apos;m going to do . &quot;
what you need is a environment that you can do it .
what you need is a new medical culture .
and it starts with a doctor .
the new book is a human being white to know his humanity , and it &apos;s not proud to make it feel guilty , but it &apos;s all about to learn something that can be used to learn .
they have their experience with others .
she supports others .
and you show other people &apos;s mistake , not to bloßzustellen , but in a lively , kind of way that all of them benefit .
and you &apos;re working in a medical culture that recognizes that people fill the system and if that &apos;s so , then people are also making mistakes from time .
so the system is designed to make sure that it &apos;s kind of easy to make the mistake of the people and make it harder , and it also makes the people that are creating the same way that the potential of the world is contributing to be belohnt , and the result of people like me , and the speziell for me , who are going to make the
my name is brian .
i &apos;m the new machine .
i &apos;m a man . i make mistakes .
i &apos;m bedaure , but i &apos;m trying to learn to learn from it to learn it .
i don &apos;t know what you &apos;re holding from me , but i can live in .
let me finish three my own words : i remember .
i &apos;m going to talk about a tiny little idea .
it &apos;s about veränderbare normwerte .
and because you can explain this idea in a minute , i &apos;ll tell you three stories to use the time .
the first story is about charles darwin , one of my heroes .
you know that he was 1835 .
you may think that he &apos;s finken , but that &apos;s not true .
actually , he was fish fish .
he described a little bit of it as a very common .
it was a zackenbarsch .
in the &apos; 80s , in the mid- &apos; 80s , it was being transformed in grand style .
now he &apos;s going to be on the red list .
this story has been many times from the galapagos or other places , it &apos;s not very particularly .
yet , we still are still on the galapagos .
we still think it &apos;s originally .
the broschüren describe them still as good .
what &apos;s happened here ?
the second story is to be a different concept that verdeutlichen verdeutlichen .
because i &apos;ve experienced it when i was an 1971 in west-afrika .
i went there because i grew up in europe and wanted to work in africa .
i thought i could integrate myself .
and i got a schlimmen sonnenbrand and was convinced that i really don &apos;t know .
it was my first sonnenbrand .
as you see , the lagoon of palmen and a few mangroven umsäumt .
there were buntbarsche of about 20 centimeters , schwarzkinnmaulbrüter , a unterart of buntbarsche .
the fischgründe of these buntbarsche were very ertragreich and the fishermen were good at all , and then in ghana , in ghana .
when i was 27 years later , the fish was on half his greatness .
ausgewachsen .
they were genetically modified .
it was still fish .
people were still happy .
and the fish also had happiness to be there .
so it &apos;s not changed , and yet it changed everything .
my third story tells me about my favorite story about the einführung of the schleppnetzfischerei in southeast asia .
in the &apos; 70s -- the beginning of the 1960s -- förderte europe .
the other thing that has been a 100 000 in the middle of the industriellen , the industrial fishing of this pretty ugly ship is called a ziemlich of the mutiara of the mutiara .
i drove it to mit , and we made it in all the southern südchinesischen sea and particularly in the javasee .
we had no words for what we started there .
i know that it was the reason of the ocean .
90 percent of our fangs were sponges , other animals that are connected to the reason .
the most part of the fish that are little dots on the rubble , the trümmerhaufen , waren .
essentially , the reason of the sea was on the deck and then became zurückgeworfen .
these images are exceptional , because the transition goes very quickly .
within a year , you put a sheet of a year and start with the most of the ones .
the reason is going to change . in this case -- a hard reason or soft corals will be mist .
this is a dead turtle .
they were not eaten , you threw them away because they were dead .
once we started a live .
she wasn &apos;t ertrunken .
then they wanted them kill them because you could eat them .
in fact , this mountain is given every time of fishermen when they &apos;re going to go into areas in areas that never had ever been .
but it &apos;s not going to be documented .
we change the world , but we don &apos;t remember it .
we adapt our normwerte to new level and calls us not in love with what was there .
if you have it verallgemeinert , it &apos;s happening .
on the y-axis , there are some good things : biodiversity , number of the orca , the green country , the wasservorrat .
and it changes it , it changes . it changes because people are all of their actions .
every generation look at the pictures that they &apos;re going to do in their own lives , as a standard and it &apos;s going to be all of it .
the difference is going to be a loss .
but they don &apos;t take the previous losses .
it can give a order of change .
and at the end , they want to get the erbärmlichen remains .
right now , this is now the ability to our goal .
we want to get things that are gone or things that are not so much as they were .
you might think that the problem of people living in the problem , which certainly , when they were living in räuberischen societies , animals and they &apos;ve only been found for a few generations , which they had done .
because obviously , a animal is going to be a animal that has been very often , only rarely before it was ausstirbt .
so you don &apos;t lose a lot of animals .
you lose rare animals .
and so it &apos;s not going to be a big loss .
and at the time we focus on the big animals and in the ocean , that &apos;s the big fish .
they &apos;re going to be cut down because we &apos;re going to catch them .
and over time , there &apos;s little fish left , and we think that &apos;s the normwert .
the question is , why is that people accept .
well , because they don &apos;t know that it was different .
of course , many people are going to be a lot of people , scientists , that it was really different .
you &apos;ll see it because the evidence you can see in a former form , not as they would like to be on the evidence .
there &apos;s the anecdote that the report of a kapitäns soundso that doesn &apos;t beobachtete in this area of große , not used to be used or not gewertet , because it &apos;s not a scientifically .
so we have the situation that people don &apos;t know the past , although we live in the very poor societies , because they don &apos;t trust the sources of the past .
this is the enormous big role that can play a marine tree .
because through the world , we &apos;re basically going to be able to return the past .
we &apos;re asking the past , the people who cannot grasp because the change has changed and very low .
so people can see the people who can see a little bit of the meeresschutzgebiet and the insight of the insight , the ermöglicht , the ermöglicht .
what is about the people that are not possible because they don &apos;t have access to the people in the middle west ?
here , i think , the art and the movie may the gap , and simulation .
this is the simulation of chesapeake bay .
a long time ago there was there , 500 years ago .
and the farbtöne and -schattierungen remember &quot; avatar . &quot;
if you think about &quot; avatar , if you think why people were touched as being touched -- except from the pocahontas-geschichte , why were they touched as berührt ?
because it &apos;s something that &apos;s been lost in a sense .
so my recommendation , the only thing i &apos;m going to do is , you know , it feels about cameron , so he &apos;s going to go &quot; avatar . &quot;
thank you .
in the &apos; 80s , in the &apos; 80s , you had to be a typewriter owned , that one of the government is declining .
they had to have a sheet of beispieltext from this typewriter .
the reason for this : the government could be able to be able to be text , where a text came from .
and they found a paper with falschem gedankengut , they could roll the creator of this ideas .
and we couldn &apos;t understand how anyone could do something like this , and how much that would be the speech .
in our own countries we would never do something like this .
but if you get a new farblaserdrucker of the leading laserdruckerfabrikanten and a page , this page helle helle on the yellow flecke , in any side of the same aufgedruckt , in a pattern that &apos;s clearly clearly sitting on her and your printer .
that &apos;s happening today .
and it seems to be no aufzuregen .
and this was one example of what the way our own governments are using technology to us , the citizens .
and this is one of the three main hauptquellen of the today &apos;s today .
let &apos;s look at what really happens on the world : we can divide the attacks in categories .
we have three hauptgruppen .
there are online-kriminelle .
for example , this is mr. dimitry golubow in ukraine .
and the motive of online-kriminellen are very easy to understand .
these people deserve money .
they use online-angriffe to earn a lot of money , a huge bunch of money .
there are several well-known cases of online-millionären , multimillionären , who have made your money through their attacks .
this is wladimir tsastsin from tartu .
this is alfred hitchcock .
stephen watts .
björn sundin .
these are matthew anderson , tariq al-daour and so on and so on .
these people have come to the wealth of wealth , but they &apos;ve been using illegal for trojaner , as we &apos;re going to do it from our online-banking , while we &apos;re going to do our online-banking , or even keylogger , the most knowledgeable on the input , the ones that have collected our kredikarteninformationen over the keyboard , while we &apos;re going to buy a infected online
the u.s. intelligence agency , two months ago , two months ago , mr. konto &apos;s jain &apos;s jain &apos;s jain , and on this , 14,9 million dollars , when it was an opportunity .
mr. jain itself is on the ugly foot , the aufenthaltsort is unknown .
and i claim that it &apos;s more likely to be a online-verbrechens of a online-verbrechens , than one of the world in real world .
and it &apos;s very obvious that this is only worse .
in the future , most crime online .
the second angreifergruppe that we can observe today is not by money .
they &apos;re just a little bit of other than something else , and i think , &quot; recently , a opinion , or by her audience .
groups like anonymous are the last 12 months of months and they are actually become a hauptspieler on the field of the online-angriffe .
so these are the three hauptangriffsgruppen : criminals are the way that it &apos;s about the money , hacktivisten like anonymous , the people who &apos;ve been able to do with resistance , but the last group of group are nations , governments that lead the attacks .
there &apos;s been there , like the rest of diginotar .
it &apos;s a beispielhaft , what happens when governments are going to attack their own citizens .
diginotar is a vollmachtszertifikat from the netherlands -- it was it .
last autumn , it had to be insolvenz , because diginotar was hacked .
somebody was covered and had been hacked and had the system .
and last week in a meeting , i hired a leitenden of this group that asked me to think about it , if he was to be able to do it for possible , that because of the diginotar-hacks people were killed .
and his answer was &quot; yes . &quot;
now , like , people are dying in a row like that ?
diginotar is a zertifizierungsstelle .
they sell selling .
what do you do with zertifikaten ?
well , one of you need to take a website with a website with https , with ssl-verschlüsselten , for instance , for instance .
now we all use , or many of us , or gmail , or a dienste , like the service might use the iran , like the dissidenten of the gmail , as the dissidenten of the brain , you know , there are more vertrauen than local anbietern and that they &apos;re about ssl-verbindungen , so that the local government can &apos;t be able to herumschnüffeln .
but if you &apos;re in a foreign foreign foreign .
zertifizierungsbehörde hacking and gefälschte ausstellen .
and that &apos;s what happens in the trap of diginotar .
how does it behaves to the arab spring and the things that are in egypt , for instance ?
well , in egypt , the vision of the aufständischen in april is the headquarters in the country , and then they found a lot of records .
in this records , a folder called &quot; finfisher . &quot;
and in this folder , notes in germany , notes in germany , the egyptian firma of the egyptian government had sold a few programs that they were -- in very large , all of the physical citizens were able to live in .
they had this program for 280.000 euros for the egyptian government .
the firmenhauptquartier is right here .
so feed governments governments governments with hilfsmitteln , so that the against your own citizen .
but western governments also help themselves .
for example , in germany , a few weeks ago , a few weeks ago , this was a trojaner that was used by german regierungsvertretern to bespitzeln their own citizen .
if you &apos;re going to be verdächtigt in a kriminalfall , it &apos;s going to be ziemlicher your phone .
but today we are far beyond .
they tap their connection .
they use resources like the staatstrojaner to bespielen their computer with a trojaner to bespielen their entire communications , their online-diskussionen abzuhören , their online-diskussionen abzuhören .
so if we think about these things about things , the obvious answer of people , &quot; ok , this sounds bad , but it doesn &apos;t feel like me , because i &apos;m a braver citizen .
i don &apos;t have to worry about it .
i have nothing to hide . &quot;
and that argument makes no sense .
privacy has to be .
privacy is not the debate .
it &apos;s not a decision between privacy and safety .
it &apos;s a choice between freedom and control .
and as we &apos;re today , in 2011 , our governments are trust , but every right that we &apos;re going to be , for forever .
and we trust we &apos;re blind to a every future government , a government that we might have to be in 50 years ?
these are the questions that we have to do with the next 50 years .
it may seem strange , but i &apos;m a big fan of betonblocksteinen .
the first betonblocksteine were made 1868 and entstammten a simple idea : modules from cement with the festgelegten , the middle east .
betonbausteine were very quickly in the world .
they &apos;re able to build things that are able to build things that were bigger than we , buildings , bridges , a pebble of the other .
in essence , the betonbaustein was actually become the betonbaustein of our time .
almost a hundred years later , in 1947 , the lego came out .
it became the automatically verbindende rock .
and within less years , the lego in every household .
it &apos;s estimated that over 400 billion dollars were produced , or 75 rocks for every person on this planet .
you don &apos;t need to be an engineer to make beautiful houses , beautiful bridges or beautiful buildings .
lego , it made possible for everyone .
lego has basically been the betonbaustein , the building of the world , and it &apos;s made a building for our imagination .
in the meanwhile , the bell &apos;s been celebrated labs in the bell labs , the next revolution announced , the next building .
the transistor was a little plastikeinheit that &apos;s going to us from a world of the world , aufeinandergestapelten building blocks to a world in everything .
as the betonblock , the transistor allows us to build a lot more , more interesting cycles , a rock after another .
but there &apos;s a hauptunterschied : the transistor was just for experts .
i personally don &apos;t know that the building of our time is for experts and so i decided to change that .
eight years ago , i was at the media lab and i started studying this idea how to put the power of the engineers in the hand of artists and designers .
a few years ago , i started developing littlebits .
let me show you how they work .
littlebits are electronic modules that have a specific function .
they &apos;re vorgefertigt , light , and the ton and sensor .
and the best part is that they connect with magnets together .
so you can &apos;t get it to be a high school .
the stones are farbcodiert .
green is the copy , blue is power , pink is input and orange .
so all you need to do is a blue and a green link together and you can build a whole lot of bigger kreislaufe .
it &apos;s a blue on a green , and you can make light .
you can produce a switch between them and so they created a little dimmer .
take the switch out to switch out of a pulsmodul , which is , einzufügen , and they made a little blinker .
and then you add this buzzer for a extra effect , and they &apos;ve made a lärmmaschine .
i &apos;m going to stop the stop .
and beyond the simple , littlebits actually is pretty powerful .
instead of that you &apos;re programming , verdrahten or löten , allows you to code with simple , intuitive gestures .
so to slow it out of it or slow , you just turn it on that button and it makes it the momentum faster or slow down .
the idea behind littlebits is that it &apos;s a growing library .
we want every single interaction in this world in a gebrauchsfertigen rock .
lights lights , sounds , solarelemente , motors -- everything should be available .
we &apos;ve got littlebits to children and play with it .
and it was an unbelievable experience .
the most beautiful is , how do you start to understand the electronics that they &apos;re in the everyday world and they don &apos;t learn in school .
like , for example , a nachtlicht works , or why the doors of the aufzugs offenbleiben , or just a ipod to touch .
we have littlebits littlebits .
so we had designer designers with no experience in electronic things that are beginning to play with littlebits as material .
here we see , with filz , paper and water , like geordie ...
a few weeks ago we have brought to risd littlebits and gave them some designers that had no technical experience -- just karton , wood and paper -- and they said , &quot; do you know . &quot;
here &apos;s an example of one of a project that they did , a bewegungsgesteuerte konfetti-kanone .
but wait , this is really my lieblings-projekt .
it &apos;s a hummer of play-dough that has fear in darkness .
for these nicht-ingenieure , it became another material , a few material .
and we want to make this stuff available for all available available .
so is littlebits open source .
you can go to the website , all of the designvorlagen and make them .
we want the world of the creators , the inventor , the inventor , the mitwirkenden , because these world we live in life , that &apos;s what we &apos;re going to live in .
so , pull them , and start to invent them .
thank you .
