you know , one of the great vernügen vernügen at the travel , and one of the joys of the ethnographischen research that &apos;s still remember the old days of leben that they &apos;re still changing the vergangenheit , they touch the vergangenheit stones , they schmecken the bitteren of plants .
just that , in fact , that jaguar-schamanen still travel beyond the milky way , or the importance of the ältesten of the ältesten , or the zentrale of the ältesten , is not the breath of the welt of the realität , but as a model of the reality that we &apos;re not in , as a model of the reality of the reality , is not just as
and of course , we all share the same anpassungsnotwendigkeiten .
we &apos;re all born . we bring children to the world .
we go through initiationsrituale .
we have to deal with the unaufhaltsamen separation that we &apos;re looking at and so we shouldn &apos;t surprise us that we &apos;re all singing , dancing and art .
but interesting is the unique tonfall of the liedes , the rhythm of dance in every culture .
it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s not a matter of whether it &apos;s the penan of any of the borneo in haiti or the krieger in the kaisut-wüste , or a karawanserei in the anden , or a karawanserei in the sahara , or the kollege in the &apos; 70s , which is a month of the wüste , or even a yak-hirte on the edge of the qomolangma
all of these people teach us that there are other people who have other existenzmöglichkeiten , other ways of dealing with the orientation .
and this is a picture that when you think about it , just a hope .
together , the world &apos;s unzähligen cultures of the world &apos;s world &apos;s unzähligen aus , and kulturellem life that &apos;s going to be the earth and the most important for the earth is important as the biological animal system that you know as biosphere .
you can imagine this cultural lebensnetz as a ethnosphäre principle , and ethnosphäre can be considered the gesamtsumme of the thoughts and dreams , myths ideas , inspiration and significantly , that have been definiert by the human imagination since the beginnings of consciousness .
the ethnosphäre is the great legacy of humankind .
it &apos;s the symbol of what we &apos;re and what we &apos;re capable of as an amazing species .
and just as the biosphere abgetragen , this was what happened with the ethnosphäre -- just with greater speed .
no biologist would say that 50 percent or more of all kinds of species in front of the extinction , because it &apos;s just not true , and yet , this -- the apokalyptischste szenarium on the area of the biological diversity -- is almost what we know as a optimistischstes szenarium on the continent of cultural diversity .
and the key of the entscheidende is extinction &apos;s extinction .
as any of you were born in this room , we were talked about the world in the world .
now , a language is not just the quality of the vokabulars or a series of grammatikregeln .
a language is expression of human mind .
it &apos;s a means that the soul of a certain culture has access to the material world .
every language is like a altbestehender forest of mind , a tipping point , a thought , an thought , an ecosystem of the ecosystem .
and from these 6,000 languages today , while we &apos;re sitting in monterey , they &apos;re not going to be the half of children in the ears .
they &apos;re not going to be taught anymore . that means if nothing is done , they &apos;re actually dead .
what might be to be lonely than being schweigen , one of the recent most recent people who speak to the language , no possibility to have the wisdom of the other , or the hope of hope for the hope ?
and yet , in fact , the terrible fortune , in fact , somewhere on earth , and about all two weeks , because of all two weeks , one of the elderly , and the last silben of an old language with a old language with a old language with the grave .
and i know some of them say , &quot; isn &apos;t it better ? &quot; is it not better ? &quot; if we all would talk to a language , if we all say , &quot; well , let &apos;s say , &quot; well , these language be , you &apos;re going to be kantonesisch .
let &apos;s be kogi . &quot;
and then you would suddenly see how it would be , if you could not talk about their own language .
so i want to take you on a trip of the ethnosphäre , a quick journey through the ethnosphäre , to try to make them understand what &apos;s actually going to be done .
now , there are some of us , the kind of thing that i forgot about , if i say , &quot; different ways of being , &quot; really , really different possibilities of the end .
take for example , for example , this child in the northwest of the amazon , the people of the anakonda , believe that they mythologisch the milchfluss from the east of the east of holy snakes .
this is a people who are not cognitively between the colors and green , because the himmelszelt of the forest is dependent on the forest .
they have a eigenartige language , and a heiratsvorschrift called the linguistic exogamie exogamie , which is , you have to marry somebody who &apos;s talking to a different language .
all of this in the mythologischen past , the eigenartige of these large houses , in which the mischehen six or seven languages were spoken to the mischehen six or seven languages , but that you never hear somebody &apos;s listening to a language .
they just listen to and start speaking .
or , one of the most intriguing tribes i &apos;ve ever lived in , the waorani of ecuador , a remarkable people , the first one was called the first year before the year .
in 1957 , five missionare kontakt , and made a schwerwiegenden mistake .
they threw glänzende photos from the air , which we would rate as a friendly gesture , and so , i forgot that these people have seen something more wrong .
they took this photographs from forest , trying to see the face or the character , found nothing and schlussfolgerten that this is the business of the devil and killing the five missionare of the body .
but the waorani didn &apos;t kill the speer with the spear .
they &apos;re durchbohrten each other .
54 percent of deaths happened through durchbohrungen .
we went back eight generations and found two cases of a natural death and when we were to ausfragten the people with this , they were so old that he was so old because of his age , and we killed him with the spear .
but at the same time , they had a clear knowledge of the forests that was amazing .
their hunter could smell the urine of a single day from 40 to the tieres , and determine what was that owned .
in the early &apos; 40s , i got a really amazing task , when i was a professor at harvard , whether i was interested in the way that i was going to go to haiti and tonton societies that were the foundation of duvalier and tonton macoutes , and the poison that was used for making the fundament to make a difference .
and to give you a sense of this , i had to have something to be about this remarkable remarkable belief in the vodoun and voodoo , and not a cult of the black magic .
in the contrary , it &apos;s a complex metaphysical kind of metaphysical .
it &apos;s interesting .
if i ask you , the big world rockets , what would you say ?
christianity , islam , buddhism , judaismus , whatever .
a continent is going to be more likely to be ausgelassen , because the guess is that there was no religious belief , and of course , there was a very profound religious religious thoughts that während the tragic diaspora in the tragic diaspora .
but what &apos;s interesting about this is that the living relationship between the living and the dead .
the living one is called the ghosts .
the spirits can be heraufbeschwört by the great water , answers to the rhythm of the dance to create the soul of the living , so that the akolyth is going to be a short moment for god .
deshab , they like to say , &quot; your white is going to church and talking about god .
we dance in the temple , and we &apos;re going to become god . &quot;
and because you &apos;re obsessed with being obsessed with the spirit , how can you get damage ?
you see this amazing demonstrations : voodoo-akolythen in a trancezustand , which glühende coal without verbrennung , a amazing graph of the mind of the mind of the mind of the mind that it would be aushält when he &apos;s going to be versetzt in a state of the extreme arousal .
now , from all the people i met , the kogi was the kogi from sierra nevada santa santa in in nordkolumbien , which is extraordinary .
offspring of the old civilization , the caribbean of colombia bevölkerten , and in the most unlikely , the people came back in a isoliertes vulkanisches massively , who was going to see the karibischen küstenebene .
in a blutbefleckten continent , these people were the only ones who have never been conquered from the spaniern .
so , for today , it &apos;s been governed by a ritual priesthood . the education community is very extraordinary .
the young akolythen are separated at age three and four years of the world , and in a schattenhaften world of the glacier at the fuße of the glacier and two periods of jeweils , it &apos;s been chosen to replicate the nine months of pregnancy , which they spend in their mother mother &apos;s mother , now they spend a metamorphorisch of the great mother .
and during this time , they &apos;re going to be a culturally kulturell in the values of their society , and values that the claim that their prayers and only their prayers , or we could say that , the environmental aufrechterhalten .
at the end of this amazing , she &apos;ll take a day , and in the very first time , you will take a sonnenaufgang , and in this kristallklaren moment of the erstaunlich of the darkness , you will see all of the time in the abstract of the first time , and the priest is going to go back and say , &quot; the priest and says ,
it &apos;s so wonderful . you have to protect it . &quot;
they call the older brothers and say that we are the younger brothers , for the destruction of the world .
now this level of the intuition is very important .
and whenever we think of native and landscape , we either have rousseau and the old gerücht of the fancy side that &apos;s a rassistischer thought , or the other thing , and say , these people are more connected to nature , when we are .
so , in fact , they &apos;re not eingeborene , they &apos;re not sentimental , they &apos;re going to be geschwächt by the nostalgie .
it &apos;s not much place for asmat asmat , or the cold winds of tibet , but they &apos;re not going to be a geheimnisvollen nimbus of the earth , but it &apos;s not a very subtileren device , but on a far subtileren , the idea that the earth can only exist because they &apos;re going to be hineingeatmet in the human mind .
now , what does that mean ?
it means that a little kid from the andes that is a apu-geist , that the mountain is a apu-geist , and a different relationship to that resource and this place , as a little kid in the belief that a mountain came to the belief , that a mountain is a lot of rocks , which is going to be recovered .
whether he &apos;s a aufenthaltsort of a mind or a pile of erz , is irrelevant .
the interesting thing is the metaphor that the relationship between the individual and nature .
i grew up in the forests of britisch colombia and believed that this forests are there to become gerodet .
and so , i made a different person , when my friends were under the kwakiutl faith that this forest is the forest of hukuk and the gebogenen himmelsschnabel and the kannibalischen ghosts , who live on the most nordende of the world , and they would include their hamatsa-initiation .
now , if you start looking at the idea that these cultures can create different different things , you can understand some of their extraordinary discoveries , like this plant here .
it &apos;s a photograph i took off the last april of the amazon .
this is ayahuasca , from many of you have heard the most powerful psychoaktive of the repertoire of the schamanen .
what makes ayahuasca ayahuasca is not just the most sophisticated potential of this type of präparats , but it &apos;s going to be a series of betakarbolinen , harmin , leicht , leicht , birgt , birgt , birgt , birgt , birgt , and it &apos;s about a blue smoke on their consciousness , but it &apos;s going to be the petals of a strauchs vermischt from the family
these plant , some very strong tryptamine that are serotonin , dimethyltryptamin-5 , and methoxydimethyltryptamin are very similar .
once you &apos;ve seen the yanomami , as you schnupfen this stuff , these substance , that they contain from different species of animals .
this powder is about schnupfen , like this is about a gewehrlauf approach , gesäumt of barocken , and landing on a sea of electricity .
it will not create the verzerrung of reality , but the resolution of reality .
i even have been with my professor , richard evan , who had been established in the 30iger of the magic art in mexico , in mexico , in mexico , and i argued that you couldn &apos;t have a halluzinogen , because in the moment you &apos;re really passionate about the effect that you &apos;re not on to experience a halluzination .
but the thing about tryptaminen is that they can &apos;t be oral , because they &apos;re durch through a human darm , naturally vorkommendes of vorkommendes , denaturiert enzym , denaturiert .
they can only be oral in a number of other chemicals that are mao to the mao agencies .
now the fascinating is that the betakarboline that are in the liane , mao-inhibitoren of the kind of species that are necessary to potenzieren the tryptamine , and so you &apos;re wondering .
how can these people from 80,000 species plants have not related plants , and that two plants are not related to plants , if you can , in this way , a kind of biochemischer version that the whole of the parts of its parts is the sum of its parts ?
we use this great euphemism , trying to try and make mistakes , what turns out as a meaningless .
but what you &apos;re asking the native people say , &quot; the plant speaks to us . &quot;
so , what does that mean ?
this tribe , the cofan , haben , 17 mutations of the ayahuasca that they all recognize in the very much distance in the woods that they &apos;re all in the forest for our eyes as a kind of seem .
and then you ask them how they were begründen their taxonomie , and they say , &quot; i thought you were doing something from plants .
i mean , you know nothing ? &quot; and i said , &quot; no . &quot;
so , it turns out that you can get any of the 17 points at vollmond , and they sing to a different tonlage .
now , that doesn &apos;t bring you a ph.d. in harvard , but it &apos;s much more interesting than stamina .
now , the problem is that even those of us who have the sympathy for the schwierige , the sympathy for the eingeborenen and farbenfroh , but somehow , it somehow somehow , in the past , they were able to get the world , the world &apos;s world .
so , in fact , you &apos;re going to remember the 20th century , in 300 years , not for his wars or technological innovation , but rather than a era that we &apos;re in , and the massive destruction of biological and cultural diversity of the biological and the cultural variety of cultural diversity , or passively , the problem is not the change .
all cultures have been involved in the dance with new lebenmöglichkeiten .
and the problem is not the technology .
the sioux-indianer didn &apos;t have to be less to be less than she and pfeil tasks when americans americans have american american american americans to be when they &apos;re pferd and pferdewagen tasks .
not changing and technology , the integrity of the ethnosphäre . it &apos;s power . the ugly face of sovereignty .
and wherever you look at the world , you &apos;re going to discover that these cultures are not geweiht in the wald , and it &apos;s dynamisch to be the ungeheuerliche of the schlamm , and the japanischen frachter of the anpassung , and the volk frachter of the horizont , a generation , the fast frachter , which is ready to füllen the ungeheuerliche of the horizont , and
or if we go into the mountains of tibet , where i &apos;m going to see a lot of forsche , you will see the ugly face of political dominance .
you know , the genocide , the phyische extinction of people will be convicted of people , but the ethnozid , the destruction of people , not only convicted , but generally , it &apos;s been convicted and vielerorts as part of a entwicklungsstrategie .
and they can &apos;t understand the suffering of suffering if you haven &apos;t seen it on the unterster level .
i once went to a young colleagues at westchina meilen by südost-tibet , and i was just looking at the lhasa of the statistics that i saw , and the face of the statistics of those statistics that you hear . 6000 holy monuments that were transformed in rubble and asche million people who have been assassinated during the cultural revolution .
the father of this young manns was identified as a followers of the panchen song .
that meant that he was killed during the chinese invasion .
his uncle tells her holiness in the diaspora that people brought to nepal .
his mother was imprisoned in eingesperrt , as punishment for the crimes of life .
he was in the age of two years into the prison to hide under their rockzipfel , because they couldn &apos;t live without him .
the sister who did this brave did , was put in a erziehungslager .
one day , she stepped out of a armband maos , and for those übertretung , she had to put it for seven years in a heavy .
the suffering can be unerträglich , but the erlösende mind is something unvergessliches .
and we &apos;re really , in the end , we really are a choice . we want to be in a monochromatischen world of the world &apos;s energy world or in a polychromatischen world ?
margaret mead , who said , the great anthropologist , before they died , that it &apos;s their greatest fear , gestaltlosen , generischen , generischen , and we would not just see the whole range of human imagination , but that we have a day from a dream , and i forgot that there was ever else to other possibilities .
and it &apos;s humbling to think that our species existed since we have been living for a half .
the neolithische revolution that brought us agriculture to agriculture , and in this moment of saatkorns unterwarf , the poetry of the schamanen of the priesterschaft and hierarchy , specialization and all the surplus , and found himself 10,000 years ago .
modern industrial world as we know it &apos;s hardly 300 years old .
now , this shallow story tells me not that we all respond to the challenges we &apos;ve been looking at in the ensuing millennia .
if we ask these myriad weltkulturen of the importance of the importance of the importance of the importance of the importance of a human , you &apos;ll respond with 10,000 different voices .
and in this song , we will be able to be the possibility of what we &apos;re in , and people who are aware of the importance of consciousness that are aware of all the people and the gardens needs to be zugesichert , and there &apos;s great moments of optimism .
here &apos;s a photograph i took on the northern end of the baffin-inseln when i went to inuits on the narwhal-jagd , and this man , olaya , was a wonderful story of his grandfather .
the eastern government is not always very well with the inuit , and during the 50iger years of the etablierung of our sovereignty , they were forced to be forced to go .
the grandfather refused to be the old man .
the family , who were scared of his life , he took all of the guns and all the tools .
now you know , the inuit doesn &apos;t have fear of the cold , they use them to their advantage .
the gleitschienen of their sled were originally made of fish that was built in karibu-haut .
the grandfather attacked a man &apos;s not afraid of the arctic night or the storm storm .
he pointed out to his pants off his pants off his pants down , and he started to break down the feces , he shaped them in the form of a messers .
he sprühte speichel onto the sides of the fäkalien-messers and when it was completely frozen , he erstach a dog .
he enthäutete the dog and a geschirr , took the skeleton of the dog and a schlitten , and improvisierte a sled , and improvisierte a different dog and entschwand over the eisschollen of the gürtel .
so you can &apos;t do anything .
and this is a symbol of the widerstand of the inuit and all the eingeborenen in the world .
the eastern government was the inuit mountains in april 1999 over the april , the greater than the times as california and texas .
it &apos;s our new public and called nunavut .
it &apos;s an independent area . they &apos;re all mineralvorkommen .
an amazing example , like a nation , a state , the wiedergutmachung , and can achieve that .
and finally , i think it &apos;s pretty obvious , at least for those of us who are going to be on the distant goals of the earth , to realize that they &apos;re not removed at all .
they &apos;re the heimatländer of somebody .
and they represent parts of the human imagination that are zurückreichen in past times . and for all of us , the dreams of our children are the dreams of our own children &apos;s lives .
what we &apos;re trying to do at national geographic is that we think politicians can achieve something .
we believe that polemik -- we think that polemik isn &apos;t necessarily , but we think that storytelling is changing the world , and we &apos;re probably the best institution for storytelling in the world , and our website , we &apos;re 35 million hits every month .
156 nations senden our fernsehkanal .
our magazines are read by millions .
and we &apos;re doing a series of traveling in the ethnosphäre , where we take our audiences from such cultural wundern , and hopefully , they will take a nach of the gesehenen revelation , and that this world is going to be made by different ways that we can find a lebensmöglichkeit in a really multikulturellen world where the wisdom of all human beings can do .
thank you very much .
what i first about to show you as quickly as possible , is the fundamental technology that we &apos;re microsoft as a part of a übernahme in a year , and it &apos;s a environment where they &apos;re either locally or a environment that they &apos;re either locally or from huge amounts of visual input .
we see many , many of these bodies on digital photographs that you can engage and fortwährend , predators , can be changed in any way .
and it doesn &apos;t matter how many information we look like , how big those collections are or how big the images are .
most of them are digital shot of a camera , but this one is , for example , a scan of the kongressbibliothek and it &apos;s in a domain of 300 megapixeln .
it doesn &apos;t matter because the only thing that can be the power of a system like this is the number of the pixel on their screen in every moment , and it has a very flexible architecture .
this is a whole book , an example of nichtbild-daten .
this is bleak house of dickens . every column is a chapter .
to prove it really , it really is about a text , and not to be a picture , we can actually show something like this , to really show that this one is a real representation of the texts and no image .
maybe this is a artificial way to read a e-buch .
i wouldn &apos;t recommend it .
this is an realistischerer case . this is a copy of the guardian .
every major image is the beginning of a abschnitts .
and that gives you the pleasure and the good experience a real papierausgabe or a newspaper , which is a kind of medium of mehreren .
we also have something about the corner of this particular copy of the guardian .
we &apos;ve designed a false display with very high resolution , which is much higher than a normal display , and we added it .
if you want to see the features of this car , you can see you here .
or other models , or even technological gains .
and this is really , this is really , really , these ideas , these are the constraints for the available space on the screen .
we hope that this is not a pop-ups and other nonsense . that &apos;s not supposed to be necessary .
of course , the mapping of the really obvious is really obvious for a technology like this .
and i don &apos;t want to spend a lot of time in here , except for saying that we are going to be too much .
but these are all the streets in the iraq war room in the iraq war .
übereinandergelagert on the top of the nasa image of nasa .
now let &apos;s get something else .
now , this is even live on the internet . you can nachprüfen it .
this is a project called photosynth , which is really two different technologies together .
one is a very good research , and the other is a very good research on computervision , which is a universitätsstudenten of noah , a universitätsstudenten of the university of washington , under steve seitz to the uw of the uw .
and rick szeliski was done by microsoft science . a very good collaboration .
so this is live in the internet . it &apos;s driven by seadragon .
you can see that if we can create this kind of views we can do with images , and we can do this experience of the mehrfachen .
but the spatial opportunity is the imagery here in the fact .
the computervision-algorithmen have taken these pictures together to the real space that were made in the kanadischen , which are all made in the canadian rockies , and they &apos;re all elemente in the canadian rockies , and you can see here from stabilisierten slides and these things were set up in the relationship with the relationship .
i don &apos;t know if i &apos;ve got some other environments .
there are what a lot of räumlicher are .
i &apos;d like to show a straight set of the originalen datensätze of noah and this is from a early prototype of the sommer that i think it &apos;s really the punchline behind this technology , and this is not so obvious that it &apos;s so obvious , if you look at the environments that we &apos;ve seen on the website .
we had to make us about the lawyers and so forth .
this is a rekonstruktion of the cathedral of notre , the ausschließlich of flickr , and they just give you a notre in flickr , and they &apos;re going to keep bilder by men in t-shirts and all of these orangefarbenen , and so , every orange cone represents a picture that was discovered as a model of gehörend .
so this is all flickr-bilder , and they all are in the same way in the way .
and we can navigate that very simple way .
you know , i never believed that i &apos;m going to work at microsoft at microsoft .
i &apos;m very grateful for the reception here .
and i suspect , you can see that this is many different types of cameras : everything is to professional professional slrs , a pretty large number of them that were all zusammengeflickt in this environment .
and if possible , i &apos;m going to find some of the weird strange .
many of you are on faces and so on .
somewhere here are a set of photographs -- here are you .
this is actually a poster of the notre lady that was recorded right .
we can change the poster to a physical view of this environment .
the point here is that we can do things with social environment , and it &apos;s now collecting all of the collective memories of how visual and visual , like , the earth looks like -- and everything will connected .
all these photographs are connected together and it creates something that &apos;s bigger than the sum of the parts .
they &apos;re getting a model that emerges out of the earth .
look at this as the sequel of the work of stephen lawlers in the process of virtual earth .
and this is something that &apos;s using the complexity that people use it , grows and whose use of the user &apos;s always getting greater .
their own photos will have thrown with metadata beschildert , which has a different person .
if someone has done the trouble and all of those holy civil rights , and i &apos;m willing to use them , and i can use it to take it into the notre of all this data , and i can use them to take them into these space , in these metaverse , the photos of other people and somit a kind of übergreifender social experience with the use
and of course , the amount of nebenprodukt are the most sophisticated parts of the earth , not only by any interesting part of the earth that are not only by überflüge or satellite and so on , but by collective memory .
thank you very much .
i understand it ? what your software enables to do that in a certain moment , within the next few years , all the images that are used in the world in the world , are going to be associated with each other in the world ?
yeah . she doesn &apos;t make anything else .
if you want to make them hyperlinks between the images .
and it does this because of the content in the images .
and that &apos;s really exciting when you think of the abundance of the semantischen information that have many of these images .
as if you &apos;re a websuche for images , where they &apos;re sätze and the text of the website contains lots of information about that , which is .
but how if you do that picture you linked to all your pictures ?
then the volume of the semantischen is querverbindung and the abundance that makes it really , really enormously , it &apos;s a classic netzwerkeffekt .
blaise , that &apos;s really incredible . thank you .
thank you very much .
i &apos;m going to tell you some of the things about my book , how i hope you &apos;ve already heard of , and i will try to make yourself a couple of links , if you haven &apos;t been able to do this .
i want to start with what i call &quot; official &quot; &quot; offizielles . &quot;
the official official dogma of what ?
the official glaubenssatz of all western industrialized societies .
the official dogma works : if our goal is to maximize the issue of our citizens of our citizens , it &apos;s all about the maximierung of the human race .
the reason that is that freedom is good , valuable , makes sense , a unverzichtbare premise for human human .
if people have liberty , then everyone is about to do the things that our public health and no one has to choose .
the way freedom is to maximize choice is choice .
the more choices people have , the more freedom have , and the more freedom you have , the more they have , they have more .
this is , i think , as deep in our societies , that it would be no question in the mind .
and it &apos;s also deeply rooted in our lives .
i &apos;m going to give you some examples of what we can do with modern progress .
this is my supermarket . no big .
i just want to say just a little bit about salatdressing .
there &apos;s 175 dressings in my grocery store , if you could not buy the 10 different extra extra balsamico-essig that they could buy a huge number of salat an , in the unlikely case that no one in the store is right .
so that &apos;s what the supermarket is .
and then they go to the verbraucher-elektronik business in a stereo zusammenzustellen -- speaker , cd-player , a kassetten-player , radio , radio , and in this one elektronik , there are so many stereo facilities .
we can put 6.5 million different stereo facilities from the components that will be offered in this business .
you have to admit that this is a big choice .
in other areas -- the world of communication .
there was a time when i was a boy , because you could have any telephone house that you wanted to see as long as a few ma .
they rented your phone . they bought it .
one of the time that was the phone was never been broken .
these days are over .
we now have a infinite choice of phones , especially in the world of mobile phones .
these are the mobile phones of the future .
my favorite one is the one in the middle -- mp3-player- , nasen-haar-trimmer and crème brûlée .
and you should have seen it yet to their business , you can sure you &apos;ll be soon .
and what it does is it brings people to go to the business and ask this question .
you know what the answer to this question is ?
the answer is no . &quot;
it &apos;s not possible to buy a mobile phone that doesn &apos;t do too much .
in other parts of life that are very much more comfortable than the buy of their own , is the same explosion of choices .
health -- it &apos;s no longer the case in the united states that you &apos;re going to go to the doctor and the doctor tells you what to do .
instead , they go to a doctor and the doctor says , we could do a a , or we could make b .
a , has a benefits and risks .
b has these benefits and risks . what do you want to do ?
and they say , &quot; doctor , what should i do ? &quot;
the doctor says , a has to have this benefits and risks and b has the benefits and risks .
what do you want to do ?
and if you say , &quot; if you were , i guess what would you do ? &quot;
the doctor says , &quot; but i &apos;m not her . &quot;
the result is -- we call it &quot; patient autonomy , but in reality , the verschiebung of the last of choices for the treffen of choices -- namentlich of the doktor -- the nichts of the doctor -- -- to someone who &apos;s nothing and , is not a decision to make a decision -- namentlich the patient .
there is a tremendous marketing for verschreibungspflichtige medicine for people like you and me , if you think about it , no sense because we don &apos;t buy it .
why do they advertise around us if we can &apos;t buy ?
the answer is , you expect the doctor at the next morning , and to ask a change of the way .
something like our identity is now a question of choice , like this slide .
we don &apos;t inherit identity , we invent .
and we &apos;re going to make us very often as we want .
that means that every day , if you wake up at morning , they need to decide what to be a kind of person .
in terms of marriage and family , there was a time that the standard-annahme was that almost everybody had one , and they were so fast as they could , and then so quickly as they could .
the only choice was &quot; who said , &quot; not when , and not what they did .
now , today , it &apos;s all easy to have .
i teach some intelligent students , and i &apos;ll give you 20 percent less less than i did .
and that &apos;s not because they &apos;re less smart , and not because they &apos;re less carefully .
it &apos;s because they &apos;re engaged with other things , they ask yourself , &quot; should i marry , or not ? should i get married ?
should i marry later ? should i have kids , or first you have ? &quot;
they &apos;re all einnehmende questions .
and they &apos;re going to answer these questions that is that this means to make all the tasks that i &apos;m going to do to you and get a good grade in my class .
and in fact , they should do that . these are important to ask questions .
work -- we &apos;re blessed , like carl , verdeutlicht , with the technology that allows us to work every minute of every single day on the planet -- to the randolph hotel .
there are a corner of the way that i &apos;m going to tell you about that , in the way that i &apos;m going to work on the wirelesslan .
i &apos;m not going to tell you because i want to use it .
so what it means , this incredible freedom of choice we have in terms of work again , again and again , and again , whether we should work or not work .
we can play our kids playing football , and we have our phone on the hip , and our blackberry hip hop , and our laptop probably on our lap .
and even if you all have become all the time , every minute we &apos;re asking our child at the time of a fußballspiels zugucken , we also ask ourselves , &quot; should i take this call ?
should i answer this email ? should i write this letter ? &quot;
and even when the answer to the question , &quot; no , it &apos;s certainly going to be very much in your experience of your child &apos;s child in the child &apos;s child as it would be .
everywhere we look at , big things and small things , material things and lifestyle , life is a question of choice .
and the world in which we lived in the world .
so i want to say , there was some options , but not all of the choice .
and the world in which we &apos;re seeing now is now look .
and the question is , is the good news or bad news ?
the answer is yes . &quot;
we all know what good is , so i &apos;m going to talk about what bad about it .
all of these choices have two effects , two negative effects on people .
a effect , paradoxer way , is that it &apos;s lähmt instead of free .
so many options can choose to choose , it &apos;s very hard to choose to get .
i &apos;m going to give you another example of this , a study in volunteers .
one of me had access to investitions-akten on investitions-akten , who was giant fondgesellschaft from about a million and about 2,000 different jobs .
and what she was found was a 10 investmentfonds of the employers that anbot , took the participation of two percent .
they offer 50 percent of them -- 10 percent less likely to take less than if she was just five . why ?
because it &apos;s 50 investmentfonds that are on the choices , is it hard to decide that they should be able to hold it up .
and then tomorrow , and tomorrow , tomorrow , and tomorrow , and tomorrow , of course , never .
and you know , that &apos;s not only that people have to eat food , because they don &apos;t have enough money to the end , it means that it means so hard to make great investitionsangebote of their employers .
they &apos;re not giving them participation to 5,000 dollars a year , in the arbeitsgeber , who would have been happy to reproduce their contributions .
and paralysis is a consequence of a lot of choices .
and i think it &apos;s really powerful that the world looks like this .
they want to really make the decision to make sure that it &apos;s for all eternity , right ?
they don &apos;t want to choose the wrong investment , or even the wrong benchmark .
so this is a effect . the other effect is that even if we overcome the paralysis and make a decision , we end up with the result of choice , as if we had the opportunity to choose us between less possibilities .
and there are several reasons for this .
one of them is a great artist unterschiedlicher , if you have a buy , and it &apos;s not perfect -- and what &apos;s the bildlich of the entscheidung is that they have been besser , and this particular regrets is negativ to the decision , and this particular regrets is negative to the satisfaction that they had made of their roles , also when it was a good decision
the more ways that there is , the simple thing is not at all , it &apos;s the disappointing to do this , that &apos;s the enttäuschend for the choice .
second , what economists call oppertunitätskosten .
dan gilbert has made a huge dot in this morning , by telling how much the way we evaluate things that we &apos;re comparing to what we &apos;re looking at .
well , if there is a lot of alternative to concerns , it &apos;s just attractive traits of alternative , they &apos;re doing less happy with the alternatives , which makes them less happy with the alternatives that they voted .
here &apos;s an example . for you , the one of them who are not new yorkers , i apologize to me .
but here &apos;s what they should have thought .
here &apos;s a couple of the hamptons .
very expensive immobilien .
beautiful beach . great day . they have everything for themselves .
what could be better ? &quot; &quot; &quot; the man thinks &quot; it &apos;s august .
everyone in my manhattener neighborhood is gone .
i could park directly on my house . &quot;
and he spends two weeks of the thought that he missed the possibility of day day a great amount of work .
oppertunitätskosten senken , the satisfaction that we get through our choice , even if we have been fantastic .
and the more ways to have choices , the more attractive features of these choices are going to be in the oppertunitätskosten .
here &apos;s another example .
now this cartoon is doing some statements .
he does a testimony about it now , and maybe things about things too .
but a key point that he is , always who you decide to decide for a cause , you don &apos;t choose to do other things .
and these other things like a lot of these attractive traits , and it will be what they &apos;re going to do about less .
third , eskalation of expectations .
this struck me when i wanted to replace my jeans .
i &apos;m wearing jeans , almost all the time .
and there was a time in the way that they bought , and they bought them , and they were bought , and they were incredibly unkomfortabel , they were incredibly unkomfortabel , and if they had them , they had long enough enough , and they &apos;d have enough enough that they &apos;d come up with , &quot; ok . &quot;
so , to buy new jeans after many years of the old tragens of the old , and i said , &quot; i &apos;d like to have a few jeans , here &apos;s my size . &quot;
and the verkäufer said , &quot; want you to schlanke , easily anliegende or weite ?
do you want to have buttons or reißverschluss ? stone or a acid ?
would you want to be jeans with holes ?
you want to be able to cut down the bottom , kegelig , blah blah , blah , blah , and so on .
my jaw was down , and after i recovered , i &apos;d like to say , &quot; i &apos;d like to have the kind of the kind of the one . &quot;
he had no idea what was this , so i spent an hour of the damn jeans and makes the geschäft of the business -- and i say the truth -- with the the most the most expensive jeans i ever had .
i had better . all of these choices are allowed me to have better .
but i felt bad .
why ? i wrote a whole book to try to explain myself .
the reason i was bad was to be bad , with all these available possibilities , my expectations for a good pair of jeans , and then , up .
i had very low expectations . i didn &apos;t have any concrete expectations than it was in a kind of art .
when they came in 100 ways , damn one , one of them should be perfect , one of them should be perfect .
and what i got was good , but it was not perfect .
and so i compared to what i had had to get to what i expected , and what i had was in comparison with what i expected .
the ability to get possibilities in the lives of people , the expectations of people have the ability to be about how good these possibilities are going to be .
and this leads to fewer satisfaction with the results , even though the results are good .
nobody in the world of the marketings knows this , because if you would , you don &apos;t know what you &apos;re going to do .
the truth is more like this .
the reason is that used to be better than anything , when everything was worse than anything , was it possible for people to make a very comfortable experience .
today , in the world we live -- we &apos;re dealing with the most common citizens , with perfection as a expectation , the best for you can hope is that things are so good to you .
they &apos;re never going to be angenehm because your expectations , my expectations , my expectations .
the secret to the glücklichkeit -- that &apos;s what they &apos;re all came -- the secret to the glücklichkeit are low expectations .
i want to say -- a little bit of a moment -- i &apos;m married with a woman , and she &apos;s really wonderful .
i couldn &apos;t do it better . i didn &apos;t get niedergelassen .
but niederlassen isn &apos;t always a bad thing .
eventually , a consequence of a bad thing about a bad thing is , if you &apos;re a kind of bad , if you &apos;re just a kind of a piece of life , that if they &apos;re necessary , and ask why , the answer is clear . the world is responsible . what would you do ?
when hundreds of different kinds of jeans are available , and they &apos;re buying a picture of the jeans , and ask why , who &apos;s responsible ?
it &apos;s also clear that the answer to the question is , you know .
they would have better done better .
with 100 different kinds of jeans in the schaufenster , there are no excuse for mistakes .
and so if people make decisions , and even if the results are good , they feel about it , they &apos;re comfortable on themselves .
clinical depression has been forced to be in the industrial world in the last generation .
i think a signifikanter -- not the only one , but a signifikanter beiträger principle to this explosion of depression , and also the selbstmord is the key , is that people are so high , because they &apos;re so hoch , and then if you have to explain this experience of yourself , you think it would be their fault .
and so the proof that it is generally better , is objective , and we feel bad .
so let me remind you .
this is the official dogma that we all think that &apos;s really , really wrong , it &apos;s not true . it &apos;s not true .
there is no question that something choice is better than not , but it doesn &apos;t follow that more choice than something .
there is a magical amount . i don &apos;t know what it is .
i &apos;m pretty sure that we missed this point long time thinking about that our choices .
now , as a grundsatz question -- i &apos;m almost finished -- as a grundsatz question that &apos;s going to be thinking about the way that all these choices are actually enabled in the industrialized societies , is wealth .
there are many places in the world , and we &apos;ve heard many of you , whose problem isn &apos;t the problem with big selection .
your problem is that they have too little .
so the things that i talk about is a curious problem of modern , rich societies .
and what &apos;s so frustrating and angry : steve levitt has told you yesterday about how this expensive and hard to help , it &apos;s a waste of money .
what i &apos;m telling you is that these expensive , complicated decisions -- it &apos;s not easy to help you .
they &apos;re actually hurting .
they &apos;re concerned about that we &apos;re bad for that .
if something of the human society allowed us to make decisions so much that people would have done to wenig in the people in the people who would have been verschoben , not just the lives of people , but our dignity would be improved .
economists call this a pareto-verbesserungs application .
einkommensumverteilung is going to make it all better -- not just the poor -- because all of these big choices are plagt .
finally , reading this cartoon , please , please , a hochentwickelte person , says , &quot; ah ! what does this fish do ?
you don &apos;t know it &apos;s possible to this goldfischglas . &quot;
verarmten , imagination , a kurzsichtige view of the world -- and that is the way i read it first .
but the more i thought about it , the more i came to the view , the fish knows .
because the truth is that if you break the goldfischglas that it is possible , they don &apos;t have freedom . they have paralysis .
if you break the goldfischglas , so that all possible is possible , they lower happiness .
they increase paralysis and lower .
everybody needs a goldfischglas .
this is almost certainly secure for limited to limited -- possibly for the fish , definitely for us .
but the abhanden is a metaphorischen for a metaphorischen for misery , and i suspect , the katastrophe .
thank you very much .
you know , i &apos;ve talked about some of these projects before , about the human genome and what that could mean , and about the discovery of genes .
in fact , we start off by a new point : we have the biology , and now we &apos;re trying to get from the digital code in a new phase of biology , to create new life .
we always have to ask ourselves questions .
what is life ? it &apos;s something i believe that many biologists are trying to understand and see on different levels .
we tried to try to simplify different approaches to the order of the minimum components .
we have digitized 20 years , and when we sequenced the humangenom sequence , they have the shift from the analog world of biology , the wechsel world of the computer .
now we try to ask whether we can regenerate life or whether we can make new life , from this digital universe ?
this is the map of a little organism , in the mycoplasma genome , which is the smallest genome of a species that can be in the lab , and we have tried to get it with a smaller genome .
we &apos;ve managed to get it to about about a hundred genes from the 500 or so that these are ones .
but if we look at this metabolic map , which is very simple , which is very simple , and i trust it , but if we can see all of these genes , we can eliminate one of the genes that we can have one after the other , it &apos;s very unlikely that this would lead to a living cell .
so we decided that it &apos;s the only way to look forward to the front , actually , in fact , what we actually allowed to do to produce the individual components and so to ask some of those fundamental questions .
and so we started with the question , we can actually synthesize a chromosome ?
it gives the chemistry of these really big molecules , and we never have done anything else ?
and if we can , we can start the chromosome ?
a chromosome is so by the way that we just take a piece of chemical material .
our steps in the donor of life were exponentially .
our ability to write genetic code has been evolving very slowly but nonetheless , and our last point would sit on a exponential curve .
we started doing 15 years ago .
it took me several years with a bioethischen review before we did the first experiments .
how it turns out , it &apos;s very difficult .
there are tens of thousands of machines around the world to make the little pieces of dna , but it &apos;s a degenerativer process , so the longer you make a piece of the same , the more mistakes .
so we had to design a new way to put these little pieces and the mistakes .
that was our first attempt to start starting with the digital information , the genome of the genome , the genome of the genome .
it &apos;s a little virus on the bacteria .
we made little pieces , and they took a fehlerkorrektur , and had a dna molecule of about 5,000 letters .
the exciting phase came when we took this piece of chemical chemical and put in a bacterium , and the bacteria started reading the genetic code and made the latest code .
the viral particles were brought from the cells and came back and went back to e. e. .
recently , i &apos;ve been talking about the oil industry , and they said they were very quickly .
they laughed more than you do .
so we think that this is a situation in software to actually build your own hardware , in a biological system .
but we wanted to go far more , and we wanted to build a whole new healthcare chromosome . it &apos;s more than 580.000 letters of the virus , we could build it in the size of the virus , which we could move the size of the quantum the kassetten , to understand what the individual components are in the single one of the living cell .
design is the key , and if you want to start with digital information , the digital information is really going to be really accurate .
when we sequenced the genome back in 1995 , the fehlerrate was the fehlerrate in a mistake of a mistake .
we found out the resequenzieren 30 mistakes . if we &apos;d never been able to have the original sequence that would have been possible .
part of the design is to make the 50 letters for 50 and the other 50-buchstaben ratio to build smaller sub-einheiten sub-einheiten so that it is .
we have unique elements here .
you may have heard that we &apos;ve built the waterzeichen .
think about it : we have a code code : a , c , g and g and g and ts and grew up and grew up and grew up and grew up and grew up and grew up and grew up and grew up and grew up and grew up and grew up and grew up and grew up and grew up and grew up and grew up and
triplets of this letters -- these letters may be about 20 amino acids ; and there is one of these amino acids .
so we can use the genetic code to write our words , sentences , thoughts .
and initially , we have signed only signed .
some people were disappointed that it was no poetry .
we &apos;ve been able to make the pieces so that we could break them with enzymes . there are enzymes that repair these fixing and zusammenfügen .
and we started creating pieces , starting with the fünf- to siebentausend letters , fügten these together to make these aneinander around these days , to 72.000 these up .
in every step , we have these pieces in the surplus so that we could sequence it , because we tried to make a very robust process , and we &apos;re going to see a very robust process .
we tried to get to the point of the automation .
so , this looks like a basketball-playoff .
if we &apos;re going to get to these properly big , and over 100,000 feet -- they &apos;re not going to grow in e. coli . it &apos;s beyond the possibility of modern biology , and so we went to other mechanisms .
we knew about a mechanism called homologe rekombination , which is using biology to repair dna that can occur those pieces .
here &apos;s an example of it . there is one organism called deinococcus radiodurans of the three million rads of radiation .
you can see in the upper field that his chromosome just drops apart .
12 to 24 hours later , it has been all the way it was so much more than it was .
we have thousands of organisms that can do that .
these organisms can be completely ausgetrocknet , you can actually live in the vacuum .
i &apos;m absolutely sure that life exist and move on looking for search conditions .
in fact , nasa has shown that there &apos;s lots of it out there .
here &apos;s a gefügeaufnahme of molecule that we &apos;ve made by using these processes -- actually , we &apos;ve only done only hefe-mechanismen with the right design of the pieces , and so yeast put these automatically together .
this is not a elektronenmikroskopaufnahme elektronenmikroskopaufnahme .
it &apos;s so a big molecule that we can actually see it in the lichtmikroskop .
that &apos;s footage about a quarter of six seconds .
that &apos;s the publication we &apos;ve just recently completed .
these are over 580.000 letters on genetischem code , and it &apos;s the largest molecule that has ever been created by people .
it has a molekulargewicht of 300 million .
if we were to ausdrucken it with a schriftgröße of 10 and without abstände , it would be 142 pages , just to take that genetic code .
now how do we take a chromosome ? how do we activate it ?
obviously , it &apos;s very simple , it &apos;s very simple . it &apos;s much more complicated with bacteria .
it &apos;s easier if you &apos;re in eukaryonten like we &apos;re doing it : you just take the 3d out and you have another coffee , and that &apos;s exactly what you &apos;ve all heard about the cloning .
in archaebakterien , the chromosome in the cell , but we &apos;ve just shown that you have a complete chromosome from one of one chromosome from one of one percent to other .
we &apos;re going to reinigten the chromosome of a mikrobenspezies . roughly , these two entfernt , and we &apos;ve got some extra-gene to do this chromosome , and we put it to enzymes to destroy all the protein . and it was very amazing when we put it in a cell -- and they &apos;re going to appreciate our very ausgereiften graphs .
the new chromosome went into the cell .
in fact , we thought that this is the end , but we &apos;re trying to get the process further .
this is the hauptmechanismus of evolution here .
we find all sorts of species here , or a third of irgendwoher , every time thousands of times , in just a second , a species .
so people who imagine evolution as a gene has changed a lot of biology .
there are the enzymes called the restriktionsenzyme , which is actually verdauen the dna .
the chromosome in the cell has been none ; the chromosomes we &apos;ve already been doing .
it was exprimiert in the cell and recognized the other chromosome as a human material , and we just had a cell at a cell with a new chromosome .
it &apos;s verfärbte , blue because of the genes we have .
and after a very short period of time , it had all lost all the characteristics of species and konvertierte entirely in a new species based on the new software that we &apos;ve given in the cell .
all of the proteins changed the rate -- when we read the genetic code , it was exactly what we have provided .
it may sound like genomic alchimie , but we can , by changing the most software-dna , things quite dramatic .
now , i have argued that this is not the genesis -- it &apos;s based on 3.5 billion years of evolution .
and i &apos;ve been able to make sure that we may have a new form of the cambrian explosion in which it could generate massive new solutions based on this digital design .
why should we do that ?
and i think it &apos;s pretty obvious to what we need .
we &apos;re in six billion people in the next 40 years .
to put it in my context , i was born in the year born .
today , three people on this planet is to be in the year of every year in the year , within 40 years , it will be four years .
we have problems with food , with fresh and clean water , medicine , fuel , for the $ six billion people .
it will offer a challenge for 9 a.m. .
we need five billion tons of coal , 30-plus billion barrels of oil . that &apos;s a hundred million square miles .
if we think about biological processes or any process to replace that , it becomes a huge challenge .
then , of course , there &apos;s all the co2 of this material in the atmosphere .
we now have , from our discoveries of all over the world , a database of 20 million genes , and i want to believe that these are the most designkomponenten of the future .
the elektronikindustrie had a dozen components , and see the diversity of the diversity that came out of it .
we found this in first line of the limits of the biological reality and the idea of our imagination .
we have today technology today because of this rapid synthesemethoden to do what we call genetics genetics .
we have now to build a big robot to build the millions of chromosomes to a day .
if you imagine these 20 million genes that are making optimieren or to optimize these processes to manufacture or medicine new vaccines , we can only change a small team more biology than the last 20 years .
and it &apos;s just nurmale selection . we can selektieren nach , production of chemicals or treibstoffproduktion and so on .
this is a aufnahme of the wirklicher design-software that we &apos;re actually working with , and you &apos;re actually hinsetzen with a hinsetzen and new species on the computer , in the computer .
you know , we don &apos;t necessarily know how it is going to look like . we know exactly how their genetic code will look like .
we &apos;re focused on the fourth generation .
they &apos;ve seen a bad experiment .
we have this treibstoffe and third generations that are relatively soon coming up getting much higher , like oktan or different types of butanol .
but how we think it &apos;s a huge impact on the cost of the cost of food or the limitation of their availability , and that &apos;s why we see co2 as a north , and therefore we work on cells that go to the cells that go .
and we think we &apos;re going to be the first generation of fourth generation and that &apos;s about 18 months .
sunlight and co2 is a method .
but in our discovery , we have all kinds of different ways .
that &apos;s a organism that we &apos;ve described to .
he lives in the deep sea , about ein-einhalb miles deep , in almost almost kochenden .
it &apos;s like co2 in methane , using the use of hydrogen as a source of hydrogen .
we investigate whether we can use gespeichertes co2 , which could simply be brought into produktionsplätzen , which is simply co2 co2 in the fuel to get this process .
within a brief period , we believe we could be able to solve one of the fundamental questions of life .
you know , we really have -- moderate targets like the ersatz of the entire petrochemischen industry . right , if you could do that at ted , where else ?
but the same thing we &apos;re working at work is that the same way to use the development of vaccines .
you &apos;ve seen this year , we &apos;ve been seeing this year , we &apos;re always going back to the flu , and they have a dollar to a dollar , if it &apos;s about the right vaccine .
i think that &apos;s the way you can actually put in the vorhinein place in the vorhinein .
this is how the future may look like to look like changes , now can accelerate the evolutionsbaum , is beschleunigt bacteria , archaen , and possibly eukaryonten .
we &apos;re making light from people to improve . our goal is to be just a chance to survive long enough to do that , and thank you very much . thank you very much .
at the last ted conference , i gave a introduction to the lhc .
and i promised to come back to explain how the machine works .
so it &apos;s so far . and for all of those days , and the ones that weren &apos;t there , the lhc is the largest scientific experiment that &apos;s ever been determined by the way -- 27 miles in diameter .
his job is to create the conditions that are less than a billionth second in the universe -- and that &apos;s to 600 million times in a second .
it &apos;s just breathtaking , atemberaubend .
this is the machine below .
we take images of these mini-urknalle in detectors .
i work on . he &apos;s a atlas detektor -- 44 meters in the width , 22 meters in diameter .
here is a spectacular picture of the atlas atlas that you see in the construction .
at 10 thousand last year , the machine was going to first .
and this image was taken from atlas atlas .
it &apos;s huge huge jubel .
it &apos;s a picture of the first strahlenpartikels that the entire distance around the lhc , and it &apos;s associated with a part of the lhc , to make a rain of particles on the detector .
in other words , when we saw this picture on september 11th , we knew that the machine works , which is a big triumph .
i don &apos;t know if this is the largest jubel , or this , as someone &apos;s google side , and the front of the bottom line .
it means that we &apos;ve reached a cultural impact next to the scientific .
a week later , there was a problem with this machine that had to do with these wires -- these golden wires here was here to be here .
these wires lead to 13-tausend 13-tausend when the machine is going on .
now the engineers under you , you &apos;re going to look at them , and say , &quot; no , they don &apos;t . they &apos;re little wires . &quot;
you can afford that because if you get them very far , they will sogenannten them .
so minus 271 , cooler , as the space between the stars , can be able to withstand the tension .
in one of the links between the verbindungen , zwischen magnets , there was a manufakturdefekt .
so it turns out the wires to be culturally and 13-tausend ampere of resistance .
this was the result .
now , this is all about that , if you imagine that the magnet over 20 tons and turn around about 30 inches or 30 inches .
so we &apos;re really to map about 50 of the magnet of the magnet and the magnet of the magnet .
and then , they had to take away what we did .
we konditionierten them , reparierten them .
now they &apos;re all back on their way back .
against the end of march , the lhc will be kept .
we will expect him , and expect first data in june or july able to collect , and we sit our journey to go to find out what the building of the universe are .
now , of course , in a way , a kind of entfachen , the debate around the value of science and ingenieurskunst of the limits , it &apos;s easy to get to this .
i think it &apos;s so hard to think that we reach beyond our limitations , is the value of things like the lhc .
i &apos;m going to be a scientist scientist scientist , a english scientist scientist , humphrey davy , who &apos;s vermute , as he &apos;s vermute , the nutzlosen experiments of the human mind , was that the scientific ideas of the human mind is , it &apos;s not the mysterien of the human mind , and that &apos;s not the mysterien in nature that our triumphe are vollzählig ,
thank you very much .
i &apos;m a novelist .
books to write books is my job , but it &apos;s more than that .
it &apos;s also my big , lifelong love and fascination .
and i don &apos;t expect that that &apos;s ever going to change .
but it &apos;s a recent thing about my life in my life and my career that &apos;s been made me to rethink my reference to this work .
this curious event that i &apos;ve written a book called „ eat , pray , love , love , love , which , in fact , the other books , the other books from the world , and a big mega-ereignis , was a big mega-ereignis .
the result is , i don &apos;t care where i &apos;m going , i &apos;m going to be treated as i was going to be the untergang .
seriously -- the untergang geweiht .
so , for example , they come to me on me and say , &quot; fear they don &apos;t have to be weighed on the success ?
don &apos;t worry about that they would weiterschreiben their whole life and never create a book that would have to live in the world ? never ?
okay , that &apos;s really mut .
it would be worse if i was not to remember that i was about 20 years ago when i was told that i was a teenager for the first time i was being a schriftstellerin of the same kind of angstbesetzter response .
people said , &quot; „ did not have no fear of success ?
you don &apos;t worry that you &apos;re the humiliation of a absage ?
you don &apos;t worry that you can go and make it a long time , and it never entsteht out of that , and you can &apos;t die on a schrotthaufen dreams -- your mouth will allow the bitteren to the versagens ?
so , like , you know , you know .
the answer -- the short answer to all these questions is , „ &apos;s .
yeah , i &apos;m afraid of all these things .
and i had always been .
and i have a lot more stuff that would be no one else .
like algae -- and other things things .
but , if it &apos;s about writing , i &apos;ve been thinking about that , and i ask myself , why ?
is this reasonable ?
is it logical that by somebody who should be afraid of it , that he &apos;s afraid to do the work that he feels ?
and what is the creative enterprises , where they &apos;re doing a lot of geisteszustand -- in a way that it doesn &apos;t do other professions ?
my father , for example , was chemists , and i can &apos;t remember a situation in his 40 years as a chemist , where he was asked to be a chemist .
with your chemiker-blockade , john -- how goes to it ?
it just didn &apos;t just happen , you know ?
but to be fair -- the group of chemist have not been given the centuries of jahrhunderte people &apos;s call .
we seem to have this kind of call . but not only the writers , but the creative of all the genres , seem to be the kind of call to be mentally unstable .
all you need to do is , the bitter todeszahlen of really great minds from the 20th century , who &apos;s going to look at the young and often of their own hand .
and even the ones who didn &apos;t actually translate into suizid , tracks by their talents .
norman mailer said , a little bit of his death in his last interview : „ every one of my books i &apos;ve been killed a little more closely .
a außerordentliche statement that they can do about their lebenswerk .
but we don &apos;t even know if we &apos;re going to hear somebody like this , because we &apos;ve been familiar with this kind of statements for so many times , and somehow we have the idea of creativity and suffering and that art -- that art -- always leads to the end -- always leads to the end .
the question i want to ask today is this idea of all the idea for you ?
do you feel that ? because with only one inch , i think , just a centimeter -- i don &apos;t feel that perception at all .
i think they &apos;re the fact .
and i find them dangerous . and i don &apos;t want to watch how you get back to the next century .
i find it better when we live our great creative lives .
and i definitely know that it was -- in my situation -- very dangerous , to start , to start this dark path of the point of what &apos;s called herunterzusickern -- especially in the fact that i &apos;m in my career right now .
that &apos;s called -- you know , i &apos;m pretty young . i &apos;m only about 40 years .
i &apos;ve got another 40 more 40 i .
and it &apos;s very likely to be a lot of what i &apos;m going to write from now to be from the world that the work of the work that was going to be the last of my last book , right ?
i say it geradeheraus , because we all have all friends in all of us -- it &apos;s highly likely to be the greatest success behind me .
oh , jesus , what a thought ! &quot;
these are the kind of thoughts that can bring someone to start nine o &apos;clock in the morning , and i don &apos;t want to get it .
i would rather continue to do that work that i love .
so , the question is , how ?
after some time , i seem to be able to write a kind of schützendem psychological psychological psychological .
now , i have to find a way to find a safe distance to true of me and i think of my very natural beklemmung about how the reaction will be written on .
i had to take advantage of the past year , i &apos;ve been looking for the past , and i &apos;ve been trying to find other societies , whether they may be better or more ideas about how to help creative risks with the emotional risks that are linked to creativity .
and this quest led me to the old train and the old rome .
please join me , because the bubble will end up again .
but in ancient greece and rome , people don &apos;t believe that creativity is coming from people , okay ?
they thought that creativity was a kind of göttlicher diener-geist , which is from a distant , unknown source to people -- from unerklärlichen , unknown reasons .
the greeks called these divinity diener-geister of creativity dämonen dämonen .
from socrates is known that he believed he had to have a dämon who was going to mitteilte him out of nowhere .
the roman idea had the same idea , called this kind of körperlosem kreativem , a „ genius .
that &apos;s great . the roman doesn &apos;t really think that a genius was a particularly smart individual .
they thought that a genius was this kind of magical magisches creature that we could literally live in the walls of a künstlerateliers -- about like dobby , the rauskäme -- the rauskäme and the artist was happening in work and the result of the work of work .
this is brilliant -- there &apos;s the distance that i talked about -- the psychological laboratory that &apos;s been building the psychologische of your work .
and everybody knew that it worked so well , right ?
the artist altertums was kind of protected , like , for example , for example , too much , right ?
if your work was brilliant you wouldn &apos;t have to do all of you for you , and everybody knew that you had this körperlose genius , who helped you .
if your work -- not entirely your mistakes , or ?
everybody knew , your genius was something more surprising .
so the people in the west have really been a long time for creativity .
and then the renaissance and everything changed . we had this big idea , and this big idea , and this big idea was , let &apos;s take the human individual and low , and there &apos;s no room for creatures creatures , the orders of the divine .
it &apos;s the beginning of the rational humanism , and the people started to think that creativity is completely autonomous from their own individual .
for the first time , people are hearing this or those artists who are a genius -- instead of having a genius .
i have to tell you , i think that was a great mistake .
you know ? i think a bloßen person , or it &apos;s like the vessel , and the source of all the göttlichen and the source of all the göttlichen , creative , is a small little responsibility to get a fragilen , human psychology .
it &apos;s like somebody to ask the sun .
the background and distorted all of the time , and it creates all of these unerreichbaren expectations to success .
i think that erfolgs-druck has been responsible for the artists of the last 500 years .
and if that &apos;s true -- and i think it &apos;s true -- is the question .
can we change it ?
maybe too , perhaps a sense of understanding about the relationship between people and the mystery of the creative network .
maybe not .
maybe we can just humanismus the gedankengut from 500 years of humanismus , just in a 18-minütigen talk .
and there are certainly people in this audience that really anmelden the vorstellung scientific argument about the notion of -- -- feen -- feen , people who are nachfolgen and anwenden on their projects .
i &apos;m not going to take all of you on these journeys .
but the question i want to leave is , why not ?
why not so ?
because it makes a lot of sense as much as everything i &apos;ve heard when it was the process of explaining the absolut of the creative process .
a process that &apos;s -- like everybody knows that it has ever attempted to make something -- in other words , everybody here -- not always the end of the day .
in fact , he can feel sometimes quite comfortable .
i had a encounter that i met with a begegnung , which was the extraordinary american poet dichterin , who was the außerordentliche of 90 years ago , and she told me that she was in the dörflichen virginia , she said , she said she would feel and hear it like a poem on the landscape .
she said it would be like a donnernder train out of air , and it would be like a donnernder train .
the country would be zurollen on her country .
she felt when it came , because it would bring the earth under their feet to the quake .
she knew that they could just do one moment , and that was one of them , and that was -- in their words -- „ races like the devil .
she ran the devil out of the house during this poem , and it was only that it was just a blatt enough to get a sheet of paper and a pencil to get it through them , and they could capture and down on the sheet .
and they didn &apos;t get fast enough , and she ran and ran and ran it and she didn &apos;t give it the house , and she said it , and she said it would go beyond land and -- like she said -- „ after another poet .
and then there was this moments -- the part i never forget -- she said that there was a lot of them that they &apos;ve been nearly .
so she runs out to the house , and i &apos;m going to go through the paper and the poem is driving through them , and she grabs them in a pen , and then she -- she said -- it was like the other hand after your other hand , and they get to get it up .
they commissioned the poem to his tail , and he pulled back in their body and put it on the sheet of paper .
in these opportunities , the poem would seem up and intact on the paper -- but backward -- from the last word for the first word .
when i was hearing this , i thought that &apos;s unheimlich -- that &apos;s exactly what my creative process is .
that &apos;s not like my creative process -- i &apos;m not the channel !
i &apos;m a maultier . to work with the same time , i have to stand up every day at the same time , sweating , and really awkward .
but even i even have this thing in my maultierart , sometimes this thing .
and i guess that many of you did that .
even i had work on work or ideas that made from a source of mich that i really can &apos;t identify .
what is this for a thing ?
and how do we deal with that without being able to lose our minds , but we can actually hold ourselves in the contrary of any mental health ?
for me , the best living example of how to do this , how do you create this , the musicians tom tom . i was allowed to interview him for a magazine .
we talked about this topic , and you know what ? most of the time of his life was tom , the embodiment of the gepeinigten modern künstlers who tried to beherrschen these unkontrollierbaren of the impulse , which would be in him to master and with them .
but then he got older and ruhiger . he told me that he was walking on a schnellstraße at los angeles , and there was everything for him .
he was driving with high speed than he &apos;s a little fragment of a tune , which is , like it &apos;s often schwer for him , and he &apos;s hard to be schwer . and he &apos;s will . it &apos;s prachtvoll . he &apos;s lechzt it , but he can &apos;t tap them .
he doesn &apos;t have a piece of paper , he doesn &apos;t have the pen , he doesn &apos;t have a kassettenrekorder .
so he starts to bring these old beklemmung in him , like „ , i &apos;m going to lose this thing , and i will be considered to be verfolgt .
i &apos;m not good enough , i won &apos;t .
but instead of panic , he just stopped .
he gave the full train and did something completely new .
he just looked into the sky and said , „ excuse me , can &apos;t you see that i &apos;m driving ?
i see that like i could just look at a song that i &apos;m just a song ?
if you really want to exist at a moment , you get back to a moment , when i take care of you .
if not , quäle today .
go and quäle leonard cohen .
his whole entire data has changed .
not the work itself . that was often as dark as ever .
but the process of the process , the schwere , the genie , the genius , it was taken out of the time , and he was taken out of trouble , and he dahin where he came out of trouble , and he realized that there was no verinnerlichtes , quälendes thing .
it could give a eigentümliche , wondrous , wundersame , bizarre collaboration , a kind of conversation between tom and the fremdartigen , äußerlichen , which was not entirely tom .
and as i heard this story , it also changed the way i worked , and i &apos;ve been saved a saved once .
and this idea was me in the middle of „ eat , pray , love , love , and i fell in one of these forms of the zweifels that we &apos;re going to work on , and you &apos;re starting to think that it &apos;s going to be a disaster . that will be the worst book that was ever written .
not just bad , but the worst time ever .
i started thinking , i was just going to einstampfen the project .
but then i remembered how tom got used in the free sky , and i tried it .
so i took my view from the manuscript and the sprach of my commentary in the direction of space .
i spoke to loud : „ listen , you know , you know , you know , if this book doesn &apos;t brilliant , that it &apos;s not completely not my fault , right ?
because you see , i see that i have everything i &apos;ve got , and i don &apos;t have more than that .
so if you want to have better , you have to get there and your share of the deal of all of the deal .
okay . but if you don &apos;t do that -- you know what , then the hell of the hell .
i &apos;m going to keep writing , because that &apos;s my job .
and i want to give you to the conclusion that i was in my part of the jobs .
because ... ... in the end , it &apos;s like follows . and in the end , in the deserts of nordafrikas people with saints dances and the music to versammelt the hours of stundenlang , to dawn .
these strong were always great , because the dancers were , they were fantastic , and they were fantastic .
but it &apos;s happening , and again , very rare , something special happened . one of the characters was actually überweltlich .
and i know you know what i mean , because i know you &apos;ve seen all of your life in your life .
it was as a würde of the time and the dancers of pforte , and he did not have anything else than he did before -- 1,000 nights before . but it &apos;s got to get together .
and suddenly , suddenly , he doesn &apos;t even have more in the longer human .
he was laid off the inside and down and down , and it all erhellte through a göttliches fire .
when this happened at that time , people knew what was . they called it in his name .
they put the hands together and started singing : „ allah , allah , allah , god , god , god .
that &apos;s god , you know ?
interesting historische : when the mohren südspanien did they took them to diesen . the result of the pronunciation went to the centuries of „ allah , allah , allah “ zu , olé “ , olé , olé , that you still hear and flamenco-tänzen .
if a actors has done something , something that &apos;s done , „ allah , olé , allah , bravo , bravo , bravo “ , there &apos;s a flüchtiger view of god .
and that &apos;s great because we need that .
but the tricky thing is the next morning , when the dancers gets hold and realizes that it &apos;s 11 o &apos;clock in a tuesday -- and he &apos;s not a fünkchen of god in god .
he &apos;s just a alternder sterblicher with schmerzenden knees . and maybe he &apos;ll never get to this höhen .
and maybe never even call god , if it &apos;s spinning . but what should he be about to the rest of his life ?
that &apos;s hard .
that &apos;s one of the most fundamental korrekturen of a creative life .
but maybe it doesn &apos;t have to be quite so full of being the beginning of the beginning , that the most extraordinary thing of their existence are from them .
if you may believe that they &apos;re a loan -- from a unvorstellbaren source for a erlesene period of your life that &apos;s passed on somebody else when you &apos;re done with somebody else .
if we start to think about that , it changes everything .
so i started thinking about this and i think i think with certainty in the past months , while i was working on the book , which soon — as the dangerous , the dangerous , was really , really , really , was very dear to my abgefahrenen .
what i constantly have to tell myself is , if i &apos;m going crazy to you , is not fear .
it &apos;s not entmutigt .
just do your job .
it &apos;s still continue to be the contribution , whatever it is .
if your job is dancing , dance .
if the dumme genius , that &apos;s gestellt for the side , for a moment , a hauch of the wonders of miracles through your effort , then „ olé !
and if not , the dance still mean dance .
and „ olé ! “ for you .
i believe i feel and i should feel that .
„ olé ! “ for you , for you , just for you to do the mere human love and the eigensinn , to be there .
thank you .
thank you .
olé !
last year , i showed these two slides to illustrate that the arctic eiskappe that had the size of the lower 48 to the lower states , 40 percent of the lower states .
but this doesn &apos;t really matter so much enough of this particular problem , because it doesn &apos;t take the thickness of the ice .
in a sense , the arctic eiskappe is the most schlagende heart of our global global lives .
it grows in winter and the schrumpft .
the next slide i show you is a zeitrafferaufnahme which happened in the last 25 years .
the dauereis is markiert with red .
as you can see , it grows on the dunkelblau , this is the annual ice in winter ; it &apos;s gross in summer .
the so-called dauereis , five years old , or older , is almost like blood , which is from the body .
in 25 years , it will be here .
this is a problem because warming costs the frozen reason to auftaut the arctic ocean , where there are great amounts of gefrorenem carbon , which , if it &apos;s auftaut to methane methan .
compared to the whole amount of klimaverändernden , in the atmosphere , could double this amount of life , if we &apos;re going to move this critical spot .
today , sprudelt sprudelt in some flat lakes in alaska , in alaska , methane from the water .
professor walter walter in columbia is associated with another species to another flat sea water last winter .
wow !
you &apos;re fine . the question is how it &apos;s going to be ergehen .
and one reason is that huge accidental came from greenland to north .
this is a jährlicher tauwasserfluss .
but the volume are much bigger than ever before .
this is the kangerlussuaq river in southwest greenland .
if you want to know how the sea level rise is increasing by landeisschmelze , you &apos;re going to the ocean .
this rivers is taking a lot .
on the other end of the planet , antarctica , antarctica , the biggest eismasse on the planet .
last month , researchers said that all the continent has now been an negative eisbilanz .
and the westantarktis that is about a few unterwasserinseln , is particularly strong in the melt .
this is about 20 foot meereshöhe , like greenland .
in the himalayas , the drittgrössten eismasse , see the top up top , you have a few lakes that were glaciers .
40 percent of all people in the world are half of their trinkwassers from this schmelzwasser .
in the andes , this glacier is the trinkwasserquelle for this city .
the wassermengen have been expanding .
but if you &apos;re versiegen , it &apos;s going to be the most drinking water .
in california , a 40 of mental illness in the sierra verringerung reduction .
this is the speicherbecken .
and the predictions of how they read them , they &apos;re serious .
this austrocknung in the world leads to a dramatic spike in fire .
and the disasters all over the world have been in a really ausserordentlichen , and never that dagewesenen of an unprecedented .
so many of the time , many of the last 30 years , like in the vorhergegangenen , in the vorhergegangenen .
this is an entirely sealed entwicklungsmuster .
if you look at this in the historical context , you can see what it &apos;s going to do .
in the last five years , we have 70 million tons of co2 -- 25 hours -- 25 million tons every day in the oceans .
look at the area of the eastern pacific right now , from the american continent , and beiderseits of the indian subkontinents , where it &apos;s a new decline in the oceans .
the biggest faktor for global warming , besides deforestation , which is 20 percent , that &apos;s burning from fossil fuels .
oil is a problem , and coal is the most serious problem .
the united states are one of the two biggest verschmutzer , along with china .
and the suggestion was , a lot of other more kohlefabriken .
but we start to see a change .
here are the ones that were taken over the last few years , with some green alternative alternatives .
trotzdessen is a political role in our country .
and the kohleindustrien and ölindustrien have spent a $ viertelmilliarde dollar last mile to promote clean coal , what &apos;s a contradiction in itself .
this image reminded me of something .
to go around christmas , in my home , in my home , a billion tons of tons .
they saw it in the news .
this is in our entire country &apos;s entire country &apos;s entire country .
this happened to be a christmas .
one of the commercials of kohleindustrie to christmas .
frosty of the kohlenmann is a vergnügter , fröhlicher .
there is it in the envelope and plenty in america and to grow our economy .
frosty , the kohlenmann is sauberer .
he &apos;s affordable and liebenswert , and workers remain in the lohn and bread .
this is the source of most coal in west virginia .
the most powerful bergarbeiter is the head of massey coal .
let me say a very clear . al gore , nancy pelosi , harry reid , they don &apos;t know what they talk .
so the alliance for the alliance for us to live in the world .
this is one of her , a part of her .
in the coalergy , we see climate change as a serious danger for our business .
so we set up to the top zeil , a substantial geldsumme to bring a werbeaktion to the way to the truth of coal .
in fact , coal is not dirty .
we think it &apos;s clean -- and smells even more well even well .
so , don &apos;t worry about the climate change .
let &apos;s leave it to us .
saueber coal , you &apos;ve heard a lot of it .
so let &apos;s make a tour of these modern , clean kohlefabrik .
fantastic ! this machine is pretty noisy .
but it &apos;s the sound of the clean kohletechnologie .
and yet , the burning of coal is one of the hauptgründe for global warming , which is the remarkably clean kohletechnologie that you see here , changes everything .
look at it carefully , this is the today , clean kohletechnologie .
finally , the positive alternative to our economic challenge and our challenge of national security .
america is in a crisis , the economy , the national security , the climate crisis .
the red thread that everybody &apos;s connecting to the abhängigkeit is our dependence on kohlenstoff-basierenden , like dreckige coal and oil oil .
but now there is a bold , new solution to bring us from this misslichen situation .
versorge america with 100 percent of the electricity , within the next 10 years , within the next 10 years .
a plan to bring america back to work , to make more safer , and to help the global warming .
finally , a solution that is big enough to solve our problems .
versorge america , neu . find more out .
this is the last one .
it &apos;s about a neuversorgung of america .
one of the fastest ways of our old ways of old , dirty kraftstoffen , who are ersticken our world .
the future is here . wind , sun and a new energy system .
new investments to create good jobs .
versorge amerika , america . it &apos;s time to accept reality .
there &apos;s an old african saying , &quot; if you want to be fast , you go through .
if you want to come back , you get together . &quot;
we have to come far away , and it &apos;s fast .
thank you very much .
so i want to start asking you to start the time of your childhood when they were playing with bauklötzen .
while they realized how to take the hands and zugreift , the klötze , and moves , they learned to understand and solve problems with understanding and change through the understanding of understanding and change .
the spatial thinking is closely related to how we understand a majority of our environment .
as a computer scientist -- inspired by the kind of our interaction with real objects , and i started to wonder , what if we were able to use computers , which is , if we could take a digital fingerspitze on a flat arbeitsfläche -- what if we could take two hands and data , and we can take it as a beiden , and we can take it
this question was so straightforward that we &apos;ve decided to explore the rise of the answer and siftables .
in short , a siftable is a interactive computer in the size of a kekses .
you can get rid of your hand , you can see each other , you can actually adjust your movements , and they have a screen and a funkempfänger .
more importantly , are physically physically , why you can only move them out of the hands of hands and move .
and the siftables are an example of a new generation of hilfsmitteln to the manipulation of the manipulation .
and if these tools are going to be put together and develop a conscious mind to their movements , each other and the intricacies of our lives , we can start with the exploration of new and more powerful .
i start with some simple examples .
this is the siftable for the videowiedergabe , and when i kippe it into a direction , the video is moving forward , and if i &apos;m going to kippe it in the other direction , it &apos;s backwards .
and these interactive portraits , taking each other .
so if i put them together , they have their interest .
if you &apos;re surrounded by voneinader , you &apos;ll notice that also , and you can get something nervous .
and they feel like their movements and tilt .
one interesting result of the interactions we started to realize was that we could apply to the mundane gestures of data in the way that you can do about color like this with the liquids .
in this case , we have three siftables as a farbtöpfe konfiguriert , and i can use them to pour color in the center where they get mixed .
if we overdo it , we can get a little bit more sophisticated .
there also is some nice possibilities in education like languages , mathematics or logikspiele where we are going to see the potential of the patient and the results .
here i am -- this is a fibonacci series that i &apos;m going to have with a simple gleichungsprogramm .
this is a game with words that &apos;s kind of a mixture of scrabble and boggle .
basically , you get every round of performance in every random dates , and you &apos;re trying to make words , they &apos;re going to be a wörterbuch of a dictionary .
then , after about 30 seconds , and then , again , and you have a new and new possibilities .
thank you very much .
these are some kids who came to the media lab to the media lab and i could move them to it , and i &apos;ve taken a video of it .
they really loved it .
an interesting idea of this kind of applications is that you don &apos;t have to give people many instructions .
all you say is &quot; bildet words , &quot; and you know exactly what to do .
here &apos;s another couple of people who are doing it .
that &apos;s our jüngster beta-tester down there .
it turns out that he just wanted to get the siftables out of the siftables .
so for him , they were only bauklötze .
this is an interactive trickfilmanwendung .
we wanted to develop a lernmittel for sprachlerner .
that &apos;s felix .
it can bring new characters into the scene by rotating the siftable from the table , which shows this character .
here he lets the sun .
the sun rises is going on .
now , he &apos;s going to have a tractor in the scene .
the orange tractor .
good work ! yes !
he left the siftables and they can put it on the side of the characters that he can do ...
... his own story invent .
hello ! hello !
it &apos;s a story with open and he can decide how to evolve .
flying flying places .
the last example of that i &apos;ve been doing today , is a musik-sequencer for live-auftritte , which we &apos;ve developed recently and in the siftables as sound as the sound of sound like führungsstimme , bass and ethics .
every four different variations ; you can pick that you want to use .
and you can put these notes into the sequence that you can organize it in the measurable form .
and you put them together by just holding a ton-siftable on a sequenz-siftable .
there are effects that you can change live , like hall and filters .
you connect him with a certain sound and neigt it .
and then the bigger effects of how to speed and volume that you &apos;re on the sequence .
so we &apos;re looking at .
we start in that führungsstimme führungsstimme in two sequenz-siftable , and this in a row , they expand and add a little more of the voice .
now i &apos;m putting a bass .
now i &apos;m going to do something more to do something .
and now i took the filters with the drums that i can control the effect .
i can accelerate the whole sequence by turning the speed of the speed of the other way .
and now i took the filters with the bass , and something more expression .
i can get the sequence while they got .
i don &apos;t have to plan you in the front of the day , but can improvise ; they were währenddessen or shorten .
and i can finish up the whole sequence , by the way i look at the lautstärke-siftable left .
thank you very much .
so , as you can see , my desire to develop new mensch-computer-schnittstellen , which is better to fit the better way of our brains and bodies .
and i had time to give you a part of this new design-welt and some of the ways that we work in our lab .
the idea i want to give you with the way to the way to the door is to the door of the werzeugen of werzeugen , with digital media , which are the information in our world that are using our demands .
thank you very much , thank you .
i &apos;m looking forward to the conversations with you .
yeah , good afternoon .
i &apos;m happy to myself that i &apos;m there .
yeah , well , what should be biohacking ?
i have to start a little bit of a bit , and it &apos;s busy beschäftigt with modern molecular biology .
i &apos;m studying molecular and i &apos;ve been doing a few years with the biohacking , and i started to know because i just wanted to know , and also , and also , i want to do whatever i learned in the study of theory .
so , that was my primary motivation motivation .
so it was a curiosity , and i wanted to sort of get closer to the matter , so .
i think the molecular biology now is , so , in general , is the biotechnology , all you count , synthetic biology and so on .
so important , now is extremely important , and much more important , much more important than that .
there &apos;s all kinds of things like this whole entire universe , on the äckern .
now there are craig venter in the u.s.a , which is trying to make it biofuel , so gasoline from algae .
there &apos;s also some things that are totally in love , but most people , most people , but for example , the waschmittelenzyme that allow us to wash us with 40 degrees , are also called gentechnisch optimierte .
and the list can continue to stay on .
and so from interest in this thing , this technology , i &apos;m going to keep on .
so what are you hack now ?
most people know most of most people know that from the softwarebereich .
computers , and then it &apos;s going to be in media , yes , the hackers , the hackers would be somewhere and you on the ground and so on .
that &apos;s kind of a traurig for the hackerszene , because that doesn &apos;t really matter what you actually really started and what it &apos;s actually done .
and that &apos;s the software-hacker , in the &apos; 70s , achtzigerjahren with computerbasteln , and it &apos;s also the internet .
and it &apos;s about a spielerische , creative , works , sort of , a problem .
and the problem , that &apos;s not just a technical problem , it can also be a social problem , it can also be a zugangsproblem , which is a beliebige , so a question , a question , and how can you do that , and how can you do that .
and it &apos;s been halt with software , but there &apos;s also a whole bastlerszene , there &apos;s also a whole bastlerszene , which is all kinds of things all kinds of things .
and now , in biology , and i want to take this metaphor from the synthetic biology , which is that biology is a more abstract code , which is not quite a abstrakter , because it &apos;s dynamic , because it &apos;s dynamic , because it &apos;s matter , so matter matter , so it &apos;s real matter , and not only cyber .
but it &apos;s also a code , and it can also be coding , and you can also program it also , and it &apos;s also hacken , and that &apos;s what i find fascinating , and i just wanted to go to a lot deeper .
that actually has only been really eight , really eight ways , this networks , these networks .
there &apos;s hackteria dotcom , which is originally from switzerland , which is with europe and with cooperation in india , but now , in any of the world , but now are members of the world , or active people around the world .
this is a more artistic story , so there &apos;s a lot of artists and philosophers , with scientists in working with scientists , with these technologies , and they &apos;re dealing with these technologies and ask questions and the creative , there is museumsausstellungen and yes , all kinds of things .
but it &apos;s always about finding a lockeren access to have a spielerischen , so that &apos;s a spielerischen to have it .
and then there is do-it-yourself-bio dotcom , d.i.y.bio .
this is from the u.s.a a network , which is actually a kind of forum where you &apos;re going to go and talk to a lot of data .
and they &apos;re a little bit technical , and also a little bit of businessmäßiger , and then they &apos;re going to ask , you know , ja questions .
and from these networks that made all the popular popular , it took a scene that i &apos;d like to take out for a moment .
so here in the left , you see it , you see , in the left , this is a hackerspace , so basically a private school , like a private school , non-profit school , where anyone can be .
children , old , all kinds of people go , just go around and just look at it , they have a lab and see what they can do when those laborprotokolle laborprotokolle .
here on the left is a group in indonesia , house-of-natural-fibers , which is , in fact , that &apos;s been quite long .
already as a result of these other networks .
and also , in a artistic aspect of biological materials and , yes , also , also , also , of the biologischen , and combine that in a pretty much sort of abgefahre .
a group of muslims i met a while ago , who is a studentengruppe , which is to convey the public , which is to convey more , what they want to learn in college and they have so on straßenfesten little actions and trying to explain what &apos;s going on , which is what &apos;s d.n.a .
and i put up in the other image in the other museum in copenhagen in the medical museum in the medical museum in combination in the medical museum in the medical world .
and that &apos;s , yes , it &apos;s mostly quite young people , but the only thing that actually translates to all the united united states is that fascination is about technology .
and what you can do with it , and you also can do it in the society to zuzugehen and ask , so what do you want to do , you have interest in this way to give you so that ?
so , o.k , to turn biology , to get it to somehow kind of material .
you need biological materials , and you need the tools , but it &apos;s also a lab , and that &apos;s a lab .
and what you usually find is that you normally understands under a lab , which is so sort of abgefahrene machines , extremely expensive , extremely extremely expensive , extremely distanziert , ausgebildete , educated , educated , educated , they have so much academics with doktortitel and so on .
and our approach was to say , to say , o.k , that actually , you don &apos;t have to do that .
it &apos;s actually not necessary because every every single product has actually been higher technology than most laborgeräte , that &apos;s really like that .
and the premise of this premise is , for example , brian degger in england , a minimallabor zusammenzustellen , then a dampfdruckkochtopf , and then , and then , and then , and then , so suppenbrühe , and then it has bred bacteria .
so every single one that &apos;s been a soup of a soup that he had left too long , even before it has been .
i &apos;ve been trying to take this into my lab , a little bit auszuweiten , and then bought me so second-hand-equipment on ebay , trying to do a vaterschaftstest , so that &apos;s so / , so that &apos;s so / .
now , that shouldn &apos;t be a joke , but it &apos;s not a joke .
and here in the picture , you see the lab in the picture , in anführungsstrichen , so the uni garage , which has been in the college , a group of paris , which has been in paris , which is what was happening in paris , and pretty successfully , it &apos;s quite a very successful thing , and i also want to get a project in a
and this is biocurious , who also mentioned hackerspace hackerspace , this yes , this is a kind of volkshochschule in the principle of molecular biology .
and yes , you see it &apos;s relatively relatively relative , so that &apos;s the very relatively relatively relatively relatively relatively relative , so that &apos;s where you do this alone , so to large major organizations that are already going to be already in institutionalisierter in institutionalisierter form .
but always always the idea that it &apos;s just going to be easy and accessible .
the first project we did as a international group , when we were aware of our self , o.k , and we &apos;re now going to be very real -- and we &apos;re online , and we know that people who are always going on and so forth .
and then , from the do-it-yourself-bio website of founder , and it &apos;s been said , well , we have to meet real time , and then two events , and then two events , a in ten , zweitausend 10 , and shortly in the u.s.a , in san francisco .
and then , there &apos;s been also about , yes , ja , who we are , what are we going to do , what do we want to share ?
and what are our values , and what are our zielsetzung , our zielsetzung ?
and then we have an code-of-conduct investigator .
that was quite intuitive , so everyone just has its wishes , his desires , and what it &apos;s like , and then , expressed it .
there was one , i think , a good code .
and we have no idea that , but it &apos;s true , i think , has already been very well well , that people are quite pretty well known as well .
and we even have tried to get that in the academic world again , but there &apos;s not something that &apos;s not so .
so i think we &apos;re actually out of the biohackerszene in the ways , even one step further than the world &apos;s world .
yeah , what projects do we actually do ?
a project i did with the hackteria-netzwerk in switzerland , was that we were going to have a so-called optical trap or optical illusion .
this is , if you focus a laser home , you can put little particles in the air , or in the liquid , and so , then , that &apos;s where it is then , so how such a traktorbeamstrahl in principle .
it really works , this is really made in the academic setting , and we thought , well , we &apos;ve got to get o.k , that we might have , then , then , then the webcam , the lens , you have a microscope , you have a microscope , and you have a microscope , you have a microscope .
that &apos;s what you can see .
and then we have a d.v.d brenner brenner and the brenner brenner the laser and then try to focus on this camera .
and unfortunately , unfortunately , it didn &apos;t work , but we &apos;ve learned a lot of things .
so another project that &apos;s made from the french group in paris , that &apos;s got , it &apos;s pretty cool .
and he &apos;s so a hirnwellenmessgerät , such a hirnwellenmessgerät , so e.e.g , so something that has been preoccupied with neurobiologie , his nickname is sam .
he then got this helmet that helmet , and in cooperation with the museum of the museum .
and then they could go into the room , in the room , on these chair , they put these helmet .
then they measured their brainwaves , and the after what they thought they thought , or how they thought , then there are different lights in the space .
it was a pretty schickes project .
another thing that has been with this vaterschaftstestgeschichte has been doing that is the p.c.r , which is the polymerase-kettenreaktion , complicated , complicated word .
so it &apos;s about copying genes , to vermehren , to reproduce , fragments , can you can be able to get them visible .
so if i do this , the profiler on the scene , go to the scene , go there , you can get there any haarproben , and then they can go to this method , and you can say , o.k , this hair belongs to this person , that hair .
and the machines that make something like that , they &apos;re pretty expensive , which you &apos;re going to buy , you get to the billigsten , that &apos;s where you go .
and that &apos;s not in the hobbybereich , but it &apos;s a really cool technology that can also be very much .
so this is just a application of many , that you can do with it .
and they have two two bastler rangesetzt and said , and i think , o.k , that &apos;s how we do it and cheaper , and then we have the open source , frei hardware , elektroniksachen , and now that &apos;s the marktreife , and now we have the marktreife , and now the cheapest capital of these devices are the world .
i think somehow , like this , or something like that .
but anyway , it &apos;s still not cheap , but it &apos;s definitely in a frame where it &apos;s clearly about it .
so , i think it &apos;s a very gelungener hack .
a project i had been started to build a gene-gun .
gene-gun is , yes , like this kind of luftdruckpistole , which are about so far , two inches or so .
you invites lädt , and then the goldpartikel into this luftdruckpistole , and then i put on the zwiebeln , and then they got the shining into the shining .
so the device you can see that doesn &apos;t work .
but this is my prototype , but pretty much looked at this , so on a branch that puts this thing , electronics and pressure , but it was the pressure to go up to the right , the thing is broken .
and then i took a sahnespender and it &apos;s on it .
a sahnespender , if you do the full power with water , that &apos;s the enough pressure , so i think , like this , vierzig bis , etwa , etwa .
and so you can get particles so much enough to accelerate enough enough and then go into the zwiebel .
and the commercial device is about fünfzehntausend euros or something like something like that , so to take a fifty million .
so it didn &apos;t have the same efficiency , but it &apos;s basically achievable .
so , in the moment , the kernanliegen of the scene is to raise these availability of technology and also the information and the verständlichkeit to regard that there &apos;s more people get there .
because , as the beginning said , it &apos;s a extremely important technology , and most people have come up with relatively little , and also no chance to form really well .
because , if you just read about it , it &apos;s not the same thing , as if you &apos;ve seen it once or seen it .
and i think technology is always more important in our modern societies .
and if you can make a decision in a informierter way , you can make reasonable decisions in society and anyone else , you need to need access to knowledge and technology .
and you have to do it , and you can understand it and understand it .
and then the firmiert then unter below the schlagworten knowledge and citizen science .
so that you can get to the bürger , and you can have to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able
and that &apos;s the kernanliegen of the biohackern .
these are people who have eingetragen at least in the website , d.i.y.bio-dot-org website .
this is a relatively remarkable number of people worldwide worldwide .
and what &apos;s interesting is also that they &apos;re also in southeast slices .
that &apos;s what i think there are fewer people to be picked up , and in fact , in fact .
so i know from some of the ones that don &apos;t have eingetragen .
and these are just the biohacker , the individual people .
and also , in part , with these hackerspaces , so these places together .
and that &apos;s the very beginning .
as i said , zweitausendacht did it first .
and so hackerspaces , the computerhackerspaces , the c-base was the first , the first , neunzehnhundertfünfundneunzig .
and this is a gigantic network of very good , yes , infrastrukturzentren , infrastrukturzentren , all around the world .
and we hope that we can also take a lot of attention , and then also clean well , well , it &apos;s also good , so that &apos;s where it &apos;s going to be involved in .
and i would invite anyone to engage with it and even myself .
it &apos;s not so simple , but it &apos;s not impossible , but it &apos;s not impossible , if you &apos;re enough curiosity and enough energy , you get too far .
thank you for listening .
that &apos;s it .
yes , hi .
how do we work people ?
this is a question that &apos;s very moved to me as a designer , but also in the forschungsbereich usability and all things in the domain of the world .
it &apos;s about how to encounter people in interactive media , so they can use these interactive media , and they create a wider experience .
i think that the interactive media &apos;s media in us is kognitive , cognitive models , in cognitive models , is that , in our biological memory , very long , very long , very long , very long time , and we just can get the eben media media .
and this is very amazing because you believe that these hochtechnologie , that you have to get that one actually , you know , that one actually will be in the future , but actually it &apos;s the future that &apos;s right in the future , in our archaischen roots .
what are the archaische models ?
i &apos;ve got four stichworte and i &apos;d like to explain to you about a second .
and archaischen cognitive models , and that &apos;s the models that we have in the pre-industrial era .
and to these archaischen models that we have a general natural relationship to the virtuality .
that sounds like a prinzipiell reading .
i &apos;m going to go back to the same time , and i &apos;m going to show you a natural relationship to the virtuality .
the second aspect is that we &apos;ve been able to be able to speak for that archaischen models , very , very bildlich , although we use a kodifizierte language .
and the third area that explains itself .
we all know that the interactive media &apos;s interactive media model are definition by definition , which is the dominant denial of linearity , and of course , that tells us that we &apos;re seeing the linearity system today .
the fourth point is that the story is a place for us .
now , how is this with the virtuality that actually is the most natural thing about the world .
i want to show you that first time .
how many doors got the house that you live ?
and we &apos;re not going to get to spontan to me , but it will happen and just happen at the moment .
they go in the spirit of this house , in demn , they live , and look at how many doors there are .
and that &apos;s what they do .
they virtualisieren the reality , and it &apos;s all the way that you can do .
fantastic , right ?
and there we give us a mühe for the most fundamental reality of our v.r.-labor , and we can actually actually see that all the time .
and this asset that the virtual reality is the virtual reality of the reality that people have required in the pre-industrial time , because they didn &apos;t have anything .
they didn &apos;t have books .
or they didn &apos;t have any fotolitografie .
they didn &apos;t have mass media .
the only thing that they had was her head .
and in that head , it played off .
and in this head , knowledge and using these virtual images , the imagination , was also passed on .
and that &apos;s why it &apos;s so strong in us that we can deal with the virtuality so well .
the interesting thing is , if i can make a little trip .
yeah , that &apos;s what we do .
the interesting thing is that at that time , that man was at the time of human simultaneously and medium itself .
if you think about a bit of thinking .
what are media today ?
then you &apos;ll notice that it has a change .
but i &apos;ll get to the same time .
the wesentliches tool for the informationsvermittlung have been to have been .
schamanen , priests , so-called wissenswächter , were extra to keep in stories in stories .
and today , we &apos;re still very , very strong about stories .
the author of the book is the storytelling of the storytelling , jonathan gottschall , we still have a year for every year for a year every year for the rezeption of stories .
that means for a kid that it was going to be the most erreichen of the großjährigkeit that the most of the most popular time of his life has spent the rezeption of stories .
now we think our love of stories about that we have been as a child on the lap of our parents .
no , no , no .
that goes far further , and the cultures of the pre-industrial time .
but in the field of interactive media as particularly amazing , that we have been involved in our biological memory , which is the ability to think more .
i &apos;ve got one example of the nordamerikanischen tribe of the nootka-indianer .
and life lived in the küstenregion of british columbia .
and as you can see , it &apos;s a very inselreiches area , and you had to navigate it from island to get to get food .
and they have done this with so-called genannten lead-landkarten .
you may know , if you &apos;re interested in a little bit interested in the australian world .
they have similar principles .
they don &apos;t have any lead-landkarten , but they &apos;ve been using the so-called songlines or traumpfade .
and what &apos;s interesting about this is that the navigation and the topography of regions of regions was mapped by songs .
and the language of the language was rang .
that means you &apos;re talking about sound and across rhythm .
and this sound and this rhythm , the geology , the geology , the topography of a region , and that &apos;s also allowed to put these songs and sit down and then to the left and then to move the right , and then to move the right back to the left .
why don &apos;t we sing , but not to get from a to b ?
anyway , it &apos;s not to navigate .
what &apos;s going on , what &apos;s going on ?
now , what happens is that this is so powerful as well .
we &apos;ve moved in the so-called so-called genannten vogt-zeitalter .
now , it &apos;s happening , and it &apos;s happened , and it &apos;s the book , and it &apos;s the fotolitografie .
and that &apos;s what happens is that we have the responsibility for our memories and the own production of our individual memories , they have been expanding external media .
on the book and the image .
so we have unfortunately , we have a piece of god &apos;s a piece of verlernt to virtualisieren .
and the early days is actually designed for us to us , and has nothing to do with it .
bruce brown , a famous designforscher at the brighton-university is so far , he &apos;s called the book and the picture , not the way that we call the internet and so forth , that these mass media companies have been calling that these days of our memories and our ability to have facial surgery .
let &apos;s do a little zwischenbilanz .
from the vogt-zeitalter to the machine machine .
what does this really affect our thinking on our thinking and on our erinnerungsvermögen ?
then the verblassenden einflüsse of the pre-industrial vorindustriellen kulturen .
and they &apos;re going to be over the course of the centuries and more überschrieben by the time of the maschinenzeitalters .
that means instead of remind us , we have a look at the very strong , far , the masses , the erinnerungen of memories that we can hang out our personal memories .
we don &apos;t produce more even more .
we have an abstract language , a abstraktahierte language .
we &apos;re not going to put things in the bildern things that things don &apos;t look at in images , but we &apos;re putting them into our language .
we used to think of that things are linear .
and we have the linearity system as a law and there &apos;s just just exceptions how the non-linearität .
what &apos;s stayed with us is the storytelling .
still , we &apos;re still storytelling as a informationsvermittlung , very strong , very strong .
the question is , what is going on ?
we had the vogt -zeitalter , we had the machine and we &apos;re going to take this to cyber-zeitalter .
that sounds very spacig , and it sounds very , very , very , very , very , very carefully , i know .
but these concepts of the cyber-zeitalters , which gives us this opportunity back to our capabilities back again .
it &apos;s about virtuality , it &apos;s about non-linearität , it &apos;s about storytelling .
i want to explain a little bit about a little bit .
there are tons of concepts like the augmented reality , which is called the extended reality .
so if you look at google glasses , and then , in fact , this is a concept that makes us combine the virtual world with the real world , which is called our affinität to the virtualisierung , which is the virtual light , natural natural disasters will be again .
another example is the so-called virtual reality .
so , this is how this is , of course , this is something that we might sound in , because we &apos;re not born into existenten , virtual worlds , very after the role model of the war .
and another example is another example of the ambienten , intelligent systems .
these are spaces that can respond to a human being on a human .
all of this is the ability to do the ability to do our basic ability to accept as a real habitat .
i &apos;m going to have , and i hope that the video works , a very , very beautiful project , which is the bachelorarbeit of michael burk , ann-kathrin krenz , joris klause and jan-moritz müller .
and the two letzteren are also here today .
maybe you can get up to you , so they can talk to the two over the project .
and this project , i brought as an example of how to get back to this archaischen , cognitive models .
now , this is a game , i have to say .
what the storytelling of course , is extremely entgegenkommt and it &apos;s a computer game .
and if i say , you have very likely to see that there are very likely to be a very likely to be able to do people with some people in the irgendwelchen , or that they play with some of the konsole in the hand .
anyway , that they &apos;re doing it .
this is a game for a game .
and that &apos;s how they thought i &apos;d take the outside the world , so i &apos;m going to discover the real world again .
and this game connects the virtual world , so the data that we produce the datenraum that we produce with the real world .
i apologize that i have to be so much about this as well .
you can tell that much better , because there &apos;s more much more than that .
and it &apos;s about that i &apos;ve taken a city by looking at what &apos;s positive or negative .
and so i get a whole different view , a very different impression , which is a very different impression , which is a little bit of a stadt and positive zones of a city and a very different way to get a very different way to a real world of a real city .
and that &apos;s what we &apos;re going to do now .
oh , what you can see here , sorry , is another explanation of what you see .
of course , this virtual world is in the walls of our cities , is yes .
and with a kind of a flashlight , we can do this virtual worlds .
so , i &apos;d like to have this kind of my my life , and that &apos;s the kind of the qualities that we have in the vogt and the skills that we have acquired the hilfe of the vogt -zeitalter , and that we can get in the help of complex products , and that in the future , in fact , in the future , in the future
thank you very much .
yeah , i &apos;m very happy to be able to be .
i &apos;ve been asked to see if this bag was a sprechender , and i &apos;m being talking about .
that &apos;s not going to do .
i &apos;m also going to also give the same thing , what &apos;s inside there .
but i &apos;m just doing it just like this , &quot; what &apos;s more curious about it .
yes , kids are inherently from nature or curious , and they should be curious .
i &apos;m out of the house , so i &apos;m going to be the issue of curiosity and how the curiosity think and why we &apos;re thinking about , and why we might also wonder and neu and have to neu it again .
this is a whole range of things that you &apos;re going to be on with the actual sense of what you &apos;re doing .
when professors are being neugierig , they &apos;re often going to be häufig in the n forschungssemester .
and that &apos;s what i had in the last half year .
a forschungssemester system to the subject of the natural of the user of the design of the design .
now , you &apos;re going to ask yourselves why , why do all the promote gestalter on itself with natural natürlichen , archaischen urformen of communication , and so on .
and i just hold one of these small devices , because things are always more intuitive , always , more intuitive , more intuitiver , and you have to look at what &apos;s really going to be , what is , what is benutzungsfreundlich , which is benutzungsfreundlich .
and before the background , i was natural into the field of design , so the next generation of computers in the human brain is doing the relationship with the human being in the relationship with the human werkzeuge , and how the computer of computers changed from the computer screen .
so i was dealing with it , when , of course , or intuitively .
maybe you also have to look at it again .
why is that what &apos;s happening ?
so if we look at the evolution of our society , here we move from third , and we &apos;re now moving from the third , or gesellschaftsform .
so the modern one in the modern world .
every society is a geprägt .
at the beginning , the stammesgesellschaft through the language .
that means that you &apos;ve talked to a common language , you could communicate with each other , you could have miteinander , or in other areas , has been gebildet , and the villages and dörfer has created it , and created it in the nen .
but the primärmedium was , but the language was very natural , something very significant .
and you also had to learn , not a toddler , and we can &apos;t speak of nature , but we &apos;re learning it sukzessive and all of course .
so that &apos;s what we &apos;ve been talking about the ancient society and the first form of abstraction .
this was a riesen-aufschrei , because of course , the history of the living language began to manifestieren in the form of writing , which is called what &apos;s fluid and alive , and i &apos;m going to go and meißele it in the stone and so i can &apos;t help it .
the after i meißel and when i meißel , it &apos;s , of course , a whole different way of being a kind of alive from themselves .
but sukzessive , the script , then , they got als , erhielt .
then the next generation came in that we actually live in today .
this is the durch of pressure and print geprägte with gutenberg and other .
at the time , it was a affront , a affront , where adel , klerus and other people have said , are you really , really , if the people begins to read , then the afterwards , and that &apos;s , of course , it &apos;s ridiculous .
and now we get into the next generation and the exciting is , a generationswechsel is just the only several hundred years and we &apos;re really in this phänomenalen phase that we &apos;re going to join this .
and the confused of course , is totally , because we see on the one side of the media , social media , facebook , facebook , etc .
with the total transparency , which is what the new thinking thinking is , what the old thinking thinks of the old thinking , don &apos;t tell you that in the lasagne , and no beef is more than other phenomena , which is just , i want to leave you with the vertuschen and the will .
and these two worlds are just aufeinander , new and old thinking .
and it &apos;s exciting when you &apos;re the one , this new society , these computergesellschaft , entlehnt , very many of the mechanisms of principles and archaischer &apos;s brain from stammesgesellschaft .
but no longer on local level , but on a global level .
we understood that the weather is global .
that the topic is ecology in the human ecology .
not if i think , when i think , in a mirror , and the neighbor thinks they &apos;re less ecologically , it doesn &apos;t work .
that means that from local village , is actually a global village with the same principles , which is , of course , natural , but also the total transparency .
as you knew in the village , who was in the village who &apos;s done with whom and when , this is what happens to this expansion of our self through this mobile device on the way .
it &apos;s that we know , we know , global , and getting faster and more and more and better .
as it used to be used to the center of the village .
before the background , i have to do it with this , which is , what is it , what is we , and what we might have , of course , what we might have , what is we also , but also instinctively , what makes the difference ?
because often , people can &apos;t do it , they can &apos;t do it benutzungsfreundlich with everybody .
so you have to engage with it , which means that , and not just simply make it easy to change it , but it &apos;s also going to be better .
and , of course , of course , and how can i take it and just as a creator of that , and just as a creator of it , they just make things like that , so they &apos;re a benutzungsfreundlich , so they &apos;re fun , because they &apos;re fun and they &apos;re just using them .
you &apos;re going to start , even though , in the process , with the subject of perception and the wahrnehmungspsychologie .
and that &apos;s what you start , and of course , where you start and say , and say , okay , now i &apos;m just looking at the inside of you .
and what &apos;s like this , because it &apos;s actually going to be ?
so how do we work if we were there ?
and what does , of course , intuitively , and how do our channels of perception and how to work the cognitive ?
because steve jobs has said , &quot; you , you to to dig deeper it .
so you have to watch in the detail , if i want to do something more or intuitive to make a intuitive to do that .
and you see , you &apos;re going to have a very strong , most of us , most of us have just think of , are even seven anerkannte , there &apos;s certainly going to be the next one to the next , and i think , as an extension , is also helping our self .
and look how we process information , how do we take information ?
alone , tell you what information ?
information is any difference that makes a difference .
many use the word , but not even what it means to detail .
but i have to understand the core , in the understanding of information , when information is information , when information is going to know information , so i know how i can also do things like things , or natürlich , or natürlich .
and of course , how to make design influence .
we see this , when i get things , i can design the way on the right , where i don &apos;t know what &apos;s salt and pepper , or i can make it kind of intuitively , by doing things .
so much of the natural thing that is in a gourd , but i see , sort of , sort of , sort of , where the salt and pepper .
and if i say somebody , you give me a salt or pepper pepper , and then he will be , you know , where is what &apos;s inside .
and the left is just the way it &apos;s intuitive and then hopefully that there is no sugar inside , the salt there just have to be .
but also our perception , how do you acquire it and the &quot; nature she too .
for example , this perception in context .
the right circle is bigger than the small ones , although that &apos;s not the case , but they &apos;re just the case of large , and yet , it &apos;s changing our perception , depending on the after the context of things we are looking at .
anybody know what this is ?
come on .
pattern recognition should work still .
there &apos;s been there to be more to my glasses .
so it &apos;s n circle .
a second circle is already beginning to get some resemblance to the other or too .
and then , if i &apos;m going to be a halboval , we don &apos;t see any more attractive , which is not only one unit , circle and , but we see a unit , we don &apos;t see more bits , a circle , a circle , a different cycle .
it &apos;s called gestaltgesetz or eben , which is also affecting us in perception as well as well as well .
so , important for the designers , the most popular semester , the most amazing semester of the tollen .
gestaltgesetz of the closeness , the continuity of the continuity and so on .
so , in the third , i &apos;ve been forgotten in the third .
but that &apos;s a essential important thing , if you want to make things like things like things like that .
the next phenomenon , which is also very interesting to the benefit .
now , it &apos;s very banal , but it &apos;s very exciting if you &apos;re doing it in a very efficient way .
so we looked at the eyes and now think we &apos;re seeing from the front of the back .
that &apos;s wrong .
you see the back to the back of the back .
and that &apos;s what they &apos;re looking at is a very mean to start , that you see something that they recognize , beispielweise circle .
that means we just see our vision , before we see it , again , back to our seheapparat in our seheapparat , to say , to say , okay , okay , okay , ok .
i &apos;m going to have this kind of cognitive rückkoppelung , you have what you want to see .
and then that &apos;s there , it &apos;s coming back .
and then it goes back to forward because the back room doesn &apos;t go back and say , now , now , let me just go back and look at the time you see , and that &apos;s what you see , and that &apos;s what you want to see .
and then it goes back to the back , and then it &apos;s actually going to be seen .
so , a whole , very sophisticated process of how certain things happen , and what &apos;s happening to these things .
i don &apos;t know who knows this picture .
and that &apos;s what happens exactly the same thing i &apos;ve just described .
now , everybody &apos;s trying to recognize that pattern .
i don &apos;t know who &apos;s what &apos;s going on .
somebody can see something specific ?
a dalmatiner , right .
once i saw that , that that &apos;s the fact that there &apos;s a dalmatiner in the air , you know .
you &apos;ll never forget it , because i &apos;m going to show you where the dalmatiner is .
now , you see the dalmatiner .
and further , now you &apos;re going to see him .
so , i mean , i actually have a verdorben verdorben , that they don &apos;t have any pattern , but i have konditioniert them within a short time again , again , again , again , to see this dog in this fuzzy picture .
and that &apos;s this projection of the time , looking at rückkopplung , rückkopplung .
now i know it , and now i &apos;m going to see that i see the dalmatiner .
i see the dalmatiner .
so , quite exciting processes that then , in this , yes , it &apos;s actually not , but it &apos;s actually not in this rosanen mass of mass .
anyone who knows what three seconds ?
for long , yes .
that &apos;s our present .
so , it &apos;s also interesting to know as a designer .
if i know something three seconds , until i sort of slipped from the present to the present , i can also bridge very well in the present , where i &apos;m going to get it through , i &apos;m always going to get to the end of the next bit .
that &apos;s not just as a present .
and then it moves into the past and so i can get very elegantly , for example , to the computer , if i know this phenomenon .
what is the fünfundzwanzig milliseconds ?
yes , milliseconds .
also a very exciting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the time you fall in love with .
that means , if you know that now , you &apos;re looking at the way to look like long , because i don &apos;t have any gewähr for what &apos;s going on .
and sechzehn milliseconds , also a very exciting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the most powerful of most of the most perceptions that we have .
that means that first impression is happening in a rapidly fast way of doing things like we see things .
and as we see things , we see what we &apos;re looking at and how we &apos;re going to protect ourselves against our environment , so we can see that accordingly .
of course , the creator of the designers , not only with the topic and neuronale verarbeitungen , or kognitionsergonomie , but primarily , of course with the subject of the mensch-objekt-beziehung .
so how is a human being about with certain things .
there is once there &apos;s a produktsprachlich of the practical functions , so that &apos;s so formale things like that .
there are anzeichen-funktionen , where i &apos;m exactly where i actually need to reach .
but there &apos;s also the symbolic features , why is somebody for such a small täschchen , where they hardly reinpasst , so horrende sums of money , even though it &apos;s not so practical ?
there are more on the symbolischen , on the bedeutungsebene , which we think of as a creator of , of course , as well as a result of , of course , as well .
back to my actual topic , the user interface interface and the topic , which is also dahinterliegt , is usability .
usability means , how can i get to achieve a certain target , or how can a user in a certain special effect is effective in a certain position of nutzungskontext , efficiently and zufriedenstellend a goal .
that &apos;s how it &apos;s like this norm to the norm .
how can i do something more benutzungsfreundlich ?
can i just push this directly , or i need it , i need it for the entsprechende of the training .
and fewer usable or benutzungsfreundlich is it .
that i just made it different and beautiful , doesn &apos;t mean it &apos;s better .
you have to understand that .
and then , if you look at the software that we saw , you &apos;re going to see , you &apos;re going to understand why , why neunundneunzig percent of our software is not intuitiv , or not on anhieb , that i-pad i-pad in many areas , even though it &apos;s very much more intuitive , although it &apos;s already a lot of intuitive to be a classic .
and this is not intuitive benutzbarkeit since apple ein , nen elementarer , if i could make technology devices .
why ?
because in the usually , we usually regel through this new kind of nutzbarkeit , so the natural user is ínterfaces , for example , five times faster , five times at the average of our goal .
you have to imagine that , if you do something about the classical softrware , five hours , and you need to take that new kind of software , just one hour of the natural software .
that doesn &apos;t mean they &apos;re probably going to be four hours home , but your employers , or someone else is going to be doing it with the four hours .
but i want to say that it &apos;s a corresponding process of imagery , of course , to achieve certain things .
so if we go back into the area of software , here &apos;s the first command of the line interfaces that were very abstract , where you &apos;ve taken months to deal with these systems .
and then the next thing that has been here with the fourth of brain , or mental model , as the software eergonomen , have worked on , and you would have a vision of something that &apos;s metaphor , the metaphor of one of the desktop to make the computer .
so not just nullen and ones or kryptische code , but a metaphor .
that made this whole thing , and it &apos;s also a lot better than that .
the next generation of graphischen works very much more with behavior .
so , i &apos;m going to point out that as a creator , i think , very much more often than that .
that &apos;s also such a paradigm shift .
i think that this is always going to be the case for success , just to be a applikation .
and then , if i put a step in this game , where i &apos;m going to have a voice , by the way , by sprache , by geste , and no longer by mouse , and no longer just drive things , then i &apos;m still going to be more and more .
but that leads to me again , when the things are going to be more intuitive ?
if you &apos;re becoming a intuitive , and then i have to go back to my little friend here , and i &apos;m going to see what &apos;s going on , and what &apos;s the point of view of the kognitionsergonomie , when is it really important ?
and that &apos;s always for us , is always a thing , if i think about it a little bit more about it .
so , i don &apos;t want to think that he wants to think , but it &apos;s just going to be a verhältnismäßig .
the less i think about it , the more intuitive , it &apos;s the intuitive .
and what does that mean for the designers ?
that means that we can see that we can translate existing handlungsmodelle from a different scenario , for example , the metaphor , then i can do this as a creator .
that means i can just take a intuitive , human handlungsmodell to a software and so that the software is going to do the software .
and of course , the question of course is actually the most helpful handlungsschema of us , and now i &apos;ve already talked about it .
this is called the sogenannte osit-modell .
it &apos;s used to each of us and osit is a acronym and it &apos;s for orientieren , selektieren , inform , informieren .
so , what &apos;s happening is that all of you will do all the time , but it does it , it &apos;s unconscious and it &apos;s kind of intuitive , or part of the countries .
the model is already becoming ausprägt in the womb , and it &apos;s interkulturell , so it works at the world at the top and old , and it &apos;s going to be used all the time without the most that most of the time that most of us have been there .
osit osit , about 50 to siebzigtausend times the siebzigtausend , so in the sleep , you &apos;ve found that it &apos;s less often than the day .
i can now have this mental workload , selektieren , selektieren , inform , transagieren , transagieren , übertragen .
and through this kind of transmission , similar to the metaphor of the desktops , but not a metaphor of a physical object , but a metaphor of a handlungsmusters , one of a handlungsprinzips .
and that &apos;s on a higher grail of the benutzungsfreundlichkeit than the transmission of a classic metaphor , which is the desktops .
and if i &apos;m übertrage this , like i &apos;m übersicht , as a übersicht , informieren , informieren , informieren , informieren , and i can see it in the details , and i can go to the detail , and i can &apos;t go to the detail , i can send it to someone or einkaufen or so on , and so on .
then i can transmit all the entire translation .
i try to take that out of a beispiels .
he has eaten pies .
übersicht : now i &apos;m going to start with the object , can be rauszoomen , reinzoomen .
i &apos;ll get the entire overview , now can be filter and can tell me , show all of me just about chocolate .
and once again , a interface , which is much more intuitive and much natural gas .
because i can take things like the art drive , and it &apos;s much more natural to me , is much more natural than when hierarchisch organized websites , or other mechanisms to do these things .
imagination imagination more than than , and with this phrase , i want to close and again , i want to think , and also , again , designers have to be thinking about the same thing , and also , designers , to come to the new solutions , and in this sense , thank you right now , and please .
i want to give you a particular aspect of curiosity .
the first thing that you &apos;re being big , as a baby , they &apos;re doing what they &apos;re doing , yes , yes , and depending on whether their parents allowed them to play more or less to play , more or less , the more , , of course , your curiosity will be true .
and the curiosity won &apos;t learn .
so , all of us are the ones here and are curious , in which people have a property that you can &apos;t learn .
i &apos;m now about this whole umweltdiskussion , weltuntergang , weltuntergang , 40 years , in quality of qualität .
and there is a central point there .
and that is what &apos;s going to be phosphorus .
give pee a chance .
every day , they give you the order of magnitude of two gram of phosphorus and every day , you have to take two grams of them .
otherwise they can &apos;t have teeth .
they can &apos;t store energy .
you can &apos;t have a bone .
we could only grow as a amorphe mollusken through the weltmeere .
if we don &apos;t have a phosphorus and you &apos;re phosphor .
so amazingly , it &apos;s so that we &apos;re looking at something here , what &apos;s actually going to be like , and it &apos;s not so much .
because all of the talk about energy , but nobody talks about the phosphor-problem .
the phosphor-problem is much critical .
we &apos;re dependent on two countries .
we &apos;ve only got two years for two years and already in the world &apos;s world has been a lot more to the world , in the environment , in all the atomanlagen .
in the last 20 years , fünfzehntausend tons of uranium has been dispersed in the fields in germany .
and that &apos;s what we take everything .
it makes leukemia in children .
and we think we would protect the environment if we &apos;re a little less harmful .
so , for example , schütz , the environment , less car seats .
schütz schütz , make less waste .
schütz schütz , verbrauche less energy .
that &apos;s not a protection .
this is how if i would say , schütz your child , it just schlag three times .
that &apos;s just a little less destruction .
if we think of the wiege to the bahre , we will be going to think of our whole earth , or later , a friedhof .
so that &apos;s why we have a wiege to think about the wiege .
and the most important thing is , the soil look at the ground as well .
in the ground , over a sechzig percent of the kohlenstoffs .
now , at the moment , we &apos;re building maize and lose between 11 and 30 kilograms per hectare , or on the surface of the air .
that means we lose weight in the soil , and the gebildet is going to be educated .
we can see , of course , we can see the müllproblem .
and everything is yes , or content .
in offenbach , for example , most of the most hausmüll percent of the müllmenge of the müllmenge of the müllmenge of the world &apos;s müllmenge
and because we &apos;re getting older , it will be expanding .
that &apos;s what they &apos;re all in the vorwindelphase .
yeah ?
a baby takes about a sechstausend .
we could reduce this , of course , about 10 percent , but what does this do ?
this is going to balanced in china in a second .
that &apos;s completely trivial .
so the question is , how do we go to this one that we &apos;re dealing with this ?
here &apos;s a proof of the way that men are not pigs .
i want to tell you .
because the phosphorus is going to be emitted in the pigs that abgegeben is emitted .
people about the urine .
yeah .
so , so , men can &apos;t be pigs .
because that &apos;s right ? right ?
we think in the umweltdiskussion , we &apos;re too many of the world .
and if you zoom in the people when you &apos;re abspricht to it , if you say that would be better , you wouldn &apos;t be there , you &apos;re going to be raffgierig and feindselig .
and so somebody like al gore , one of our great heroes , there is nothing more wichtigeres than the human population .
in israel , you say , if you &apos;re a single person , you &apos;re going to put the earth .
here it says , the more you umbringst , the better .
yeah .
the first question is , are we really too many ?
if you look at ants , the weight of the ants on earth , then the ants are about four times more than we .
i could also take pictures , but in the united states , no one was termiten , in the u.s. , even though they &apos;re vegetarian .
that means that ants weigh much more than we .
and because they &apos;re physically working harder than we , and because they &apos;re only three to six months of life , they &apos;re in your weight in your weight , in the energy consumption of billions of people .
that means we &apos;re not too many , we &apos;re too stupid , yes ?
and where do you see how far away we are , we could actually accomplish , and how sad we are , we can actually see that we can see that for example , it &apos;s got a program to be a program to be klimaneutral by 20 times , you know , right ?
you can only be klimaneutral if you don &apos;t exist , yes ?
the only thing .
once you &apos;ve seen a klimaneutralen tree ?
yeah ?
one single one ?
that means our whole intelligence means that we want to be a trees , yes ?
yeah ?
no tree is kohlenstoffneutral .
fortunately , yes , yes ?
there is no überbevölkerungsproblem at trees .
there &apos;s only in the amazonasgebiet alone , there are still a few billion trees .
they &apos;ve heard about the etwas of trees ?
that means all of our intelligence means that we want to be a trees .
and where you see , even in something like the demeter , the strikteste bio- of agriculture , doesn &apos;t allow our own stoffwechselprodukte .
every year we lose three million tons of tons of phosphorus that would have to go back in the present .
and we &apos;re too many .
just about it , on this .
that &apos;s what we &apos;re looking at is we &apos;re going to feel guilty about the earth that we &apos;re not saying , there &apos;s no bio-landbau , no bioland , no nature-et-progrès , and how they all are , we allow our own exkremente .
isn &apos;t that sad ?
so we &apos;re too many .
it &apos;s safe to be good , less harmful , which is ölverbrauch .
but where are we useful ?
we &apos;re trying to minimize our ecological footprint , but it &apos;s about to have a big footprint that is useful .
we want to be good for society , we want to be good for economies , but if it &apos;s about the environment , it &apos;s not going to be there , right ?
nullemissionen , yes ?
you can only have nullemissionen , if you &apos;re not there .
even if they were going to shoot , they would have emissions .
so you can &apos;t solve this .
we can do it differently .
we can get our nutrients .
we &apos;re doing in brazil agriculture in the field where we get nutrients .
and we can actually put in the way we can zurückkriegen in the way agriculture .
we do this in china for example , where we &apos;re going to take the waste of it .
in china , a nachttopf is still honigtöpfchen , sort of , right ?
and in our western world we were always interested in stupid , our nutrients .
that means the whole western zivilisationsgeschichte zeichnet itself , that the city has just taken , but never has something to have something .
and so , the cities had to grow more , because the farmers went into cities and cities had to keep their nutrients .
all of the rich rich are over , until they don &apos;t have the infrastructure anymore , and then they &apos;re implodiert .
yeah ?
in china , it was different .
you &apos;ve been able to process a bruchlos civilization over the age of fünftausend , because you &apos;ve always been able to get nutrients .
even today , if you &apos;re in the food , you &apos;re going to be in china , you &apos;re going to stay with the food you stay in the toilet until they &apos;re going to the toilet .
because it &apos;s physical , go to go and the nutrients .
you have them to eat them , not to get them to the food .
that means you can see on the internet , how to get the nutrients .
this is actually a nice thing about this , so agriculture generates , in fact , in a hectare of land , with a hektar of eintausendfünfhundert dollars , and the facility is waiting for hühner dollars and the facility and the anlage and schwein and fische and fish .
and the great thing about this is that the verbrechensrate in the favelas is going to go over the favelas .
so we don &apos;t have to control people to be very little bad .
we can support them to be good .
now , of course , of course , and the plants bear itself .
the byproduct is clean water .
and they &apos;re so designed by design , which is a farmer , which can simply be able to fix .
that means that that &apos;s going to go back .
and none of these facilities , we &apos;ve now been talking about hundertfünzig now over the last 20 years , none of these facilities ever had ever been sabotiert .
you could easily put a liter of altöl altöl , and then the costs costs over years .
not instead .
that means we don &apos;t need to control people , to be a little bad .
we can support them to be good .
that means we need to zurückkriegen phosphorus .
and by the way , if you want to do what they want to do , they write in germany , in germany , in germany , the best current is in the frankfurt of all the parts .
unfortunately , the ones that don &apos;t work in the offenbach , but maybe they can help the frankfurtern of a little help .
because the frankfurter device could be the best transformed .
and that has to go back .
we see that the phosphorus is really critical .
and we see that it &apos;s been happening .
we &apos;ve been able to put on now over three years .
the chinese government explains , they will be the first country in the world , which is phosphorus .
but we need the overall overall overall .
you see , there are two countries that control almost every single percent of the world &apos;s worldwide worldwide .
there is opec a bunch of waisenknaben .
these are sechsundzwanzig countries that control 40 percent of the control parts .
and the oil will we can replace by others .
but the phosphorus is that you can &apos;t replace .
that &apos;s not about the existing to make a little bit less bad , but it &apos;s about making something right .
and , particularly , is to ask what the right thing is .
that is , it &apos;s about efficiency , not to efficiency .
in holland , you understand that , of course , because in holland , the land is on flowers .
yeah ?
imagine if you &apos;re your wife &apos;s sad , if you have them geärgert , and they come with 50 actions .
completely inefficient .
but , very , very effective , yes , yes ?
or take a lippenstift .
a woman in germany , about six of the komma of their life , during her lifetime .
and that &apos;s what you do .
this is not exactly exactly the right things that is not exactly because we don &apos;t know how much weggeküsst is going to be .
but a lippenstift , even in this lighting , i can tell you , is completely inefficient , but it &apos;s very , very effective , and it &apos;s very effective , yes ?
all of the things that &apos;s beautiful is not efficient .
that &apos;s not just resource , but efficiency .
and ask , what is the right ?
not a little bit better , and it &apos;s a little bit better to burn and ihn it and to lose all the materials for the kreisläufe , but first of how to do you ?
imagine a lot of catching .
yeah ?
if i go to dinner , and i say , yes , there &apos;s a pill with offenbach-geschmack and a glass of water .
wonderful , wonderful ?
that &apos;s efficient .
all of the life in life is not efficient .
if you fall in love with someone else ?
yeah ?
that means everything that &apos;s in life is not to save it &apos;s not to be saving .
all the umweltdiskussion .
we say people , oh , yes , you don &apos;t have a green kingdom .
no , the nature is right right now , yes ?
every place where you &apos;re wegwirft , you &apos;re going to rebuild .
but the wrong things .
if you look at the wrong things , you have a müllproblem .
in the way we think of north .
there is any footprint on that footprint .
if you walk , yes , everybody &apos;s drifting on the ground .
because the soil will die the mosses and the wind blows the wind and the water doesn &apos;t take the ground away .
but if you &apos;re in italy , everybody means that the water is going to be in the meadow .
so , it &apos;s about creating a big footprint that becomes a feuchtgebiet .
not schuldmanagement .
we say in germany .
yeah ?
but if i ask you , how are you going to go to your wife ?
what do you say ?
sustainable .
then i say , herzliches beileid , yes ?
that &apos;s just the minimum .
so not save , it &apos;s not .
every waste is nährstoff .
and it &apos;s a lust , if you see in italy , how people are bogen in the high bow , and you put it out of the car .
because you know , this is a lustvoller process .
it &apos;s a huge form of revierverhalten , yes ?
you can show , i was there .
but with the proper design , please .
we have developed a eiscremeverpackung developed , which is the ne fluid .
they can wegschmeißen them where they go and stand .
in two hours , they build all over the place .
and they contains seeds from rare plants , so they allow it to contribute through the wegwerfen of biodiversity .
that means we &apos;re useful , not less harmful .
so , there are two cycles .
not everything is supposed to be kompostierbar .
a television set or a washing machine that use them just to use them .
just the things that verschleißen , like schuhsolen , like bremsbeläge , like autoreifen , who have to be so that they &apos;re going to go in biological systems .
the things that are only used , go to technical systems .
but today , we &apos;re talking about the biological systems .
yeah ?
for example , the sneaker , yes ?
and so many of the werbung , and it wasn &apos;t for the company puma for se , but that they &apos;re helping this company to do this business .
because we don &apos;t do not make things more free .
yeah ?
so if i take them out to dinner and say that &apos;s free of hähnchen , then it doesn &apos;t help you anything .
no , we &apos;re looking at what &apos;s inside .
positive positive .
so not like detox .
not toxic , in the same way .
but it &apos;s all that in the inside , is useful .
these are the first shoes that you can hinlegen the kavalierstart on the fußgängerampel , and the rubber programs can go and see the rubber in biological areas , yes ?
all of it is kompostierbar .
and if it &apos;s to allow us to adidas it for adidas , for nike , for hennes and mauritz and the whole textile industry .
and that &apos;s half all of all the abwasserprobleme around the world that will be caused by the textile industry .
so they &apos;re going to help you with the people who people are going to ask .
hey , puma , do you really do your really serious ?
because that &apos;s now gewechselt the vorstandsvorsitzenden .
and i &apos;m not sure that they really dabeibleiben .
so , help me a little bit .
but it &apos;s about .
yeah .
that &apos;s what &apos;s been shown .
that &apos;s going .
we can do things like that , if you &apos;re verschleißen , if you kaputtgehen , they can get in biological cycles .
technical cycles gives the same as the same .
there is a direct direktes .
this is the first environmental movement , actually , that &apos;s made for the cycle of the cycle .
so , in any store , you can get things around .
if you come to this , yes ?
remember , you know , the price of the time ?
when the moment is the waste .
all of this time , all of these guys are nearly .
in the countries where people get too money .
there &apos;s the deponien on the deponien , but it &apos;s also in the landscape , yes ?
if we change the plastics , so that it can go into biological systems , if we can change the wasserspeicher , inside that they can go back to zellulosebasis , then you can actually put a baby in israel , in israel , in the tunesien plants .
yeah ?
just if you take these these things , they zerkleinern , sterilisieren , sterilisieren , and the powder to plant trees .
so that &apos;s the baby for the whole life , already by the beginning .
so we don &apos;t need to be klimaneutral , we can be klimapositiv .
it &apos;s sort of a beneficial poop .
yeah , it &apos;s sort of .
yeah ?
we can do that .
we can still reinvent everything .
i started to set up a institute .
now , there are lots of people there , and they can all engage with .
there are extra a club to cradle-to-cradle-verein where everybody can be in .
so not save anymore , the reality , avoid , reduce , not a schuldmanagement , but intelligent waste .
does it make the curious ?
thank you .
the work of the interpreten .
and that &apos;s the way that the language .
in the description of my speech , i wrote that i as a interpretin , i &apos;m talking to me as a übersetzerin , so in english wortsinn .
interpreten are the written of the written music in music music .
that you didn &apos;t just speak word for word in a different language , but also the deeper sense of words and wortzusammenhang , to understand it to make a very reasonable translation , anybody knows that it has to do with fremdsprachen .
and then , in the germans , can be more knowledge , if you can get when you &apos;re going to go to poetry or even poetry .
it &apos;s very much , but it &apos;s for laien , which we do with musicians with our musiksprache .
as a interpretin , i did just the geschriebenen note .
you sure the composer in the grades is exactly everything that &apos;s going on .
in fact , the notes are very vague and ungenau .
these notes are about as same as just as you , like a verbal event , if you &apos;re very seemingly penibelst , and description of a landscape .
because in this verbalen landschaftsbeschreibung , the fragrance &apos;s blumen is not smell to the extent the level of the grüns , not to hear the säuseln of the windes .
that means that the interpreter has to do this ungenauen in the notensprache of the notensprache in another , which is hörbare , concrete musiksprache .
today i want to tell you what i &apos;d like to do , so , so once again , once again , in a verbal language .
so basically , a translation of translation .
so i prefer to do that , because if i had to translate it in the english , it would be once in the english translation , it would be a translation of translation to translation .
so the music works for me as much as the spoken language .
the notierten grades , the feature of the letters of the letters of a script .
so it &apos;s not going to be able to learn only to read the notes , and they &apos;re willing to push the best and the right position to a violinsaite .
that &apos;s what we &apos;re just talking about , which is what you &apos;ve learned to paint .
the sense of letters , you can only see the language .
so , for the learning process of music at least for the same time , at least as the spoken language .
there &apos;s also abstufungen whether you learn it for the hausgebrauch , just to understand , you can &apos;t understand , you can &apos;t understand any active , until you get to the musical level .
the work of the interpreten starts beginning to start like a theaterregisseurs .
and after that you have a piece of paper , because you &apos;re excited about it , you &apos;re going to get to the formation of the composition .
you can collect information about the play in the sekundärliteratur .
you read in the letters , tagebüchern , notes , whether it &apos;s words , whether it &apos;s words , thoughts of the composers themselves .
you studied the works that he &apos;s got before and after he got .
you put together side-by-side .
the beweggründe , it &apos;s writing .
how do it , and what did he have this .
how were his own , how society and politics ?
that all interest me .
you think in this time , you can read the beispiel images , like , you know , zeitgenössische images or literature .
but over time , you &apos;ve also seen a rich knowledge of the composers that you &apos;re playing with , and it &apos;s always a continuous easier to be hineinzudenken and feel it .
the composer will always be more interested in the friend of the friend that you live together .
his concerns , the piece , is always going to be more and more to my personal concerns .
now , the notes is the notes that the notes on the notes of the body is , but just a framework , i turn to the framework , and i now bring this framework to befüllen it with sense .
and i &apos;m saying to my own words , which may be written between this scaffold .
i play a game of erklärend what these sounds could have .
now for me and the composers , and what they might mean for him now .
every note , every phrase gets a sense of doing it because i feel it myself because it &apos;s entspringt for my now .
it has to be in here and be stimmig , and i can &apos;t convince my audience to convince that that &apos;s my cause .
it &apos;s always a very happy concert , if i have the experience , the piece that i &apos;ve seen so long as i could .
how to rebuild a happy day , although it &apos;s always with the same rituals of life , stand up , up and get up to work , so that &apos;s so much i &apos;m going to keep the same thing , and so i &apos;ll always leave the same thing .
i &apos;ve become a day older , seasons switch to the seasons , my pulse goes down to the night , in a konzertsaal , it takes a longer that sound back home .
i &apos;m going to take the breath of the audience , consciously , or unbewusst .
all of that influenced me and all this impacts as my experience with the composition .
it &apos;s very wonderful , if i &apos;m with a duo-partner on the stage , and we have the same wavelength .
then the same thing happens in a good , angeregten conversation .
you bring a new idea inside and you get a sogleich , that answers is going to be with a reaction .
it &apos;s exciting because then , then things that we don &apos;t have so geprobt and what you can &apos;t do with samples .
it &apos;s great fun to make music , and they have the audience to have seen how the music alive .
so every concert is a different concert .
i &apos;m never going to play more like this , as in this moment .
i can &apos;t play that today , like in 20 years .
and i &apos;m going to have more lebenserfahrung than today , and i &apos;m going to have a lot of more more than the musikklänge of the musikklänge in the world , and they &apos;re also feeling on emotions and emotions .
sure , i &apos;m going to have some farbtöpfe farbtöpfe , but it &apos;s new to new .
a nice thing , a nice example of this .
it was on a klavierkursus für for my beloved old teachers , professor jürgen , a famous beethoven-spezialist , konzertpianist professor , langjähriger professor in stuttgart .
unfortunately , i was a lot too young , so that he was already emeritiert when i was finally to study .
but i had the great fortune to him , very early , with 13 years , and i was so on to my school on his own .
i was back to the back of the kurse , once i once again , once again , and played the last four of the four balladen of chopin , a spätwerk .
he asked me what the introduction of this was that was for me .
this is a getragenes part .
and in my jugendlichkeit , i said , &quot; more recently .
he schmunzelte and he said , like ?
that &apos;s what the altersunterschied must be .
because for me , it means memory .
he was already about a sechzig .
well , with 17 , you have dreams , but not a major memory .
i &apos;m playing the piece all over the back of all over and over and over and over and over , even though it hasn &apos;t changed .
every time it &apos;s exciting , because over again , i &apos;m going to read something new .
an example of a very different area . monet monet the seerosen .
it &apos;s always the same garden , but to different tageszeit , in verschiedenem light .
he translated the seerosen verschiedentlich , as he saw her , as she looked at it .
his personal impressionen of seerosen .
the x-malige interpretation of a piece of a piece .
now , i &apos;m also older than 13 years old , when he wrote the piece .
he &apos;s lived only for neununddreißig years .
and it &apos;s important to me , again , to look again , again , even if i &apos;m going to get them to you .
to keep zwiesprache , right with composers .
because the notes are the only connection to the right .
especially if he died .
now , how do you start to speak the language of music ?
i said yes , you need something like about the same way for the spoken language .
often the musikunterricht is that you just learn the notes .
you &apos;re learning first , you know , first of all , you just talk a word .
you learn to find notes to the notes on the instrument .
if all the fingers go on time and correctly like the notes in the notes , then you get sound , then they come together like sound like music .
if it happens , if it happens , the students get the nächstschwierige .
and interpretation of interpretation is barely talking about the anfängerunterricht .
well , there &apos;s a vorne , and it &apos;s a quick piece .
lento , slowly .
according to laut and leisezeichen , f and b , et .
that &apos;s most of the ones here .
but even if you do these forms of models , it &apos;s still just technical .
and yet it &apos;s still not interpretation .
i &apos;m puzzled .
i &apos;m feeling that you often have a little elementares .
and that is that to make music on the instrument , the reputation and feeling a cultural institution should be there .
that &apos;s what you sing .
a child who didn &apos;t have learned because it doesn &apos;t have the parents to not do it , it &apos;s not going to do it .
that &apos;s like sprechenlernen .
it &apos;s necessary to have its own experiences and the idea of the music to have a different way to bring it to a tool to get the sound .
people who never have been hearing , have never occurred to the own body , as it &apos;s like it &apos;s a sound .
a phrase with his own breath .
the vision is actually the extension of our body .
and to sing our vocal chords , our hands and feet to dancing .
so the hammerköpfe is the hammerköpfe in the piano the way the sequel of my fingers .
the tune comes out of the gesungenen and the rhythm of the dance .
the dauernde berieselung berieselung today , with music , there &apos;s not förderlich .
you don &apos;t need to make even more music if it &apos;s going to be boring .
no more needed to be pfeifen , to sing , to sing .
every woman will be plattgemacht when you &apos;re constantly going to beschallt with music .
sure , there are some of you who say , yes , yes , but what if i can &apos;t sing ?
i &apos;m going to ask you , can you sing , a , a , because they think they can &apos;t sing ?
or b , because they haven &apos;t learned to sing ?
and in either , it &apos;s not too late to find out whether they cannot be , or learning how to use these little muscles that stimmbänder the vocal chords , really used the vocal chords .
that &apos;s what you &apos;re going to train .
or c , because you have it bescheinigt you &apos;re untauglich .
i ask , how did fachlich artists was that diagnosis ?
have you ever been a zweit- or a drittmeinung , how to say it &apos;s nice ?
or d , they like no music and want to do that .
but what i would say , because music is a beautiful , kommunikative thing .
but maybe you can still be umstimmen .
well , you know , you &apos;re seeing all cases , nobody needs to be a aussichtsloser candidate .
but they don &apos;t say , please , i don &apos;t understand anything from classical music .
i can &apos;t tell if it &apos;s good or bad .
i say , but surely , you can tell you whether it doesn &apos;t like you .
because i don &apos;t think it says somebody , i don &apos;t know if it tastes me because i can &apos;t cook .
so , they don &apos;t eat it , just because they cannot cook .
so they don &apos;t have to keep on classical music , because they don &apos;t play a instrument .
they &apos;re aware of them and tell you whether it tastes or not .
whether the music is too gepfeffert or too sweet .
tell them what they feel .
and the time they &apos;re getting together , and want to get something more about the spices of drinhaben or taste .
why am i urge from my audience that it &apos;s also mapping that active ?
because the music is a language , and a language is to communicate .
a piece of art that you never look at , you don &apos;t have a force .
food that &apos;s made by a chef or a chef , has to be eaten , and not just it angeschaut or recipes .
so please stop asking , if you &apos;re playing with music .
it &apos;s not just a nice geräuschtapete .
if in an area where adults are doing any more music or at least aktiv music , a child grows , then it &apos;s easy to ask a musiklehrer , and ask , which color has your flower ?
can you do you in blue ?
and the kid is playing , after a gedenkpause , instead of a red flower .
and this is something very different than before .
so this was the first beginning of a personal musical expression .
so the first step is to interpretation .
and what happens when you play a piece of today that &apos;s a hundred ago before a hundred , zweihundert , zweihundert , right ?
meanwhile , the tools are fortentwickelt .
there were no time to be a chance to be a piano .
it wasn &apos;t even invented .
i think the stream would have been to be when he had the klanglichen possibilities of modern klaviere .
i can have the klangvorstellungen that has been carrying bach , in the modern wing , to bring it to the modern wing , which cannot be a barockes .
and also , from beethoven , you know , he was more heard , when he was deaf .
today , a modern orchestra in the situation , it &apos;s able to play everything that &apos;s been rejected by a orchester .
so the composers of us on us are dependent on the interpreten that keeps the pieces again .
so you &apos;re going to be able to pinpoint what they &apos;re in mind .
and also , what you would think of the mind today .
or what i &apos;m going to do today , because what you might think of .
thank you .
you know what the envy is ?
were you like this ?
and how felt that ?
so sucks .
i have a friend who &apos;s going to drive a passerati .
when i come back , with my little v w , and i &apos;m going to be a little bit wrong , that feeling comes down .
i &apos;m going to hurt something through the head .
i say , ulf , what do you need to do so much ?
that &apos;s going to be in the first year half of his value .
and even , you &apos;re more much less than i .
why do i have to do this n of a car ?
and then i &apos;m going to immediately fall back , that &apos;s a very unfair .
it &apos;s against justice .
and as i say the word justice is that uncomfortable .
our organism has invented a great way to make such kind of feelings of the natural materials to go .
you can also try this as a words like revenge or gewinnsucht or a ähnlichem .
i want to tell you about this mechanism today or something of you , what you probably familiar with .
the mechanism is from the lie .
but don &apos;t think of the lie , as you may have heard of them , if people say , nobody has to build a wall .
and then stones auftürmt , so he gives you the view .
on a lie , you see that the liars don &apos;t believe what he says .
it &apos;s easy to check that he has different different .
he &apos;s just saying , just and not himself .
no , the lie i &apos;m talking about to do that they &apos;re fooled .
they need this lie to get a lebenslüge to get a selbsttäuschung upright .
they can be slightly light , yes , nachprüfen , or to get it out .
they need time .
and from this time , you can see a anecdote that you may know .
the spanish painter pablo picasso once a woman &apos;s frau .
this woman has done since then , the portrait would not see you .
picasso , waiting for you .
it will always be similar .
and when you think of this place , and if you laugh , it &apos;s important to how much of the lie is and how much time they need , to experience something that artists can tell us .
because artists have a gestörtes ratio to lie .
artist divides something with , and especially in this lady , what you see , what you &apos;re seeing in the mirror .
artist divides the same portrait , which you &apos;re only going to be familiar with , if you &apos;re ever going to look at this piece of art .
then it &apos;s a sense of the sense , it might not be able to see you , and it will always be similar .
here you have this mechanism that we can use the lie as a great invention to the stabilisierung of our lebensverhältnisse .
and not only in art , even in the volksmärchen , in the mythology , in stories , it appeared again .
you may know this idea of the lady who looked at every morning in the mirror and asked him , who &apos;s the most beautiful in the country ?
one day , one day , he says , &quot; yes , yes , there &apos;s a schönere .
behind the seven mountains and so forth .
and they also know how much of the most of that true generation , even the mirror can &apos;t lie , from that true event .
but we should just make ourselves familiar with that , you can &apos;t tell a woman that there is a schönere somewhere else .
here &apos;s what we &apos;re doing under politically correctness , and over again .
we need this one place that we have this lie that we can &apos;t even have to go from .
we don &apos;t just have in art in art , in the volksmärchendichtung , but in science , that really lies .
and there is this story of the woman &apos;s frau of worchester .
she heard about this book from charles darwin , the origin of the species and the life of human beings .
that the human man should be abstammen and , yes , there &apos;s a shared ancestors between people and apes .
and then she kept her rannte to her husband and said that &apos;s not true what charles there .
human beings , the monkey soll , or a common ancestor .
no , no , it &apos;s not .
and if it &apos;s true , we have to keep that people get knowledge from it .
why do we need to avoid people who are people from something wrong ?
because we cannot live without these lives .
because we have this self-deception , this feeling , that feeling , is great , from the highest creature , not from a solchen , which is something like a organism , which is still , and else what is the stein , and else , that &apos;s for us .
so , we can &apos;t have these things wrong .
we need to avoid people &apos;s experience of things , especially if you &apos;re true .
so , you see , how slowly this mechanism and look like the box that he leaves in the other way that it &apos;s lying on something else than this great picture of ourselves , i want to give you another story of the time .
a particularly nice story , like i mean .
my wife has told me .
she came from school , she &apos;s a teacher , and she told them from a student .
a autistischer student .
they like it particularly like it , because he has a neigung to the sincerity .
and she asked him , what are your hobbies ?
and he says , well , i &apos;m at the fire fire fire .
and because i &apos;m at the firemen , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
yes , you feel it if you &apos;re in the place , you &apos;re not going to be something wrong .
i told my wife , whenever a human being used in a moral framework , because we &apos;re going to try and replace it through the wörtchen of the brain .
do you once , and then you get the sentence .
although i &apos;m at the firemen , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
you feel that is the actual truth behind the translation .
so a little bub who doesn &apos;t really care about feuerlöschen .
that &apos;s interested in the interest of feuermachen .
but there are no vereine , after which we can tell us where you &apos;re learning how to make fire .
there &apos;s only the second thing , just the fire .
he got up there .
and überdies , you don &apos;t say his teacher , you know , you &apos;d like to be like to be a chance to be , and i &apos;m glad to get out of fire .
no , it just looks much better if we show that we &apos;re going to be able to get the dangers of dangers , the other one only wouldn &apos;t put on fire .
here you have this little mechanism here .
this verweis that this verweis is already knew that the fire &apos;s actually related to the fire , but that he can &apos;t say that .
here you have this zensor between the unconscious and the sounds that immediately anspringt , without having to do something about it , and the things you know they can look very different , so they can make it much better for you and others .
so , just like those words that we use in language of the political world , is still using the language .
we actually know that something else is .
but we know when we go down , the social and the social mind is very sensitive .
we can &apos;t do that .
it &apos;s impossible , these things in a society that should be done .
i want to share with you what we found in my institute .
after the logic , this illusion , this selbsttäuschung , the willingness to ensure that the other reality of which we actually know in the unconscious of knowledge is that they &apos;re gültig to the outside .
so i want to give you two , maybe three examples .
the first example of what many of you know and some of them appreciate you , very few of them don &apos;t need even at all .
i mean the soul .
what is the soul ?
the soul is so a controversial thing about a leibniz .
it &apos;s something that isn &apos;t natural gas , material nature .
and if you have people who have the strong belief , you can also have a soul , or you can also say that it &apos;s like a geistiger framework , and they &apos;re like the soul that you have , they &apos;re just like fleisch , and blood vessels , they kind of call them out of sync , and they sort of sozusagen , etwas , vergängliches ,
and so , from this soul , you now think it &apos;s kind of in this wolkigen nature , in this luftigen nature , it &apos;s called the latin lufthauch , the lufthauch .
and if this lufthauch lufthauch over the people , he &apos;s filled with dignity with the mind , with nature that can only live with , and you &apos;re going to be with the soul .
and then he can davonlaufen .
this is the idea of how the soul .
so she &apos;s supposed to be coming from the outside to people .
so we should be able to see something that &apos;s necessarily going to be present for our lives .
and if you have these premise eyes , you understand the logic that we experience that happiness , through a lie of our world .
because now you can apply a dreisatz .
dreisatz , she &apos;s still from school .
now this is a dreisatz here that describes us a logic .
that &apos;s the hardest part of my talk .
here you need a logic , but also to lie to lie .
so , to lie , that they can simply apply these logic .
in this dreisatz , three sentences .
the first sentence is klaus , there &apos;s no soul .
so the second sentence is when the klaus right is right , he doesn &apos;t have a soul .
now there is a third sentence .
i &apos;m here to hervorgehoben it .
a third sentence , which is immediately auftaucht , who have a strong sense of soul .
the say who doesn &apos;t have a soul that &apos;s dead , and can &apos;t claim it .
and here you feel it .
here &apos;s the logic in this , yes , in this täuschenden talk , talk to the expression .
you see it immediately .
the first two sentences that are logical correct .
i can say everything .
the logic doesn &apos;t make a statements about reality .
i can say , the kanzlerin is a man .
and if i &apos;m right , then the kanzlerin is a man .
if i don &apos;t quite right , then the kanzlerin isn &apos;t a man .
logic does not make a statement about what &apos;s true .
i can claim everything .
but critically , when i &apos;m right , it &apos;s going to be .
so if klaus says , there &apos;s no soul .
second , if he &apos;s right , he doesn &apos;t have a soul .
these things are logical correct .
and now our täuschendes consciousness immediately can do something .
it &apos;s going to be a third sentence that has nothing to do with the first two sentences and it does that the opposite of the first sentence has already proven .
because , we really would have to prove whether it &apos;s the soul or not .
but with this logic that it just uses that two sentences are correct and a third dazuhängt that looks like this , as he would have to do something with that , so we can save our lebenslüge .
so we &apos;re doing it as if it &apos;s impossible to be impossible without a soul .
and we &apos;re very happy about it .
we can continue these things on different types .
in the present time , we have a very modern example of the tageszeitungen , which keeps the tageszeitungen .
you have to have another philosophisches topic , a dauerbrenner from philosophy , and you &apos;re going to be present .
that has to do that we go back into the 19th century .
there was a scholars that was called the johannes and after that ist esel named .
the most buridansche esel is a esel that &apos;s made out of current nature .
that &apos;s not the soul .
that &apos;s a naturding .
and if you put the exact same in the middle between two gleichgroßen heuhafen , then he verhungert .
because he doesn &apos;t know what he &apos;s going to do .
so he &apos;s right in the middle .
so , the naturdinge is introduced .
gleichgroße forces are lösen with gegensätzlichem vorzeigenzeichen .
there &apos;s nothing happening at all .
and if you take another example , so if you &apos;re going to power the one more larger , then it doesn &apos;t need any reason to do it .
automatically runs on the right thought .
so if you have this idea that you &apos;re somehow driven by nature , it &apos;s going to be driven by the larger pile that put a immediately and they have a quick way that it has to be a free will to give you a free will .
and if we &apos;re already in frankfurt here in frankfurt , i remember the max-planck-institut for genetics .
there &apos;s a scholars that &apos;s called wolf singer , and he says , sometimes you sometimes say , wolf singer , there &apos;s no willensfreiheit .
now we can take the second sentence , and can say , if you have a wolf , if you have a wolf , it has no willensfreiheit .
these sentences are absolutely logical and correct .
and what we &apos;re now to read about every day in the daily newspaper that &apos;s going to find it in this third sentence .
and it looks like this , who doesn &apos;t have willensfreiheit , can &apos;t be able to be pulled for its actions and behauptungen , and he &apos;s going to be unzurechnungsfähig .
again , you have it again .
actually , you don &apos;t have to prove to see if there &apos;s something like willensfreiheit .
but the logic of deception allows us to pretend to do that as the first sentence of the hot times , when you have to take the opposite of the opposite without any proof .
and now you can just do anything if you want to do anything , if you want to test anything , and especially if you want to make people happy , that courage to the lie .
practice , for example , if you meet a person , you can say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
and please use it the german word for vorhersager , which is called prophet .
you cannot call it not calling , that &apos;s a little bit political inkorrekt .
say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
immediately , they &apos;re going to be one of those who are there such such these kinds of vorhersager , you can see that you can &apos;t prove it .
and they have a problem .
because while they &apos;re busy , they don &apos;t really prove they can prove that there is no vorhersager , the man is very happy .
he &apos;s very happy about it because he &apos;s fooled .
because he led them to a fährte , which he doesn &apos;t even have .
because , in fact , that person is not interested in proving .
it &apos;s only interested in itself , to develop yourself in the need to prove it to be vorhersager .
so , in the kind of the shift of the beweislast , they &apos;re experiencing the brilliance of the lie .
and once you have a chance to feel that dreisatz , you do it at other people , they do it , because they &apos;re going to make other happy if they &apos;re not going to remind you of their own selbstlüge .
thank you for your attention .
yeah , good afternoon .
i &apos;ve been allowed to ask myself , whether i will mention them .
she &apos;s one of the veranstalterinnen of this magnificent event , and i asked me if i &apos;m giving a talk here and my idea .
i have to say honestly , you have mitgekriegt , it was very hard to talk about my idea .
and i may be able to imagine my favorite idea that i &apos;m trying to get you .
but it &apos;s the sum of the sum , of course , very much of a lot of ideas .
i probably -- i &apos;m probably going to be the two nice girls , i &apos;m probably going to be a lot of the generation of image image because i &apos;ve been starting to study engineering engineering in college , engineering , today , i think , i think , kit .
and it &apos;s got me back in the middle of the achtziger for berlin , because i wanted to do renewable energy and that was not in karlsruhe .
there was the kernforschungsanlage leopoldshafen .
the hießen , the damals , also the jülich , also called the jülich .
the hot world today today .
because a good engineer has been built by great cars or atomkraftanlagen .
but the thing that doofes doofes like n n , which is something that &apos;s going to come out of the square meter , which was a toy .
and in berlin , there was a crazy ingenieurkollektiv .
i &apos;m grateful that he &apos;s got the word again again , because after the mauerfall , you couldn &apos;t use the word &quot; the word &quot; all the left was bad .
however , it wasn &apos;t that much in the achtiziger , not so .
there was it was that there was selbstverwaltete alternativbetriebe , and one of them sitting in kreuzberg in the mehringhof , where you &apos;re going to be bad .
the place of terrorismusses , but that was a wuseltronik , and it was made and the wind and i started out there .
and yes , a lot of what &apos;s been told today , very , because many , many beautiful ideas that i &apos;ve been studying .
i &apos;ve been working in the elf for the 11 years that was basisdemokratisch .
we were 20 people .
if a no , the vetoprinzip was a completely zermürbt , i was really hard to gezweifelt , if i was really a zehn , i was really schwer to a schwachsinnige thing , because all my colleagues , i was always zugeredet to him , you &apos;ve got the money to your child .
it &apos;s busy mortality .
and it was really , very , very , very , very bitter , and you get to the same stage , and you just get a picture on the side , where i asked for 10 years , and a thousand years ago , that was still a tausend d-mark , and then , in the kollektiv , einheitslohn , in the collective of course , that really should
and i got it up to the top of the sechsundneunzig , and then we have a partner with friends , i &apos;ve become a mitbegründer of the company , which then was zusammen with the spin-off q-cells of the world &apos;s largest zellenhersteller .
one of the time , but also , of course , we have the problem again , and we have a small group , and we have a small group , and we have a small group of time , and that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing , and it &apos;s just crazy to do that , it &apos;s verrückt , that the people say , that &apos;s what the
and i brought you a project that i want to think about you now .
and the title of the biases , is to get to a hundred percent renewable .
and we just have a relatively radical story about where you could use a memory of a memory .
on this island , this is the island of graciosa on the azoren .
yeah , that &apos;s like this data .
there are a thousand thousand people .
they have a higher energieanteil percent of 15 percent .
and the question is , why don &apos;t they have any more ?
that &apos;s not really technologically .
if you zubauen more windkraft , the system starts to fail .
that &apos;s also always telling you , as you can , when they &apos;re besichtigen into the anlage .
then , they say , always why ?
we have already 20 percent in germany .
but not to be a problem .
but not right , we have seven percent and our net is physically physically , the european .
if we had to have twenty percent in europe , we have the same problems that people have on this island .
the question was just , the rechnet was zweitausend2006 , the first four contacts with the island , just as opposed to , just as simple .
how big would be a battery , so you &apos;re going to be a island on 20 , in 30 , 40 , 40 , maybe even 70 percent renewable .
and yeah , i &apos;m going to go again .
the conventional system is looking at all over the world .
by the way , there are about a hundred gigawatt leistung elektrische on dieselbasis zugebaut around the world .
that &apos;s the performance of a hundred nuclear power , because that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing very quickly everywhere .
the energiehunger of the world that &apos;s going on , is that with diesel , because you don &apos;t need any approved .
that &apos;s going to go quickly .
you put it as a ne .
and then it looks like it &apos;s like this .
the way we get the verlaufen are always going to be two , two .
yeah , this is what this is the bottom line is the load .
we also have very smart data .
and the windkraftanlage or the solaranlage or whatever it is , is the rule of a system that &apos;s a system that &apos;s just in small quantities of the kleinen .
our goal was to say it just to say , okay , okay , okay .
the diesel is wird and the wind , the sun is the burden that they can produce the larger rate .
and if you want to go over 20 percent renewables , so energy per year , it &apos;s not the performance at the moment , then they must switch off the boat .
that means that the moment you have to do for the moment that renewables can take into the whole net .
you can only be able to be gemanagt if you &apos;re going to be here .
that &apos;s not one of the world &apos;s first ever done in the world .
this is the small style , so you can actually use your car in a car , and you can use a little wechselrichter .
people always ask me , what do you think of you ?
that &apos;s already going .
but if you want to have multiple of these wechselrichtern zusammenschalten and they &apos;re supposed to build a mesh , it will be extremely complicated .
and our goal was , we wanted to get to the siebzig to the ship to the neunzig , and then there &apos;s another one , the last 10 , 20 percent renewable data , which is going to be very , very expensive , and it &apos;s not going to work that you &apos;re making it from batteries .
that &apos;s going to be an energieträger , which then , hydrogen , methane , methane , power , is going to be familiar with , and the power of gas you know or even the sh , that will be .
you have to go to a saisonalspeicher and winter-sommer and nicht and not just ausgleichen .
we just wanted to know what &apos;s a normal , stinknormalen battery .
how far you get there ?
and then they &apos;ve taken a whole bunch of simulation .
and wind and the sun and the load , and the last durchsimuliert and came to the conclusion , a mittleren strompreis , which is a middle strompreis of about 50 cents a kilowattstunde , about a kilowattstunde , about vierundvierzig cents a little bit .
these were the very first few years ago .
and then we said , okay , okay , okay , okay , we said , okay .
well , yeah , great , we have a business model .
we &apos;re cheaper like the diesel-system , if the average five percent goes up a year .
and then we started to negotiate with the insulanern .
what would you need to be done ?
have been using investors , i &apos;ve been building new gesellschafter .
we were only five people to rebuild a society to rebuild the society .
and here &apos;s the picture .
the brown is kind of the conventional system that green is our system .
that our system also has a preisanstieg , because we &apos;re still going to do 20 percent african percent with diesel and also a preissteigerung things on other things .
and the power-utility that the elektrizitätsversorgungsunternehmen on the island , has said , that &apos;s what we find .
we want to support , but we don &apos;t think you can solve the problem of the problem .
and so we decided to build a hall in berlin , where we sort of the electrical current , the island of the island of one of the things that we can actually map in the scale of three .
that means we have a guarantee to find the largest battery in the world .
here she is .
the comes in asia , where the trap from japan .
and witzigerweise is it in the &apos; 70s in the 1970s , in the 1970s , today , developed , and then became auslizensiert on the japanese .
you can see it &apos;s a very , very large battery .
she has a megawatts of performance and can take six hours long , and that &apos;s the battery that we &apos;ve sort of rausbekommen .
and then they created .
we also have one of these diesel-aggregate in the same size , which is , in the same size , in the hall , in fact , in the hall , in the hall , right now , there &apos;s the big battery , here , here , here is the whole umrichter of the umrichter that we simulate .
over here we simulate the whole übertragungsleitungsystem , the kilometer-physik of wires , to actually be able to write the schwingungsverhalten in the web .
and here you can see it again .
we can also aufschalten zweihundert kilowatt on the web .
here we see this again , again , again , again , again , the whole , individual aggregate .
and what we did was , since zweitausendneun , the hall was done , until today , basically everything that there is between the individual system on electronics , software , we made .
so we &apos;re not batteriehersteller , but we define ourselves as a company that &apos;s only between the subject and the theme and the theme and everything in between .
you have to communicate to the battery , you can also communicate in the web , and that &apos;s very complicated .
the beauty is that , in this island , is basically the vorwegnehmen of the problem today that we &apos;re going to get when we want to improve our share of renewables .
so , all the discussion is , as is going to be in the moment and herbewegt , energiewende , how this is going to be , for example , for example , for example , for example , for example , for example , to the wind , we müdsen the wind and the sun .
natürlicht , then bietet .
so smart-grid , a riesenthema everywhere .
we can start to integrate in the island , integrate a elektromobilität to integrate , can be able to manage the load .
that means if you &apos;re in a middle of the siebzig , you can &apos;t do that without memory .
you can smart-grid through the n smart-grid , you can be in the ausbau , yes , that should be in any case , but you can never see the anteil .
and that &apos;s like the n of the message .
so many people come up and see that there , because you can see , you can see what problems you get .
if we turn the petrol table , you don &apos;t have the rotierende mass , which is a certain amount of devices .
and our europäisches verbundnetz is basically aus from the lauter mass of large kraftwerken , where the wave is about europe around the way .
we look at this grid , see the fifty hertz , and when it neunundvierzig komma komma nine , we start a few ventilchen aufzumachen , then you go back to a little ventilchen , then we get up again .
that &apos;s the system .
and of course , it &apos;s incredibly träge .
if you runterreißen this somewhere , it &apos;s a little bit .
the spinning match is at least 10 seconds to keep the net stable .
and in time , you can respond again .
if you don &apos;t have that anymore , these spinning mass , you have to replace it with leistungselektronik and elektrochemie .
and we can start with this big three batterie of two milliseconds .
and then you see , there are enormous amounts of information there .
and the message is , we need to think about these rotating rotierenden of the rotierenden , if we sort of feed our goals , 20 percent , 20 percent , 20 percent , 30 percent , and so on , if we want to reach the at all , and so on , if we want to reach the all at all .
then we have to run our must-run capacity in the net .
must-run is just called the power station with the frequency .
yeah , that &apos;s a riesendebatte at the moment , zubau from the kohlekraftwerken , because we don &apos;t have , or gasturbinen , because that &apos;s not .
and we &apos;re just trying to make sure that you can get the capacity to abbauen the capacity , to abbauen the elektrochemische of the web .
and there &apos;s also a lot of research now .
and that purpose , people will come and see our versuchsstand on the floor , basically our inselteststand .
and yes , the discussion is about the question of how far you can go there a little bit of a future .
and many discussions that i had in the last six years , similar to the discussion that i had had the discussion that i had in the last 30 years .
it &apos;s not , schwachsinn , kinderspielkram , we &apos;ve never found everything , never found it .
we have today dreißig gigawatt photovoltaik in germany .
this is vorbildlich .
and i just go out that we have to have the same capacity in the next 30 years , the same capacity to elektrochemischen in the world .
very simple , it will come .
there &apos;s going to be a whole lot of widerständen and arguments .
the beauty is that i &apos;m basically seeing the last two years now , that the scientists are going to ask my side .
we have now got a decade of ten million förderprojekte , including the ne , to klemmen the german net .
that &apos;s going to take place in the next april .
so , you know , you know , you know , there &apos;s a change there , and it &apos;s just that there is a change and it &apos;s only about that abwehrhaltung , to the idea , a hundred percent renewable renewables .
and if you have a hundred percent renewable , that &apos;s like a autarkes system .
now , in discussions , in discussions , the insulaner , they &apos;re doing the insulaner , which are going to be a little tiny net , which has nothing to do with our verbund .
the question is , if you &apos;re totally unabhängig , they &apos;re totally unabhängig , or uranen energierträgern , which are somewhere anywhere in the world and they &apos;re going to be hingebracht , they &apos;re a island .
then they just use it , which is the sun and wind there is there .
and this is a little bit of a vernüftigen energy , and i &apos;m grateful for a cradle-to-cradle , and i &apos;m grateful that they &apos;re using , solar power .
and that &apos;s what we do , and it &apos;s like , in a way , the talk , the talk of premium kola that you can be a collective and use solar power , and you can get a little bit together .
and yes , i just want to encourage you to you , in the sense that you can be a little bit crazy and have vision .
and you really have to stay pretty zäh , but i think it &apos;s about .
thank you very much .
as steve lopez , the los angeles times , one day , one day , in the center of los angeles , he heard a wonderful music .
she came from a man , a african-american , sympathisch , rau , obdachlos , who had been playing on a violin , which had only two of them .
many of you will know the story , because made a book , who was verfilmt , and it was verfilmt , with a steve downey , and i was junior , with a steve lopez , and jamie foxx foxx , who was the kontrabassisten of the juilliard-konservatorium , and whose promising career was beendet by his paranoide schizophrenia .
nathaniel left verließ , suffered a nervenzusammenbruch and 30 years later he lived as a homeless auf , he was walking on the streets of skid row in the center of los angeles .
i encourage all of you , read the steves book , and you can see the movie , which is not just the wonderful thing that the music is made , and how they ended up with the music that was herstellen , and how it was the instrument , if this wortspiel allows , the mithalf , nathaniel away from the street .
i met mr. ayers in 2008 , two years ago , in the walt disney hall hall .
he had just been a graphic from beethoven &apos;s first law and fourth south asian , and came behind the stage to imagine .
he spoke in a very heiteren and geselligen clay about yo-yo ma and hillary and hillary , and how the dodgers would never be able to series the baseball world world series , and that &apos;s all about the tückischen passage of the first geige of the beethoven &apos;s first year of the beethoven &apos;s first geige .
we got to speak to the subject of music , and a few days later , i got an email , in the state that the nathaniel was interested in me .
i have to mention that nathaniel is a medical treatment for the medical treatment , because he was already with elektroschocks and thorazin and handschellen , a trauma that has been following him to his life .
and so , as a consequence of this is now particularly vulnerable to this very , sometimes , sometimes , so bad , and he would take it away , and he tagelang verschwindet , in the streets of skid row , and it &apos;s been exposed to this horror and the folterqualen of his own mind .
and in the same way , nathaniel was nathaniel , when we started nathaniel , we started begannen hall hall , and he had this ridiculous flackern in his eyes and it was completely lost .
he talked about invisible dämonen and smoke and about how someone was going to poison in their sleep .
i was afraid , not meinetwegen , but i could fear that he could be able to be able to hold him in a liberal states , and i could destroy his relationship to the violin , and andere and other exciting forms of didaktischen geigenpädagogik .
so i just started playing .
i played the first sentence of beethoven violinkonzert .
and while i was playing , i noticed that in nathaniels eyes , a complete transformation was .
it was like he stood under a impact of a invisible shift , a chemical reaction , which was the catalyst .
nathaniels anger turned into understanding in understanding in understanding where a calm and anmut .
and as a miracle took his violin , and started to play a bunch of ausschnitte ausschnitte from violinkonzerten , and then i asked me to play , and then they asked me to play , mendelssohn , sibelius .
we started talking about music , starting from bach , finger , brahms , bruckner , and all the other bs to esa-pekka bis .
and i realized that he was not just a enzyklopädisches knowledge of music , but it also had a very close relationship with her .
he talked about her with a passion and a understanding that i just had to know from my colleagues in the philharmonie of los angeles .
he played music and he was talking about music , and he was gezogen from this paranoiden , verwirrten man who was just going through the streets of los angeles , a liebenswerter , ausgezeichneter , ausgezeichneter , in democratic , ausgebildeter musicians .
music is medicine . music is changing .
for nathaniel means music for the music .
because the music allows him to give him his thoughts and delusions with help and creativity in something real .
and so he entflieht his quälenden state .
i understood that this is the nature of art .
this is why we make music : so we can do something that &apos;s in all of us , deep inside of us , and our feelings , through our artistic lens , through our creativity .
and the reality of that , it &apos;s all of us all of us , and it &apos;s got , and we got , and we got ourselves .
what nathaniel does , that brought him back to the music of friends .
the erlösende power of music took him to the family of musicians that the mind that his talent and achtete him .
and i &apos;m always going to keep nathaniel with nathaniel music , whether in the walt disney hall or in skid row , because he reminds me of why i &apos;m musicians .
thank you very much .
bruno giussani : thank you very much . thank you .
robert gupta .
robert gupta : i want to play something that i stole the cellisten .
i hope you &apos;ll pardon me .
so i &apos;ve been able to take a lot of fish .
i just loved two .
this first one , that was more like a passionate cultural .
it was a beautiful fish , wohlschmeckend , good texture , gehaltvoll , a suicide on the menu .
what a fish .
even better , it was gezüchtet in aquakultur to the angeblich standards of sustainability .
so you could feel comfortable with it .
i had this beauty with this beauty over several months .
one day called the boss of the company and asked whether i could give you a breath about the sustainability farm .
&quot; of course , &quot; i said .
here was a company that was trying to solve what this unimaginable problem has become our chefs . how do we keep our speisekarten ?
in the last 50 years , we have the ocean like we have defeated wälder .
it &apos;s hard to überbewerten the destruction .
90 percent of the great fish that we love , the tunas , the heilbutte , the lachse , the lachse , they &apos;re collapsed .
it &apos;s almost nothing left .
so , or übel , übel , fischanbau , a part of our future .
many arguments , against it . fischzuchtanlagen verschmutzen , most of them , most of them , and they &apos;re inefficient , we take tuna . a big disadvantage .
he has a futterverwertung of 15 to one .
that means 15 pounds of wildfisch are necessary to get a pfund .
not very sustainable .
it doesn &apos;t taste very well .
so here was a company that tried to do it right .
i wanted to give you all .
at day , the event called me , i called the head of the öffentlichkeitsarbeit for the company .
let &apos;s call it .
&quot; don &apos;t say , &quot; just to have the facts right , you &apos;re famous for the sea , so far out of the sea , that their environment doesn &apos;t happen . &quot;
&quot; that &apos;s true , &quot; he said , &quot; we &apos;re so far out that the waste of our fish are distributed , not focused on it . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; we &apos;re basically a world .
this futterverwertung of 2.5 to one , &quot; he said .
&quot; the best part of the industry . &quot;
2.5 , great .
&quot; 2.5 to one , what ? what do you do ? &quot;
&quot; sustainable proteins , &quot; he said .
&quot; great &quot; , &quot; i said . put me .
and i was lying in bed , and i thought , what &apos;s the hell is a sustainable protein ?
so i called the next day , just before the event , don &apos;t look at the end .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t , what are sustainable proteins ? &quot;
he said he doesn &apos;t know that . he &apos;s going to be a little bit more .
now , i &apos;m going to take some people in the company . nobody could give me a voice answer . until i finally , finally , to the senior biologists .
let &apos;s call it the same .
&quot; don &apos;t say , &quot; what , what are the sustainable proteins that are sustainable proteins ? &quot;
now , he mentioned some algae and some fischmehle , and then he said , &quot; he said .
i said , &quot; hühnchen-pellets ? &quot;
he said , &quot; yes , feathers , skin , knochenmehl , reste , and to food . &quot;
i said , &quot; how much percent of the eures is chicken ? &quot;
in the assumption of perhaps two percent .
&quot; well , that &apos;s about 30 percent , &quot; he said .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t , &quot; what &apos;s sustainable , to get the chicken in the process of bringing the fish ? &quot;
there was a long pause in the line and he said , &quot; there are just too much chicken in the world . &quot;
i &apos;m entliebte by this fish .
no , not because i &apos;m a selbstgerechter genießer and gutmensch .
that &apos;s actually i &apos;m .
no , i actually got micht from this fish , because i swear to god , the fish was going to be geschmeckt after this conversation after chicken .
this second fish , that &apos;s a different kind of love .
it &apos;s the romantic way , the way you think you &apos;re going to learn your fish , you love the fish more love .
i &apos;ve eaten him in a restaurant in südspanien .
a befreundete journalist had been talked for a long time from this fish .
it has a sense of verkuppelt .
he came up with a bright hellen , almost white color .
the chef had him verkocht .
stop twice .
still , it was still alive .
who can make a fish that &apos;s so good after he got verkocht ?
i can &apos;t , but this guy can .
let &apos;s call it miguel . actually , it &apos;s called miguel .
and no , he didn &apos;t clean fish and he &apos;s not a chef , at least in the way that you and i understand them .
he &apos;s a biologist at veta la la .
this is a fischaufzucht in the südwestlichen corner of spain .
it &apos;s near the mouth of the river .
until the 1980s , the farm in the hands of argentiniern was the farm in the hands of argentiniern .
they züchteten züchteten on the , , which was basically wetlands .
they made that by entwässerten the country .
they built this complicated from channels of channels , and they made water water out of the land and beyond .
now , they couldn &apos;t make that that was not , not economically .
and it was a disaster .
it took about 90 percent of the birds around what &apos;s going to be a lot of birds .
and so , 1982 , a spanish company with the country .
what did you do ?
they have the flow of the water .
they literally have the lever to lever .
instead of the water they used to take the channels to rebuild the water .
they fluteten the channels .
they created a $ 11.000 hektar -- barsch , meeräsche , shrimp , aal -- and dabei miguel and its company komplett the ecological destruction .
the farm is incredible .
i mean , you &apos;ve never seen anything like that .
they stare at the horizon that &apos;s a million miles away , and all you see are geflutete channels and those density , üppige .
i was not long ago there .
he &apos;s a tremendous guy , three parts charles darwin and a part of a &quot; crocodile &quot; a crocodile . &quot;
okay ? there were us and we fought with the wetlands and i keuche and schwitze , have matsch matsch to my knees and miguel keeps in quiet biologievorlesung .
he &apos;s got a rare gleitaar .
now he mentioned the mineralbedürfnisse of phytoplankton .
and here , here he looks a pattern of bundle that erinnert the tansanische .
it turns out that miguel has been the biggest part of his career in the mikumi national park in africa .
i wondered him how to become a fisch-experten .
he said , &quot; fish ? i don &apos;t know about fish .
i &apos;m an expert on relationships . &quot;
and then he goes and see , in more than rare birds and algae and curious wasserpflanzen .
and don &apos;t get me wrong , that was really fascinating , you know , the biotische community , in the way that sort of works .
it &apos;s great , but i was love .
and my head was weak about this verkochte piece of köstlichen fish that i had at the bottom of the bottom .
so i cut him . i said , &quot; miguel , how come it &apos;s going to taste so good ? &quot;
he pointed to the algae .
&quot; i know boy , the algae , the algae , the phytoplankton , the relationships , that &apos;s incredible .
but what are the food fish ?
how is the futterverwertung ? &quot;
now , he &apos;s going to tell me to tell me that it &apos;s such a system that the fish eat what they would eat in the wild .
the plant biomass , the phytoplankton , the zoo , that &apos;s what the fish is feeds .
the system is so healthy , it &apos;s completely selbsterneuernd .
there is no food .
depending on a farm that doesn &apos;t feed their animals ?
i went on on the site on the day , and i asked him , &quot; for a place , &quot; as a place that seems to be , &quot; unlike any farm i &apos;ve ever been to be , how measure you &apos;re going to be ? &quot;
and the moment was it was like a dog would have an bühnenwechsel bühnenwechsel .
and we &apos;re bogen around the corner and we offered the most amazing sight , thousands and thousands of pinker flamingos , a collective tapestry so far as much as the eye .
&quot; that &apos;s success , &quot; he said .
&quot; look at your bäuche , pink .
they schlemmen . &quot;
schlemmen ? i was completely verwirrt .
i said , &quot; miguel , don &apos;t you your fish ? &quot;
&quot; yes , &quot; he said .
&quot; we lose 20 percent of our fish and fischeiern to birds .
now , last year , on this site , there were a lot of vögel birds , more than 250 different species .
it &apos;s the largest one , and one of the most important private private vogelreservate in europe .
i said , &quot; miguel , is a good gedeihender vogelbestand not the last one that you want to have on a fischaufzucht ? &quot;
he shook his head , no .
he said , &quot; we build extensiv , not getting intense .
this is a ökologisches network .
the flamingos eat the shrimp .
the shrimp feed the phytoplankton .
so the whole pinker is the better the better system . &quot;
okay , let &apos;s watch this . a farm that doesn &apos;t feed their animals and a farm that &apos;s measuring their success on their own .
a fischaufzucht , but also a vogelreservat .
oh , and by the way , the flamingos of hot don &apos;t even have to be there .
they breed in a city 20 kilometers away where the bodenbeschaffenheit is better for the nestbau .
every morning they fly over the age of farm .
and every night they go back to 240 miles .
they do that because they can follow the gestrichelten white line of the landstraße .
seriously , seriously .
i had a kind of a reise of penguins , so i looked at a miguel .
i said , &quot; miguel , fly to the farm and fly back and forth at the bottom ?
do you do that for the kids ? &quot;
he looked at me as i just had a song by whitney houston .
he said , &quot; no . you do that because the food is better . &quot;
i didn &apos;t mention the skin of my beloved geological , and i didn &apos;t like köstlich , and i don &apos;t like sie . i don &apos;t like her knusprig .
it &apos;s this beißende , verkohlte taste .
i almost never do that .
and yet , when i tried to this restaurant in südspanien , she didn &apos;t get to fischhaut at all .
she schmeckte , and it was like , in fact , as if you would take a bite from the ocean .
i mentioned that , and he nickte .
he said , &quot; the skin seems like a sponge .
it &apos;s the last defense before you get something into the body .
it has evolved in the course of evolution to unreinheiten unreinheiten . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; but our water has no unreinheiten . &quot;
okay . a farm that doesn &apos;t feeds their fish . a farm that &apos;s measuring their success on their own .
and then i realized , when he says , a farm that doesn &apos;t have a unreinheiten , he gewaltig , because the water that &apos;s flowing through this farm from the river .
it &apos;s a river that leads to all the things that are rivers with these rivers today , they &apos;re using these chemische , chemical pollutants of schädlingsbekämpfungsmitteln .
and if it &apos;s been fought by the system , and this is the one that &apos;s the water is the water as it is .
the system is so healthy , it cleans the water .
so not just a farm that doesn &apos;t feed their animals , not just a farm that &apos;s measuring their success on their own , but a farm that literally is a wasser-aufbereitungsanlage , and not just for those fish , but for you , for you and me .
because when the water herausfließt , it versinkt in the atlantic .
a drop in the ocean , i know , but i &apos;ll take it , and i think it should also do , because these love , as romantic , is also necessary .
you could say that it &apos;s a recipe for the future , whether we &apos;re talking about barsch or fleischrindern .
now what we need is a radical new concept of agriculture , from one of the food in which actually actually taste .
but for a lot of people , it &apos;s a little bit radical .
we &apos;re not realisten , we genießer . we &apos;re lover .
we love wochenmärkte . we love little familienbetriebe . we &apos;re talking about local food . we &apos;re food .
and if you say that the things that &apos;s future is about the future of someone &apos;s next somewhere , and says , &quot; hey folks , i love pinke flamingos , but how are you going to feed the world ?
how are you going to feed the world ? &quot;
can i be honest ?
i don &apos;t like this question .
no , not because we already have enough calories about the world more than just feeding .
a billion people will become today .
a billion -- that &apos;s more than ever before -- because of krasser inequalities in the distribution , not the gesamtproduktion .
now , i don &apos;t like this question because they have the logic of our nahrungssystems over the last 50 years .
füttere corn , schädlingsbekämpfungsmittel on monokulturen , chemicals on the earth , chicken in the earth , and the whole time was simply asking , &quot; if we feed more people , how terrible can that be ? &quot;
this was the cause . it was the rechtfertigung . it was the business of american agriculture .
we should call them what she is , a gewerbe in abwicklung , a gewerbe , which is rapidly ökologisches , which enables the production of these production .
this is not a gewerbe , and it &apos;s not agriculture .
our kornkammer is now threatened by bedroht , not because of the abnehmender , but because of abnehmender resources , it &apos;s because of abnehmender resources , as well as abnehmender resources .
not through the latest mähdrescher- and traktor-erfindungen , but through fruchtbares , not by pumps , not by pumps , not by kettensägen , but by forests , and not by fischerboote and nets , but by fish in the ocean .
you want to feed the world ?
let &apos;s start with the question of , how are we going to feed ourselves ?
or better , how can we create conditions that empower every community that makes themselves feed themselves ?
to do that , don &apos;t look at the agrarindustrie-modell for the future .
it &apos;s really old , and it &apos;s done .
capital , chemistry and machines are obenan in it , and it never produced something really good for food .
let &apos;s take a look at the ecological model .
this is that , on two billion years .
look at miguel , farmers like miguel , like miguel , miguel .
the other ones that are not worlds for themselves , are the relationship between the world , who are instead of extensiv , farmers who are not only erzeuger , farmers who are not only erzeuger , but experts for relations , but experts for relations .
because they &apos;re the ones who are also experts for taste .
and if i really am honest , they &apos;re a better chef than i &apos;m ever going to be .
you know , this is right , because if the future is good food , it will be delicious .
thank you .
if i want to tell you a thing that we want to tell you about is that the sum of the data we consume is greater than the sum of their parts and instead of thinking about how we can use information , and we can see that patterns that otherwise didn &apos;t have been seen .
so , what we &apos;re seeing here is a typical sterbediagramm to age .
the program i &apos;m using here is a little experiment .
it &apos;s called pivot , and what i can do with pivot is that i can filter for a certain cause , say , accidents .
and immediately i see another pattern that makes sense .
and that &apos;s because in the mittelbereich , people are the most , and you &apos;re over here .
we can step one step further and see the data and see that kreislauferkrankungen and cancer , and that &apos;s not the usual suspects , but not for everybody .
now , if we look at the go on and say , we &apos;re going to see 40 years , and we see the 40 of the unfälle , that is the main underlying fact that we should be concerned about the people that people should worry about .
and who sees it that is particularly true in men .
so you see that the sharing of information and data in this way , is very , very quickly in a lively informationsgrafik .
and if we can do this for raw data , why not make a content for the content ?
now , what we &apos;re now here is the most powerful einzelnen of every single &quot; sports &quot; which ever occurs .
it &apos;s all here . it &apos;s all online .
you can like to test it in their own talk .
with pivot , they can stay in a decade .
you can put in a particular year .
they can jump directly to a particular graph .
now , if i look here , i see the athletes that appear in this topic and the sportarten .
i &apos;m a lance fan , so i click on the hierhin of all the way that the lance is erwähnt .
now , if i want to get a gröberen , i could think , &quot; ok , what if i &apos;m going to deal with it with the topic ? &quot;
so i go back and erweitere the perspective .
now i &apos;m greg lemond .
and so you get an idea that you &apos;re sort of durchsucht , gezielter , breiter , breiter , reinzoomen , reinzoomen , rauszoomen , you don &apos;t search or not just surft .
you do something that &apos;s actually a little different .
it &apos;s something between , and we think it changes the way information can be used .
i want to start this idea a little bit about something like a little bit crazy .
what we &apos;ve done here is we took every single job of pollen , and they reduced a little summary .
the summary is a quick kind of übersicht , and a symbol of the domain you come from .
i just just show you the top 500 of the populärsten .
but even in this particular scan , we can do a lot of things .
immediately , we immediately get a sense of the issues that are at wikipedia at the wikipedia .
i &apos;m going to choose the issue &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; part .
now , after i voted &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; time i &apos;ve got the government , i know that the wikipediakategorien that are most sensitive to the decken of the year &quot; people &quot; . &quot;
this is really important because this is a realization that &apos;s not a single wikipediaseite .
that &apos;s only when you look at a step and look at the whole thing .
schauend on a particular of these summaries , i can then go into the subject of time , &quot; people in the year , &quot; and all of the together .
now , if i find all these people , i &apos;m seeing all the people of these are regierungsbeamte , some of the things that are done . some of them , some of the economy , is coming out of the economy . here &apos;s my boss , and one comes from the musikbereich .
and interestingly , it &apos;s also a ted conference for a ted prize winner .
so we can jump and look at all the ted prize winner .
you see , we &apos;re going to be the first time as it &apos;s really a third time , not just to page , but much more abstract .
and so i want to show you what a little bit of a surprise .
i &apos;m just showing you the new york times website .
pivot , this application -- i don &apos;t want to call it a browser ; it &apos;s really not a browser , but you can see a websites -- and we bring them to the zoom-technologie of every single website like this .
so i can go back to a step and go directly to an awful sektion .
so that &apos;s why you just look at the look at the look at the scale of the websites in this way , and how to look at the whole way .
so i can actually take in my course in a certain place .
here &apos;s the one that &apos;s the whole demonstration that i kept from here .
and i can do anything i &apos;ve looked at today , again , again .
and if i look back , i &apos;m going to look back to a step back , and i can look at my next verlauf , maybe i went to my such-vergangenheit . here , i went to bing , here , or here , to live here , live labs .
and from here i can put up in the side of the way , and they get back .
it &apos;s a metaphor that &apos;s used again and again , every time it makes the picture larger than the sum of the datenteile .
right now , in this world , we think that data is a curse .
we talk about the fluch of the informationsüberflusses .
we &apos;re talking about &quot; drowning . &quot;
what if we could turn these situation and put the internet on the head , so we can go from one to another , to start with many things to many things , and by looking at what otherwise would be otherwise hidden , and so , what otherwise would be otherwise .
if we can do this , then this one bisherige is going to be , maybe a new source of information .
and instead of moving just to information , we can get knowledge out .
and if we know knowledge , we can actually pull even more adventurous out of it .
so i hear that i &apos;m going to listen to thank you .
i grew up with a gehörigen portion science .
i was driving with my school bus to school , every day every day .
and my nose was always kept in a book , a science-fiction-buch , which is my mind in other worlds and erzählerische in the deep welten , which is why i &apos;m befriedigte neugier .
and this curiosity showed that i was always going to be in school , through the forests of wälder , and the samples , and the proben and käfer and käfer and teichwasser , everything got home and underneath the microscope .
i was completely natural , you know .
and it was always about trying to understand the world and the limitations of the potential .
and my love seemed to be in my environment , because at the time , in the late 60s , we flew to the moon and erforschten the deep sea .
jacques cousteau came in our living rooms with his amazing shows that animals and places and a world full of wonder that we never imagined before .
that &apos;s probably very good at the very science-fiction-rolle of the science-fiction-rolle .
and i was an artist .
i could draw . i could paint .
and there &apos;s neither video games that we have noch with computergenerierten movies , the whole rise of the media landscape , i had to create the images in my head .
that &apos;s what we had to do . if we read a book , we took the description of the dopamine receptor and they took them on the screen in our heads .
my response to the drawing and paint of aliens , alien worlds , robots , raumschiffen and all of that .
in the matheunterricht , i was caught constantly by the teacher , like i , in a committed textbook , herummalte .
and creativity had to get to somehow .
and what happened was interesting . what was happening to jacques cousteaus at the time , was the idea of a completely unknown world on our planet .
certainly , i would never do a alien world with a spaceship . that seemed pretty unlikely .
but here &apos;s a world that i could actually walk here , here on earth , and it was just fascinating and exotic like all the ones i &apos;d always imagined when i was reading this books .
so i decided to be 15 , the diver .
the only problem was that i lived in a small village in canada , one thousand kilometers from the nearest ocean .
i didn &apos;t have a sense of it .
i &apos;m going to nervte my father until he finally got a tauchschule in buffalo , new york , just ausfindig , just on the other side of the border , where we lived .
i graduated from the tauchschein in a pool of ymca in the winter in the winter in the winter .
but the ocean , a real ocean , i got two years later , and when we moved to california .
in 40 years , the 40 years of inzwischen are verstrichen , i spent about three hours under water , 500 hours of it .
and i learned that the world of the deep sea itself , even in the most flacheren oceans , is so rich about faszinierendem lives , as we really can &apos;t really possibly imagine .
the nature of nature knows no borders , in contrary to our own , kläglichen human imagination .
for today , i &apos;m going to have a very tiefste awe for what i see on my own .
and my love to the ocean is holding the ocean to the same intensity as ever .
when i was a erwachsener aussuchte , it was the filmmaking .
that seemed the best way to tell you , to tell stories , to build images , to build images .
as a child i drew on and so forth .
so films were films , images , images and stories .
of course , the stories i &apos;m going to be aussuchte , &quot; terminator , &quot; &quot; &quot; aliens , &quot; and &quot; abyss . &quot;
&quot; abyss , &quot; i could take my breath for the unterwasserwelt and the diving and the filmemachen .
so , as i do , basically , my two passions .
something interesting happened to &quot; abyss : to solve a problem in this film -- and we had to create a kind of liquid nitrogen -- we had to go on a computergenerierte animation , cg , cg .
what came out was the first computergenerierte soft-surface-figur that was ever seen in a movie .
the film is not a cash , and he &apos;d just say his costs , but i realized something fascinating : the audience in the world was like hypnotisiert , the publikum of the magic .
according to arthur clarke , the law is bekanntlich , bekanntlich technology and magic don &apos;t have different from different .
so they saw something magical .
and that &apos;s what i really found incredibly exciting .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that must be unbedingt into the filmkunst . &quot;
so we went to &quot; terminator 2 , &quot; my next film , &quot; still a lot more .
together with ilm , we made the guy out of liquid metal . the success really hanging out of how this effect was going .
and it worked . again , we had created a little bit of a little bit , and the effect in the audience was the same . but we have a little bit more money on the movie .
and from these two experiences , a whole new world , a whole new world of creativity for creativity .
so i started a company , with my good friend of my good friend , winston , who was the best make-up- and creature-designer , she called &quot; digital domain . &quot;
the idea of this company was to be looking at analog processes with visual printers , to engage with the digital druckern .
and then we did that , and then we got to have a competitive advantage .
but the &apos; 90s , we realized that we were in the creature- and character-design -- which we were actually founded , to slow down to slow vorankamen .
i had this piece of &quot; avatar &quot; and the most effekte effects in things is the most visueller effects in the whole new way , with the realistic human , expressive characters who were made by the human , expressive characters , who should be all the cg , and the world should be cg .
but the fuel position is quite coming back . and people in my company told me that we cannot be able to do that .
so i took this and made this other film about the big ship , which is the result .
i &apos;ve been doing this as &quot; romeo and juliet , it &apos;s sold , and it was ausmaßes , a liebesfilm epischen , a passionate film .
but i really wanted to actually hinabtauchen the real presence of the titanic .
i made the film i made .
that &apos;s the truth . the studio didn &apos;t know .
i convinced you by saying , &quot; we dive to the wreckage . we &apos;re going to do the real job .
we &apos;re going to show it in the eröffnungssequenz of film .
that &apos;s immensely important . it &apos;s a good aufhänger for marketing . &quot;
and i persuaded them , to finance one expedition .
sounds crazy . but that &apos;s going back to that , it can create a reality .
and then we actually created six months later , a reality where i wiederfand in a russian tauchboot , four miles under the surface of the north atlantic , and i &apos;m going to see the real titanic through a bullauge .
this was not a film , no hd , that was really .
so that really blew me .
and the preparation we were enormously enormously . we had to do cameras and scheinwerfer and all kinds of things .
and i noticed how much these tiefseetauchgänge , a weltraummission .
well , they were also hochtechnisch , and bedurften umfangreicher .
you get up into this capsule , you &apos;re going to run into this dark , feindselige environment , where none of hope is not going to be able to get it back .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s just as i think i am in a science-fiction-film .
that &apos;s really cool . &quot;
i was a regelrecht obsessed with the exploring of the deep sea .
anyway , the part of curiosity and science has to do . it was all . it was adventure ; it was curiosity . it was imagination .
and it was a experience that couldn &apos;t give me hollywood .
because , you know , i could imagine a creature that we could make a visual effect , but i couldn &apos;t imagine what i was seeing outside the outside .
in some of the following expeditions , i saw creatures creatures in thermalquellen , and sometimes things that i &apos;ve never seen before , sometimes even the things that had ever seen before , and for the science that we saw , we had no words yet .
so that &apos;s really got me right , and i wanted to get more .
and so i met a little bit unusual .
after the success of &quot; titanic &quot; i said , &quot; okay , i want to put my hauptberuf in hollywood to ice in a while , and i &apos;ll leave for a while . &quot;
and then we started , we started to go to the bismarck , and we were exploring them with roboterfahrzeugen .
we &apos;re going to return to the back of the titanic .
we took little robots that we built , which is a fiberglaskabel abwickelten .
our intention was , hineinzutauchen , and then the internal inside of the ship , which never been done before .
nobody had been involved in the inner area of the wracks , and you didn &apos;t have any means for that . so we evolved the technology .
and so , i &apos;m sitting here on the side of the titanic , in a tauchboot , and planken , which is quite like this brettern , and i know that once the band was playing there .
and i fly with a little roboterfahrzeug through the gänge of the ship .
i &apos;m actually just bediene it , but my consciousness is inside the vehicle .
it felt like i was physically physically in the schiffswracks of the titanic .
this was the surrealste form of a déjà-vu that i &apos;ve ever experienced , because before i get to a corner , i always knew what &apos;s going on in the lichtkegel of the vehicle , because i was months of filmset , when we were running the movie .
the amazing set was a exact copy of the baupläne of the ship .
so that was a highly curious experience .
she made me realize that this telepräsenz-erlebnis idea that you can use such roboterhafte avatare , and so the own minds of the vehicle is going to be embarrassed in this other form of existence .
it was really special profound .
and maybe a little bit of a view of what might happen in some decades , if you have a cyborg-körper , to explore something or other things , in all kinds of things i can imagine as a science-fiction-fan .
so what we started to do is what we &apos;ve seen in the bottom , and we &apos;ve seen what we &apos;ve seen , for example , this tiefseequellen , where we saw these incredibly amazing animals . that &apos;s sort of außerirdische , but here &apos;s the erden .
they live with help .
they don &apos;t exist in a direct mechanism as we do .
and so you see animals that are directly next to a 500 degrees celsius , that they can survive there .
at the same time i was interested in the same time , i was very interested in weltraumwissenschaft , which was the science-fiction-einfluss of my childhood .
and so i ended up with people who are interested in space and the richtige and the right online weltraummissionen , and they &apos;re going to be nach , and they drive in russia , the mission of the mission of the mission of the mission of the mission , they fly to international weltraumstation and take our 3d-kamerasysteme .
that was fascinating .
but on the end , it was out that i took out to the deep sea .
i took them with them and verschaftte them access to the world : astrobiologen , planetenwissenschaftler , planetenwissenschaftler , people who were interested in such extreme situations , so i took them to engage with you , samples and testing and instruments and so on .
we were doing dokumentarfilme , but actually science , more specifically , more importantly , weltraumwissenschaft .
so the circle of the circle of life as a child , then as a child , and the execution in reality .
in the course of this , i &apos;ve learned a lot .
i &apos;ve learned a lot about science , but i &apos;m sure you &apos;re thinking , a director must have to be able to be a leader like a schiffskapitän or so .
i didn &apos;t understand much of leadership before i antrat these mounting .
because at a certain point i had to say , &quot; what do i do ? &quot;
why do i do that ? what comes out ? &quot;
these blöden films bring us not a cash .
we &apos;re going to play the costs , and we don &apos;t have any rain .
everybody thinking , i &apos;m just between &quot; the titanic &quot; and &quot; avatar &quot; and i would have been somewhere in a handtuch on the beach .
i have all these films , these bench , for a very small audience .
no glory , no honor , no money . what do you do ?
you &apos;re doing it to be the task to the challenge , to the challenge -- and the ocean is the most herausforderndste environment that &apos;s been doing , and because of the weird connection that emerges with a little group of people .
because we &apos;ve done all this with just 10 to 12 people who &apos;ve worked for years , and sometimes we were two to three months on sea .
and in this community , you realize that the most important thing that you have to do is , because you can get a task of one , you can tell you a task .
if you go back and forth , and you say , &quot; we &apos;ve got to do it , the fiberglas , the schallschwächung , and the schwierigkeiten that you &apos;re working on , and the difficulty , you can &apos;t explain the other , and that &apos;s like police or soldiers , they have something together and know they can never explain it .
there is an connection that creates an connection , an reflections .
so when i went back to turn my next film called &quot; avatar , i tried to use the same amount of a führungsstil , which is that you &apos;re going to be a team respect and gegenzug in the gegenzug of the respect .
it &apos;s changed the dynamic .
so i stood back with a small team on the unbekanntem terrain . we were drehten , &quot; avatar &quot; with a new technology that we didn &apos;t have before .
very exciting .
a ungeheure challenge .
and we were given for a hundred years of a time , for a real family .
and that changed my way , to make movies .
there were people who were thought that we would have had this ozeanwesen , really good nachgemacht and on the planet .
for me , it was more a prinzipielle way of doing my job , the real process that has changed in the outcome .
so what can we get from all of that ?
what lessons we learned ?
i think first , the first place is curiosity .
it &apos;s the most powerful human trait .
our imagination is a force that can create a reality .
and the achtung of your team is more important than all the world &apos;s globe .
and i get young filmmaker who say , &quot; give me a advice of how i can do something like that . &quot;
and i say , &quot; don &apos;t you yourself yourself .
that &apos;s another one , and you &apos;re going to get some other for you . don &apos;t you bet yourself , not versus themselves . but take risks on you . &quot;
nasa has such a lieblingssatz : &quot; fail . &quot;
but in the art and the study , it has to be a alternative , because there &apos;s a vertrauensvorschuss .
no regard , the innovation , ever voted without risk .
you have to be prepared to take those risks .
this is the idea i &apos;d like to give you with the way . fail , is not a alternative , but it &apos;s not a alternative . thank you .
today i &apos;m talking about energy and climate .
and this may be something that my favorite vollzeitbeschäftigung is something that my vollzeitbeschäftigung was mainly in vaccines and seeds , to make things that we invent and deliver to allow the poorest to give a better life .
but energy and climate change are extremely important for those people , even more important than any other on the planet .
klimaverschlechterung means that their saaten are not growing over many years , and we &apos;re going to take too much or a little bit more than to be able to change their fragile environment .
that leads to hungersterben . it leads to insecurity . it leads to riots .
so , a climate change is going to be a climate .
also , the energiepreis is very important for you .
the fact is that if you could reduce only one of the things that could reduce the price , the energy use to be the most effective at all .
now , the energiepreis is like the time .
in fact , the fortschrittsgesellschaft is based on energiefortschritten .
the kohlerevolution trieb the industrial revolution , and even in the 20th century , there was a rapid case in the elektrizitätspreis , and so we have refrigerators , air , we can make modern materials and so many things do .
so we &apos;re in a wonderful situation , with electricity in the rich world .
but if we cut the price -- let &apos;s cut the price of cut -- we &apos;re hitting a new barrier and these barrier together with co2 .
co2 warms up the planet and the equation of co2 is pretty clear .
they summieren the ausgestoßene co2 , which leads to the temperaturerhöhung , and these temperaturerhöhung has some negative consequences , and maybe even worse , that the natural ecosystems can &apos;t adapt to change , and so they can &apos;t change the whole systems .
now , the exact relationship between a co2-anstieg and the dadurch temperaturveränderung and where their other follow , there is some of the things that we have , but not very many .
and there are certainly unklarheit about how bad these consequences are going to be . but they &apos;re extremely bad !
i asked the top-wissenschaftler several years ago , &quot; we have to get down to zero ?
it &apos;s not enough to be half , or a quarter ? &quot;
the answer is to get near zero , the temperature will continue to go .
and that &apos;s why it &apos;s a big challenge .
it &apos;s very different than say , we have a 3.5 feet of a 3.5 pair of hohen , who have to come under a three meter bridge , and then you can basically squeeze underneath it underneath .
this is going to go down to the bottom , to zero .
now we found a lot of kohlenstoffdioxid from a 26 , over 26 billion tons .
every americans , about 20 tons . people from poor countries , less than one .
it &apos;s about five tons of tons for every one on the planet .
and somehow we have to change changes that goes on zero .
it &apos;s been in constant constant .
only different economic changes , it &apos;s actually influenced by it , and we need to go from rapidem increase to the verringerung and to zero to zero .
this equation has four factors . it &apos;s a little bit . you have this thing -- you have this thing -- co2 , that you &apos;re going to depend on the way , and it will take the number of people , and the diensten of the people who use the average of the average service and the co2 that &apos;s going to be emittiert per unit of energy
so let &apos;s look at each other at the time , and we think about how we get that on zero .
probably one of those numbers have to come to zero .
now this is fundamental algebra , but let &apos;s go through it .
first , we have the population .
today , 6,8 billion people , live billion people .
and it &apos;s been estimated on nine billion people who are going to move on 9 billion .
if we &apos;re very successful in new vaccines , the gesundheitsvorsorgung and reproduktionsmedizin are , we could probably reduce it to 10 percent of the way to 15 percent , but at the time we see a slope about 1.3 percent .
the second factor is the services that we use .
this is all the way that food we eat , clothing , television heating .
these are very good things and armutsverringerung means that dienste of every single thing about every single thing on the planet .
it &apos;s great that these number goes up .
in the wealthy world , we could probably do abstriche and use less , but in the average , this number is going to rise and so forth , it &apos;s going to be going to be moving around , so more than doubles , the number of services will be taken on the individual .
here we see a very basic service . there &apos;s home to get home in the home , so you can read the homework ?
and these students don &apos;t have it , so they go and read your schulaufgaben underneath the straßenlicht .
now , in efficiency , the e , the energy per service , there &apos;s finally good news .
we have something that doesn &apos;t have , that &apos;s not going to be up .
because of the verschiedener successes in the lichtsektor , through other kinds of ways , through new ways , in the häuserbau , there are many services , whose energy stores are actually dienste by 90 percent .
in other zones , like düngemitteln , 105 : 56,000 : 56,000 : 56,000 -- 05 : 05 : 05 , 58,000 : 58,000 or luftverkehr , is the gay for improvement , for improvement , for improvement , is very much lower .
if we &apos;re optimistic , we might get a reduction to a factor of three or maybe even a factor of sixth six .
but the first three factors , we &apos;re now from 26 billion of the vielleicht , maybe 13 billion tons of tons , and it &apos;s just not enough .
so let &apos;s see the fourth factor -- and this is going to be a key -- that &apos;s the amount of co2 co2 , which is going to be emittiert .
it turns out that you can get that on zero .
if you burn coal , no .
if you burn natural gas , no .
almost every major food system for electricity today , co2 , except renewables and nuklearenergie .
so what we have to do on a global level is to create a new system .
we need energiewunder .
now if i &apos;m now using the term &quot; miracle , &quot; i don &apos;t mean the impossible .
the microprocessor is a miracle . the computer is a miracle .
the internet and the service is miracle .
people have contributed to the development of many of these wonders .
in fact , there is no deadline that you need a miracle to a certain date .
it &apos;s just like , you &apos;re just like , you know , you &apos;re just not just about , and some of them are not .
in this case , we have to give up a vollgas and a miracle in very short order .
now , i wondered how can i really get this ?
now , there is a natural illustration , a demonstration that the idea of people here are here ?
i remembered the last year when i got mosquitoes and somehow , people like that .
the idea was really , for you , you know , you know , there are people who live with mosquitoes .
for energy , this is what i &apos;m doing .
i decided that this is the cooperation from fireflies , my diesjähriger to the environment .
so here &apos;s a couple natural fireflies .
you &apos;ve told me that they don &apos;t bite . actually , they won &apos;t leave the glass .
now , there are all kinds of spielereilösungen like this , but they don &apos;t all get a lot .
we need solutions , either a unimaginable and a half that have an unimaginable and a half of the unimaginable and unimaginable , and even though it &apos;s many directions , people are looking for five , i can actually do that big demands that can do these large demands .
i have tides , geothermal , merger , and biokraftstoffe .
and this is a moderaten contribution , and if you do a better contribution , i would like to do that , but my job here is , i think , is that we have to work on all these five work , and we can &apos;t give them a moment because they &apos;re likely to be locked , because all of you have any of the problems .
let &apos;s look at the burning fossil fuel fuel , even by either of the coal or natural gas .
what you have to do is , maybe it &apos;s easy , but it &apos;s not . you have to be able to get all the co2 out of the schornstein , and you can get pressure , and then there &apos;s going to be lagern and hope that there &apos;s remains there .
there are some pilotprojekte that can be used to 60 percent -- 80 percent of the time , 80 percent of the time , but it &apos;s going to be a very difficult thing to get to the decrease of co2 , but the biggest problem here is the lagerzeitfrage .
who &apos;s going to make it ?
who can guarantee something , what literally many billions of them as any kind of waste that you can imagine from nuklear- and other things ?
that &apos;s a lot of volume .
so that &apos;s a tough review .
next : nuklearenergie .
it has three big problems , and the cost , especially in hochregulierten countries , the question is , the question is that you can really feel nothing wrong with , despite the human island , that the fuel is not used for weapons .
and what do you do with the waste ?
because it &apos;s not very large , there &apos;s a lot of concerns .
so three problems that may be soluble , and you should work on that .
the last three of five , i have summarized .
they &apos;re renewables as they &apos;re often called .
and also , even though it &apos;s great , they don &apos;t need any fuel -- they have some drawbacks .
one is the most common that these technologies are substantially longer dramatically higher than the von .
these are energiefarmen , you &apos;re talking about many quadratkilometern , thousand more surface than a normal power plant .
also , those sources of things like this .
the sun doesn &apos;t seem all the day , they don &apos;t seem to be every day and the wind doesn &apos;t keep the wind .
and so you have to rely on that sources , a way of getting energy in times when they &apos;re not available to you .
so there &apos;s big preisherausforderungen . there are challenges in the world , and if we say the energy crisis , the source of the country is not just the technology , they also need to deal with the risk of what the energy of where is different from that .
and there &apos;s the lagerungsproblem .
and to show the dimension , i &apos;ve been making all kinds of batteries , which is , the für , handys , cell phones , and i found that the amount of electronic energy that we use , and i found that all batteries , that we could produce now , less than 10 minutes of the gesamtenergie .
so we need a big breakthrough , something that &apos;s going to be a factor of 100 better than the most tuna tuna .
that &apos;s not impossible , but it &apos;s not so easy .
this is what happens when you try to say this unterbrochenen sources over the way we &apos;re going to bring 20 percent of the children .
if you want to rely on 100 percent of it , they need an incredible wunderbatterie .
now , where are we going to go , what is the right approach ?
a &quot; manhattan project ? how come we to target ?
what we need is a lot of companies working on this . hundreds of things .
in every five of these five areas , we need at least 100 people .
you &apos;ll be going to say , you &apos;re going to say , you &apos;re crazy ! that &apos;s good .
i think there are many , there are many , there are many , that there &apos;s been already there .
bill gross has several companies among other companies , including a called esolar solarthermaltechnologien .
vinod khosla invested in dozens of companies who make great things and interesting possibilities and i try to support this .
nathan myhrvold and i &apos;m funding a company , maybe surprisingly , the nuclear approach .
there are some innovation in the nuklearbereich ; modular , flüssig .
in this industry , in this industry , in this industry , in this industry , in a while , is not a great surprise that some good concepts of the brain .
the terrapower-konzept means that you instead of a part of the urans , which is a percent , which is the u235 , we decided to burn 99 percent , which is the u238 .
that &apos;s a pretty crazy idea .
but in fact , you &apos;ve been thinking about it for a long time , but you could never really do any efficient , but since there &apos;s been modern supercomputers , you can simulate it , and you can see that , yes , it &apos;s the right thing , it looks like it &apos;s going to be .
and because you &apos;re 99 percent fuel , it &apos;s a lot better than that .
in fact , you have the waste , and you can actually use the waste of today &apos;s reactors as a antriebsstoff .
instead of taking the head , you burn it just , you just burn it . a great thing .
this uranium has to be done in a way , a little bit like a candle .
you see it &apos;s a kind of column , often as a &quot; wandernde wave . &quot;
that really is the löst .
here &apos;s a picture of a place in kentucky .
this is waste , the 99 percent . you have the part that &apos;s burned , so it &apos;s called aufgebrauchtes uranium .
the triebe the u.s. military for hundreds of years .
and if you can cheap and simply filtriert , you get enough fuel for the rest of the planet .
you know , there &apos;s a lot of challenges , but it &apos;s an example of many hundreds of concepts that we need to come to move forward .
think about how we should measure our success .
how should we look like this ?
now , we go to the target we need to do , and then we talk about the zwischenschritt .
many of a sprechen percent from a 80 percent reduction by 2050 .
it &apos;s really very important that we get there .
the rest of 20 percent are being produced in poor countries , and still a little agriculture , hopefully , hopefully will be waldrohdung and cement , and then to be sauber .
so to reach that 80 percent , the industrialized countries , including countries like china , their elektrizitätsgeneration completely impossible .
the other note is that we use the technology technology if they &apos;re used in all developed countries , and we &apos;re on the way to get them to the rest of the rest .
that &apos;s great important .
this is going to be a key african that zeugnisses .
if we go back to there , how should it look like this in 2020 ?
it should be the two elements .
we should use the effektivitätsmaßnahmen to get up to the way to get up to the way to get the reduction in the way , the less likely we will be the co2-summe and the temperature .
but actually , this note is the kind of note that we &apos;re doing , not just to have the major reduktionen , just as much as the other , which is the other one that the state of innovation is to this point .
and this is the key thing we need to do with vollgas , and we can measure , in firmenzahlen , in pilotprojekten and regulierungsänderungen .
there are many great books to this topic .
the al gore book &quot; we have the choice and david mckays &quot; &quot; energy energy . &quot;
they &apos;re really going to go through and create a framework that this may be discussed in that wide , because we need to take support of all sides .
there are some things that have got together .
that &apos;s a wish .
a very konkreter wish that we invent this technology .
if you &apos;re a wish for the next 50 years , i could choose the president , a vaccine , and i could choose this wish , and i could choose this wish , and i could be halbierter with co2 , that will allow me to be that wish .
this has the biggest impact .
if we don &apos;t get this wish to get the graben between us and the kurzfristig of the kurzfristig , between the u.s. and china , between poor and rich , and all of those lives are all very much worse .
so what do we need to do ?
for what kind of services i do ?
we need to apply ourselves for more .
when countries look at places like koppenhagen , they shouldn &apos;t talk about co2 .
you should discuss this innovationsstrategie talk , and they would be shocked by the silly little bit of some of the innovativen of those innovative approaches .
we need marktanreize , co2 taxes , cap , cap &amp; amp ; something that creates a preissignal .
we need to spread the message .
we have to have dialogue and more and more and more collaborative and the things that are being undertaken by government .
it &apos;s a big wish , but i think we can fulfill it .
thank you very much .
thank you very much .
thank you . thank you !
thank you very much . just to understand a little bit better -- not to understand a notion of the scale of this investment ?
bill gates : to get the simulation on a supercomputer , all the great scientists , we just have to test some 10 million , and even if we tested our materials in a russian reactor , to make sure that it works , is it only vernünftig .
the difficult step is to build the first reaktors , another billion , another billion , and the place that is actually building the first one .
once the first time , when it goes like this , it &apos;s all going to walk , and it &apos;s clear , because the economy that &apos;s the natural is as different as we know them .
to understand that right , it means deep into the soil , almost like a vertical column , this verbrauchten verbrauchten , and then the process starts to go up and go down to the bottom ?
bg : right . today , they have to neu the reactor and so many people , there are many people , and so many people go wrong , and that thing you can get and herausbringt and herausbringt . that &apos;s not good ! it &apos;s not good .
but if you have a cheap fuel , you can befüllen it for 60 years -- think about a column -- you &apos;re going to be buried -- they &apos;re used to the whole curve .
and it sits there and burns 60 years , and then it &apos;s finished .
a nuklearreaktor , who offers itself for the garbage .
bg : yeah . now , what happens to the waste : you can let him sit -- there &apos;s much less waste with this method -- and then they take it into the next reactor and burn it .
and we start by taking the waste that exists in this kühlbecken or trockenbehältern in the reactors . that &apos;s our startbrennstoff .
so what this reactors was a problem , which is what we &apos;re going to enter into our brains and it &apos;s going to reduces the transportation system in the process .
but while you &apos;ve been talking about these kinds of people in this world , over the world , you &apos;ve talked about this opportunity .
where is the biggest interest , so what really does really do ?
bg : well , we haven &apos;t been going on a place , and there &apos;s a lot of interesting offenlegungsregeln for everything that &apos;s a big interest in the name , and there &apos;s a big interest in russia , india , china , china , and i was met with the energieminister and talked about how this to fit .
i &apos;m optimistic . you know , the french and japanese have made something in the direction .
this is a variant of one of the things that was done .
this is a very important step , but it &apos;s like a faster and some countries have this built , so anyone who has a quick reactor is a fast reactor for our first first .
in your mindset , and it &apos;s about to call something like that ?
bg : now we need one of these skalierbaren , stromgenerierenden things that are very cheap , we have 20 years to invent and then 20 years .
this is the deadline that we have to have the umweltmodelle that we need to go through .
and , you know , terrapower , if everything is fine , and it &apos;s a big wish , that would be easy .
and fortunately , today , there are dozens of companies today , and we need hundreds of things that , as if their jobs work , they work for their pilots , for their pilots .
and it would be best if it can create multiple , because then you could use a mixture .
anyway , we need a solution .
and the great possible breakthroughs , is this the biggest thing you know ?
bg : a energiedurchbruch is the most important .
that would be without the umweltherausforderung , but it &apos;s not much more important .
in the nuclear sector , there are other innovative companies .
you know , we don &apos;t know how to do their work as well as these , but there &apos;s the modular way that &apos;s a different approach .
there &apos;s a liquid reaktortyp , which seems to be difficult , but maybe that &apos;s what we say about us .
and so , there &apos;s different , but the beauty is that a uranmolekül energy has been so much energy as a , and that &apos;s largely , if you can deal with the issues , and they &apos;re mainly on the issues , and the cost , the potential of the fußabdruck , so the impact on the country and other things , almost in a own league .
if that doesn &apos;t work , what ?
we have to do notfallmaßnahmen , trying to try to keep the erdtemperatur stable ?
bg : if you come in this situation , it &apos;s like you have too much lower , and just a heart attack , and you &apos;re going to have a heart attack , and you &apos;re going to do it ? you need a herzoperation or something like that .
there is a forschungsrichtung that is called the geoengineering techniques that are dealing with different techniques to delay warming , so we can take 20 or 30 years to get us to bekämen .
that &apos;s just a versicherungsmethode .
you hope that we don &apos;t need that .
some people say , you shouldn &apos;t be able to work on the insurance list because you might have a lazy , so you &apos;re going to eat , because you know that you &apos;re going to save a herzoperation .
i don &apos;t know if you &apos;re going to be smart , but there &apos;s a discourse in geoengineering about whether you should have this , if you have this , if you have to get it faster , or this innovation needs to be more longer than we expect .
klimaskeptiker : have you a or two sentences to convince you ?
bg : well unfortunately , unfortunately , the skeptics in very different hits .
the ones that make scientific arguments are very little .
say , there are negative effects that have negative effects that have to do with the clouds that are going to move things ?
there are very , very few things that you can say , you can actually say that there &apos;s a chance to be in one million .
the hauptproblem process here is like aids .
you make the mistake now , and you &apos;re going to get a lot of it .
and so , the idea of doing , now , if you have all kinds of problems , you know , if you &apos;re not just investing in something later , and it &apos;s not necessarily the most important , the ipcc don &apos;t necessarily necessarily have the worst possible , and there are people in the rich world that are going to look and say , okay , that
the fact is that these uncertainty should be concerned .
but my dream here is that if you can make it economically , and the skeptics is that the skeptics is , the skeptics that you say , &quot; okay , i &apos;m not going to have a carbon footprint that i was going to be , i &apos;m going to have that it &apos;s because i &apos;m going to accept it , because it &apos;s cheaper than the previous
and that would be their answer to the björn lomborg , that if you use all of these time and energy , all the other goals of the problem , the armutsverringerung , the l.a. waste of malaria , and so on , that it &apos;s a stupid waste of resources , and so , for investing in the way we can do .
bg : well , the actual spending for research -- say , the u.s. government should spend 10 billion per year than you do today -- that &apos;s not as dramatic .
and that shouldn &apos;t suffer other things .
you get too large , and you can disagree with big people , and there &apos;s a little people , if you have something that is not going to be done , and trying to fund that , for me , is most of the waste .
it &apos;s because you &apos;re very short just in front of a kostendurchbruch , and i just give the curve , and i think we should try to be more things that have the potential , very much less cheaper .
if the abstrich you get , you get a very high energiepreis , then only the rich will get it .
i mean , each of us here could spend five times as much for our energy without changing its lifestyle .
for the lower billion , but it &apos;s a disaster .
and even more lomborg to think about .
his new masche is : &quot; why is the research that we don &apos;t have to have more ? &quot;
he still gets to be , because of his former stories , with the skeptiker-camp , but he understood that this is a very famous group , and therefore , he &apos;s going to be the forschungsargument .
and this is a characters that i think i think about appropriate .
research , it &apos;s just nuts , how little it is .
and i think i &apos;m talking to almost all of the people here , if i say , i really hope you will be true . thank you very much .
bg : thank you .
a few years ago , at ted , stellte skillman , a design-wettbewerb called &quot; the marshmallow-herausforderung . &quot;
the idea is pretty simple . vierer-teams have to have the highest freistehende structure with 20 spaghetti , about three klebeband , about three klebeband , about three of their own , and a marshmallow .
the marshmallow has to be on top .
and , although it really seems really easy , it &apos;s actually really hard to work because there are people to collaborate very quickly .
and so i thought that this is an interesting idea , and i turned it into a design-workshop .
it was a huge success .
i &apos;ve been doing about 70 workshops in the world , with students , and architects , even with ctos of the fortune-50-unternehmen and there &apos;s something that deep eindrücke into nature , and i want to share some of them with you .
usually most people start to be in the task of the task .
they talk about it , they think about it , it &apos;s going to look like it &apos;s going to look like , she rangeln to power and make it macht .
and then they invest a little bit of time in planning and organization . they &apos;re looking at spaghetti .
they &apos;re going to spend a lot of time in the zusammenbau of the zusammenbau , and they &apos;re all wachsender structures in the zusammenbau of the time .
and finally , before they have no time , someone takes the marshmallow , and they put it on top , step back , step back , and &quot; ta-da ! &quot; they &apos;re listening to their work .
but what happens , and what happens is , what happens is that the ta-da is going to be &quot; uh-oh , &quot; because the weight of the marshmallows is that the whole thing is going to move and einstürzt .
there are a series of people who have a lot more of more &quot; uh-oh than others , and among the worst are frische bwl-absolventen .
they lie , they cheat , they &apos;re confused and produce really dürftige .
and of course , there are also teams that have a lot more &quot; ta-da &quot; and they have fresh fresh students to kindergartens .
and that &apos;s pretty amazing .
and as peter told us , they don &apos;t just produce the highest towers , but also the most interesting structures of all .
what may you be asking is : how does this ? why ? what is with those ?
and peter said , &quot; none of the kids have invested over time to be the ceo of the spaghetti gmbh . &quot;
they don &apos;t invest in machtkämpfe .
but there &apos;s another reason for that .
namely that bwl-studenten were trained to find the right plan , ok , ok !
and then it realize him .
what happens when you put the marshmallow on top of the top , they have no time and what happens ?
it &apos;s a crisis .
sounds familiar , what ?
what &apos;s going to do is what makes the marshmallow different , and they &apos;re building the marshmallow prototype , successful prototypes , always with the marshmallow of the top , so that they decided to fix the way that they can build a möglichkeit prototype .
so , konstrukteure , this kind of collaboration as a core of a iterativen vorgangs .
and with every time trying to get the children immediately and what it doesn &apos;t work and what doesn &apos;t .
so , the performance , working with prototypes , is far -- but we see how different teams are acting .
the average of most of them is about 50cm , bwl-studenten , the half of it , lawyers , lawyers , lawyers , lawyers , but not much , better than adults .
who is most of the most successful ?
architects and engineers , happiness .
the cloud is the highest thing i &apos;ve seen .
and why ? because they understand triangles and sich-selbst-verstärkende patterns are the key to build the key structures .
that &apos;s a little bit about average , but this is going to be interesting .
you put a exekutive administrator on the team , they &apos;re going to fail to be better .
it &apos;s incredible . you see around and see that team will win . &quot;
you can predict the predictions . why is this ?
because they have special skills of the prozessbegleitung .
they conduct the process , you understand it .
and the team that we &apos;re going to do and the work is going to be able to improve the performance of the team .
because of spezialisierte and prozessfähigkeiten and their combination of success .
if you have 10 team , the typical person , they get about six , who have the stable structures .
i was trying to do something interesting .
i thought , let &apos;s get the pokereinsatz .
so i offered a $ 10000 cost to the winner .
what do you think they were doing with these ?
what was the result ?
this was what happened . not a team of a team .
if anybody had built a 2,5cm construction , he would have worn the price home .
so isn &apos;t it interesting that high wetteinsätze have a strong effect ?
we went to the exercise with the same students .
what do you think they were doing ?
now , she understood the advantage of the competition .
so , from the same , bad team among the best .
they produced the highest level of the amount of time .
so there &apos;s tief-greifende lessons for us , about nature &apos;s natural and success .
they like ask : why would someone actually invest a marshmallow-challenge job ?
the reason is i help create digital tools and processes to help team to help teams , cars , video games and visual .
and what the marshmallow-challenge is doing is to identify them out of assumptions .
because frankly , every project has his own marshmallow .
the challenge offers a common experience , a common language , or grundhaltung , to build the right prototype .
and this is the value of this experience , this sort of simple exercise .
and those of you who are interested in , can be marshmallowchallenge.com .
it &apos;s a blog where you can see how to build the marshmallows .
there &apos;s a schritt-für-schritt-anleitung there .
they find crazy examples of all over the world , like people can optimize the system and raffinieren .
there are also weltrekorde .
and the basale lesson , i think , is the construction of the construction is actually a verbindender sport .
it demands that we all have our senses on the task and that we use our thinking of how our feelings and our doing , in the challenge that lies ahead of us .
and sometimes a little prototype of these experience is everything that needs to take us from a &quot; uh-oh &quot; to a &quot; ta-da . &quot;
and that can make a big difference .
thank you very much .
so we &apos;re doing this as we have a machine that we have .
a big machine , a cool , ted-artige machine , and that &apos;s a machine machine .
and everyone in this room have to be in this room .
and you can go into the past , you can go into the future ; you can &apos;t go in here and now stay here and now remain .
and i ask myself what they would choose because i &apos;ve been doing that question in last time , and they wanted to go to the past .
i don &apos;t know . they wanted to go back to the time before it was cars or twitter or america or america . &quot;
i don &apos;t know .
i &apos;m convinced that you somehow have to be zur , to wunschdenken identity .
and i understand that .
i &apos;m not part of this group , i have to say .
i don &apos;t want to go into the past , and that &apos;s not because i &apos;m a mall -- i &apos;m a adventurers .
it &apos;s because possibilities on this planet , they &apos;re going to go forward .
so i want to go into this machine , and i want to go into the future .
this is the greatest time that the planet ever had on this planet , no matter what you &apos;re using : health , wealth , mobility , the sinkende , declining krankheitsraten .
there was never a time before that .
my ur-großeltern died all of them were 60 .
my grandparents are actually doing this number on 70. .
my parents are the 80 to the fersen .
so , there should be a nine at nine at the beginning of my todeszahl .
but it &apos;s not about people like us , because this is a larger thing than that .
a child who &apos;s born today is expecting to live , as long as the richest man in the world was 100 years ago .
think about it . this is an incredible fact .
and why is this ?
smallpox . smallpox have killed billions of people on this planet .
they have the demographics of the earth in a way , like it &apos;s not ever done .
they &apos;re gone . they &apos;re gone .
we have them bezwungen . phew .
in the rich world , the millions of us have just done a generation of a generation , barely hasn &apos;t .
diphterie , röteln , kinderlähmung ...
even anyone who &apos;s got to even do what that is ?
vaccines , modern medicine , our ability to feed billions of people that are the successes of scientific method .
and i made the scientific method , things to try and see if it works , it works , if it doesn &apos;t , one of the greatest achievements of humanity .
so that &apos;s the good news .
unfortunately , it &apos;s all the good news , because there are some other problems , and they were mentioned , and they were mentioned , and they were mentioned , and they were mentioned , and they were mentioned .
and one of them is that despite all of our achievements , there is a billion people in the world to go to bed every day .
this number goes up , and it &apos;s increasing very fast , and that &apos;s embarrassing .
and not only that , we &apos;ve used our imagination to verwüsten these world .
drinking water , urbares land , rainforests , oil , gas , gas , they disappear , and if we don &apos;t get to that chaos , we &apos;re not going to take us from this chaos .
so the question is : can we do that ? i think .
i think it &apos;s clear that we can produce food , the billions of people will feed , without the land that they live in .
i think we can provide this world with energy , which they don &apos;t have at the same time .
i really believe that , and no , it &apos;s not a wunschdenken .
but this one is sitting at night -- one of the things that i &apos;m standing at night at night , we &apos;ve never had the evidence of progress like now , never yet , yet , never yet .
and we were also able to be able to be able to vernünftig it , like we can now .
we &apos;re amazing , amazing events , and i think we have to go back hundreds of 300 years ago , and i really think that we have to go back to a time where we have to have progress , where we have fortschritt , we have heftiger heftiger , more than now .
people are in their belief , and that &apos;s how tightly that you can &apos;t free them .
not even the truth will be free .
and listen , everybody has a right on his mind ; even a quite rightly one to advance progress , to progress .
but you know what you &apos;re not right right ?
they don &apos;t have a right to their own facts . &apos; &apos; tschuldigung , they didn &apos;t .
and i took a little while to find out .
a decade ago , i wrote a paper about the new yorker , &quot; a little article . &quot;
and i was amazed at resistance , on resistance , on the end of what the most effective health of the health care in human history .
i didn &apos;t know what to do , so i just did what i always do , i wrote a paper and i was driving .
and soon i wrote an article about a mental institution .
the same thing , just bigger .
people were playing nuts .
so i &apos;ve written a paper on this , and i couldn &apos;t understand why people thought that would be &quot; frankenfood , &quot; why they thought that molecules were a random kind of herumzuschieben to a random kind of herumzuschieben that was a übergriff on the field of nature .
but you know , i &apos;m doing what i do . i wrote the articles , i kept on .
i mean , i &apos;m a journalist , i &apos;m a journalist .
we &apos;re typing , we &apos;re going to get rich , we &apos;re going to eat , that &apos;s okay .
but these articles made me worried , and i couldn &apos;t figure out why , and finally , i found it .
and that &apos;s because these fanatics , that made me feel at all at all .
these were umsichtige people , educated people , decent people .
they were exactly like the people in this room .
and that took me so mess .
but then i thought , you know , what we &apos;re thinking about , we &apos;re honest .
we &apos;re at a point where we don &apos;t have the same relationship to progress in progress .
we &apos;re talking about it .
we &apos;re talking about this , with small bits of things , &quot; progress . &quot;
okay , so there &apos;s reason to get it , and i think we know what causes reasons .
we have trust in institutions , in authority , and sometimes the science of science is lost , and there &apos;s no reason that it shouldn &apos;t .
you can just call a few names and people will get .
chernobyl , bhopal , the challenger , vioxx , weapons , the us-präsidentschaftswahl 2000 .
i mean , you know , you can choose your own list .
there are questions and problems with people who believed that they were always quite common .
ask questions , ask them to ask the evidence , you ask it .
take a look like that .
but now , if you have to get evidence that you &apos;re going to take that evidence , and we &apos;re not good .
and i can say that from the reason we live in a epidemic of fear , as i never seen you , and hopefully never again .
about 12 years ago , a story was published , a terrible story that the autismus-epidemie of the masern , mumps , and röteln vaccine in relation to connection .
very scary .
and more trials were conducted by seeing whether this was true .
and in fact , in a very controversial study , in fact , they &apos;re going to be done , and that &apos;s a serious business .
the data came in .
the data came in the united states , from sweden , from sweden , from canada , and they all were the same , no correlation , no connection , no connection .
it doesn &apos;t matter . it doesn &apos;t make any difference because we believe in anecdotes , we believe what we see , what causes us to see is that we feel real .
we don &apos;t believe in a bunch of bündel of a regierungsangstellten that gives us data , and i understand that , i think we all do .
but you know what ?
the result of it was devastating , it was devastating .
and it &apos;s katastrophal because the united states is one of the only countries in the world where the impfrate is falling .
that &apos;s skandalös , and we should be ashamed .
it &apos;s terrible .
what &apos;s happening is that we could do that .
well , i understand that . i do .
because , here &apos;s someone who &apos;s got a masern ?
one single in the audience has ever see someone dying ?
it doesn &apos;t happen very often .
in this country at all , but the most innovative times in the last year .
this is a lot of deaths through the masern , 20 per hour .
but because this is not what happened here , we can actually replace it , and people like jenny mccarthy and botschaften of fear and analphabetismus of platforms like oprah and larry king &apos;s live .
and that can make you because they &apos;re not connecting to cause and correlation .
they don &apos;t understand that these things are equally equally , but almost never have the same thing .
and that &apos;s something we need to learn , and it &apos;s very quickly .
this guy was a hero , jonas salk .
he befreite us from one of the worst vulnerability of humankind .
no fear , no qualen , kinderlähmung , disappeared .
the guy in the middle doesn &apos;t really work .
he &apos;s called paul offit .
he has just been building a few other people with a rotavirus-impfstoff .
it can save the lives of 400- , 500,000 children in the developing world .
pretty good , isn &apos;t ?
now , this is good , except that paul herumläuft and paper talks about paper and says how valuable they are , and that people would just stop being too .
and that &apos;s what he &apos;s doing .
so paul is a terrorist .
when paul in in a public anhörung can &apos;t be without arms wächter .
he gets to get calls at home , because people like to tell him that they know where his kids go to school .
and why ? because paul has made a vaccine .
i don &apos;t need that , but vaccines are essential .
you take them on , turning the diseases , horrible diseases , and that &apos;s what happens .
we have now in this country .
and that &apos;s worse and pretty soon , children will die again , because that &apos;s just one question of numbers .
and they &apos;re not just dying of clubs .
what about kinderlähmung ? let &apos;s take that . why not ?
a kommilitonin of me was written a couple of weeks ago , and i said , i &apos;m going to be a little bit of schrill .
nobody has told that before .
she would not have your child against kinderlähmung . absolutely not .
fein .
why ? because we don &apos;t have throwaway kinderlähmung . and you know what ?
we didn &apos;t have a kinderlähmung in this country .
now , i don &apos;t know , maybe i &apos;ll have any stieg in lagos , in a plane , and he &apos;s just going to los angeles , and he &apos;s going to be over ohio .
and a few hours , he thinks he &apos;s a car , and he comes to long beach , and he &apos;s going to be one of this fantastichen ted-dinner .
and he doesn &apos;t know that he &apos;s infected with a lähmenden disease , and we don &apos;t know that , because that &apos;s how the world works .
this is the planet where we live . don &apos;t do it as if it &apos;s not that .
we love it to be in lies . we love this .
did you take all of the left out of their vitamins ?
echinacea , a little bit of antioxidantium that helps you on the jumps .
i know they did that , because half of americans do that every day .
they take the stuff , and they take alternative cures , and it doesn &apos;t make any difference , how often we find that they are useless .
the data keeps the time .
they &apos;re whispering your urine . more and more .
this is okay , you want to pay 28 billion dollars for dark .
i &apos;m going to be completely .
dark , urine . dark .
why do we do that ? why do we do that ?
well , i think i understand -- we hate the drug industry .
we hate a strong government . we don &apos;t have trust .
and that &apos;s not what we should do . our healthcare is to be mies .
it &apos;s cruel to millions of people .
it &apos;s absolutely amazing cold and seelentötend itself to us that it can afford .
so we walk out of the time , and where we run ?
we run in the poor placebo-industrie .
that &apos;s great . i love the placebo-industrie .
but you know , this is a serious matter , because that stuff is crap , and we give billions of dollars for it .
and i have all kinds of little requisiten here .
none of it -- gingko , fraud , betrug , fraud , because i don &apos;t even know what that is , but we &apos;re spending billions of dollars for it .
and you know what ? if i say that , i &apos;m going to tell people to me and say , &quot; what does it care ? let &apos;s do what they want .
so they feel good . &quot;
and you know what ? they have wrong .
because it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s the gesundheitsminister , who says , &quot; hmm , i &apos;m going to accept the evidence of my experts in mammography of my experts , or any kind of some krebs-quacksalber of the patients who want to treat his patients with patients .
if you go to these path , where belief and magic and science does , you get to a place where they don &apos;t want to be .
they get to thabo mbeki in south africa .
he took 400,000 people &apos;s people , because he insisted that red beete , knoblauch , knoblauch and zitronenöl much more effective than antiretroviral drugs , we know that they can take the course of aids .
hundreds of thousands of unnötiger deaths in a country that is worse than any other one of these disease .
tell me that they don &apos;t have any consequences to have consequences .
they have them . they always have .
now the most hirnloseste epidemic in which we &apos;re just right now is this frog between the befürwortern air force and the bio-elite .
this is a idiotische debate . she must stop .
it &apos;s a debate about words , about metaphors .
that &apos;s ideology , not science .
all we eat , every reiskorn , every branch of them , every branch of them , each rosenkohl , was changed from the people .
you know , there were no mandarinen in paradise .
there was no cantaloupe-melonen .
there was no weihnachtsbäume . we did this all .
we &apos;ve done it in the last few years .
and some of them has worked and some research .
we &apos;re ready to have what doesn &apos;t work .
now we can do it more specific , and of course , there &apos;s risks . but we can do something like vitamin a a walk in rice and that can help millions of people , millions of people , to give lives of their lives .
do you want to do that ?
i have to say that i don &apos;t understand .
we lehnen food .
why do we do that ?
now , what i &apos;m going to hear is : too many chemicals , pesticides , hormones , monokultur , we don &apos;t want huge fields with one thing that &apos;s wrong .
we don &apos;t want to admit that companies do .
we don &apos;t want to have companies have companies .
and you know what my answer is to all ?
yes , you &apos;re right . we fix this .
it &apos;s true , we have a huge nahrungsproblem , but that &apos;s not science .
that has nothing to do with science .
it &apos;s right , morality , patentkram .
you know that science is not a company .
it &apos;s not a country .
it &apos;s not a idea ; it &apos;s a process .
it &apos;s a process , and sometimes it works , and sometimes the idea that we should not allow science to do their work because we &apos;re afraid , because we &apos;re a real sackgasse , and it &apos;s holding millions of people from the ground .
you know , in the next 50 years , we will grow to 70 percent more food than the moment , 70 percent .
this investment in africa in africa has been over the last 30 years .
middle class .
they need that , and we don &apos;t give them .
and why ? mental changed food .
we don &apos;t want to encourage people to encourage this verrottete stuff like for example .
it &apos;s a little bit , something that &apos;s half a billion people .
it &apos;s about like a potato .
it &apos;s just a bunch of calories . it &apos;s mies .
it doesn &apos;t have nutrients , it doesn &apos;t have any protein , and scientists are building this straight in this .
and then people could eat the food and would not be blind .
they wouldn &apos;t be starving , and you know what ?
that would be nice . it wouldn &apos;t be chez , but it would be nice .
and all i can say is : why do we fight ?
i mean , let &apos;s ask ourselves , why do we fight this ?
because we don &apos;t want to do genes ?
it &apos;s not about genes , genes . it &apos;s not about chemicals .
it &apos;s not about our ridiculous passion for hormones , our own goal on larger food , better food , food food .
it &apos;s not about rice , it &apos;s about getting people alive , and it &apos;s getting the highest time to understand what that means .
because you know what ?
if we don &apos;t do that , as we do so far as we do , we &apos;re going to do something about what we do , i think , not guilty , is not guilty , high-tech colonialism .
there is no other description for what &apos;s going on .
it &apos;s selfish , it &apos;s ugly , it &apos;s not worthy of , and we really need to really stop it .
so , after this incredibly funny conversation , you might say , &quot; do you want to go to this ridiculous time and go into the future ? &quot;
anyway , everyone . i want to end up .
now , in the moment , you &apos;re in the present tense , but we have an incredible opportunity .
we can put these time on everything we want .
we can hinbewegen them , where we want to be hinbewegen , and we will move them where we want .
we need to lead these conversations , and we have to think , but if we go into the time and go into the future , we will be happy to have that .
i know we can do it , and as far as it is , it &apos;s something that &apos;s going to be now .
thank you .
thank you .
i &apos;m interested in the placebo-effekt . it may seem a magician that is a magician because , as i think , as i think , as i think , as a deception that &apos;s really what you &apos;re really doing , if somebody else thinks it &apos;s very much enough to be . &quot;
in some words , zuckerpillen have shown a measurable impact , and it &apos;s just because the person thinks of what it is , and it &apos;s because of the person , it &apos;s a kind of pharmazeutische , for example , if the patient is only grounded , if the patient is only waiting enough to be a messbare effect in the body that called the placebo-effekt .
a deception is going to be a little bit more to something because somebody else is so that it &apos;s so happening .
so we also understand each other , i want to show you a basic , simple zaubertrick .
and i &apos;m going to show you how it works . this is a trick that &apos;s been at least since the 1950s in every child &apos;s &quot; kids .
i even have ihn him from the cub magic magic of the pfadfinder in the 1970s .
i &apos;m going to put him for them and then explain it .
and then i &apos;m going to explain why i explain it .
so , you see what happens .
the knife that you can investigate , and my hand , you can study .
i &apos;m going to keep the knife in my home .
i &apos;m going to push my sleeve back .
and to make sure that nothing in my sleeve disappears in my sleeve , or from him , i &apos;m going to just walk my wrist on here .
you can see that there &apos;s no time to move anything . as long as i &apos;m here , there can &apos;t be able to get anything in my sleeve .
and the goal is very simple .
i &apos;m going to open my hand , and hopefully , if everything is fine , it will take the knife by my bare physical .
it &apos;s actually a firm in its place that i can shake it without the knife .
nothing goes out in my sleeve or come out , no trickserei , and you can study everything .
ta-da !
now , this is a trick i often beibringe to be interested in magic , because you can learn a lot about deception when you look closely , although it &apos;s a very simple trick .
probably many of you , many of you here in the room here .
he works in this way : it works .
i hold the knife in my hand .
i say that i &apos;m going to umschließe my wrist to make sure that nothing in my sleeve disappears , or herauskommt , and that &apos;s a lie .
the reason i &apos;m looking at my wrist is that the actual secret of illusion is .
and the moment , where i &apos;m going to wegdrehe my hand , so you see them from the back , moving from the back , and i &apos;m going to see this fingers , just where he was , in a position where he &apos;s so ausgestreckt .
great trick ?
there &apos;s someone who &apos;s someone who &apos;s not had childhood .
so , he &apos;s here . right .
and when i &apos;m umdrehe , the fingers changes its position .
and now you might talk about why this is a deception , why not least , why not only are the way that you can just see three fingers : because the mind and the way it &apos;s verarbeitet , it &apos;s not individually to count , one , two , three , but they &apos;re seeing as a group .
but that &apos;s not really what &apos;s really about here . and then i open my hand .
of course , it &apos;s going to be there , but not through the magnetism of my body , but through a trick , through my zeigefinger , which is there right now .
and if i close my hand , what happens is the same thing by drawing me through this movement , that the fingers will come back .
i take this hand way . and here &apos;s the knife .
these trick can you demonstrate your friends and neighbors . thank you .
now , what has this to do with the placebo-effekt ?
a year or so , i read a study that really touched me right .
i &apos;m not a doctor or researchers , and that &apos;s why i was an amazing thing .
and it turns out , if you offer a placebo in a white pill , in the form of a aspirintablette , is just a round of white , white , white , white pille .
but if you put the shape , you can actually put it in a smaller pill , for example , in a smaller pill , and these blue color and an letters in it is actually more effective in more effective .
and that , although none of them are pharmazeutische ... it &apos;s just zuckerpillen .
but a white , a white , isn &apos;t as good as a blue pill .
what ? that really made me quite freak .
but it turns out that that &apos;s not all that it is .
if you take capsules , that &apos;s even more effective than any given form .
a colored capsule that &apos;s yellow and the other red is better than a white capsule .
the light also takes a role .
a pill twice a day is not as good as three pills -- i &apos;m not going to remember the exact statistics that i &apos;m not going to remember .
the key part is , but the key thing is ...
that &apos;s why the dosierungen are playing a role .
and the shape makes a role .
and if you want to have the ultimate placebo-effekt , you have to reach to the needle .
right ? a syringe with a wirkungslosen -- a few milliliter of a wirkungslosen substance that you injected a patient .
it creates a very strong image in the head , and that &apos;s very much more than a white pill .
this chart is really -- i &apos;m going to show you a different time when we have a reference .
so the fact that the white pill doesn &apos;t seem to be as good as the blue pill that doesn &apos;t seem as well as a capsule that doesn &apos;t seem as well as the needle .
and none of it has some really profound property . it &apos;s just our belief that we &apos;ve seen a stronger impact .
i wanted to know if i could use this idea for a magic trick .
i &apos;m going to take something that obviously is a deception , and it &apos;s going to look really .
we know that from the study that you have to reach to needle , if it &apos;s to go to the corner .
this is a 18 inches long . she &apos;s very , very , very , very spitz . and i &apos;m going to first take you first a little bit about it .
this is really my flesh . it &apos;s not damians spezielles meat .
this is my skin . this is not a spezialeffekt of hollywood .
i &apos;m going to take this needle into my skin , and through them , until they &apos;re going to go back to the other side .
if you &apos;re going to be , if you fall in the ohnmacht -- i &apos;ve got a couple of friends in the hotel room in the hotel room , and some people that i didn &apos;t know , and a woman has almost ohnmächtig .
so i propose , if you &apos;re going to be fast , then you look at the next 30 seconds , or , you know , what i &apos;m going to do is the first terrifying part of this .
you can see it , you can also see , but you can also see if you want to .
so , it &apos;s like , right here , where my flesh &apos;s flesh , at the bottom of my arm , i &apos;m just going to make a little einstich .
i &apos;m really sorry . do you get this crazy ?
and now a little bit of a little bit of my skin and on the other side .
now we &apos;re actually in the same situation that we have in the messertrick .
about something like that .
but now you can &apos;t count my fingers , right ?
so , i &apos;m going to show you , this is one , two , three , four , five .
well , yes , yes , yes , yes .
i know what people think when you see that .
they say , &quot; okay , that &apos;s not so stupid , and the skin itself is the skin , just to talk about a few minutes . &quot;
well , i &apos;m going to show you .
what does this look like ? pretty good .
yeah , i know .
and the people back in the people , &quot; okay . i haven &apos;t seen that right . &quot;
people in the nebenräumen are now in the nebenräumen .
let me show you from the near side .
that &apos;s really my skin . that &apos;s not a special effect from hollywood .
this is my flesh , and i can herumdrehen the herumdrehen .
sorry . if you &apos;re going to be , if you &apos;re going , you look away .
people would see the people in the video , and the one that eventually you see on video , will say , &quot; well , that &apos;s pretty impressive , but if it would be -- you see , here &apos;s a hole and there &apos;s a hole , and it would really be really bluten . &quot;
okay , let me give you a little blood for you .
yeah , yeah , here it is .
i usually would take the needle in the way .
i would clean my arm and show you that there &apos;s no lesions .
but i think that framework , and i think it &apos;s a little bit more real to do , i &apos;m going to just leave the needle in there and go out and go out and go on the stage .
we &apos;re going to take us back to the next few days .
i hope you already are already . thank you .
everybody speaks about happiness today .
i have some people who count the number of books that have been published with &quot; happiness &quot; in the last five years , and they gave them about 40 , and there were plenty of more .
there is a tremendous wave of happiness at happiness .
there is a lot of glücks-coaching .
everyone would like to do people happier .
but despite all of these early on the product , there are several cognitive traps that it &apos;s sort of impossible to think about happiness .
and my talk today is going to be doing by these cognitive .
it &apos;s true of the laien that are thinking about their own happiness , and it &apos;s true for scientists that are thinking about happiness , because it turns out that we are the same thing as any other .
the first of this fall is a widerstreben , complexity .
it turns out that the word is not a useful word , and it &apos;s more important than we apply it to many different things .
i think there &apos;s a particular importance that we could do it , but in big and all of it is something we need to be , and we &apos;re going to need to take the complicated view to what well-being is .
the second line is a cartoon of experience and memory : basically , it &apos;s basically between happiness and happy to be happy and happy to his life .
and these are two very different concepts , and they &apos;re both zusammengeworfen in the notion of happiness .
and the third is the konzentrations-illusion , and that &apos;s the most distinct fact that we can &apos;t think about a situation that influences the well-being without its importance .
i mean , this is a real cognitive trap .
there &apos;s just no way to get it right .
now i &apos;d like to start with someone who had a frage-und-antwort-sitzung of someone who had a frage-und-antwort-sitzung , who was a story . &#91; unclear &#93; -- he said he had a symphony , and it was absolutely beautiful music , and it was all the end of the city , there was a fürchterliches kreischendes sound .
and then he added , really , really quite emotionally , that has ruins the whole experience .
but that didn &apos;t .
what it ruins was the memories of the experience .
he had had experience .
he had 20 minutes of music .
they don &apos;t usually say because he was a memory of memory , and that was memory , and the memory was to get everything he had to keep it .
what &apos;s really saying is that we &apos;re talking about us and think about other people , and over other people , to be in the sense of two types of self .
there &apos;s a erlebendes self that &apos;s in the present , and the present is able to experience the past again , but basically it &apos;s just the present .
it &apos;s the most erlebende self that &apos;s the doctor &apos;s doctor -- you know , when the doctor asks , &quot; does it hurt , if i &apos;m here you ? &quot;
and then there &apos;s a erinnerndes self , and the erinnernde self is , and the history of our life , and it &apos;s the one that asks the doctor to ask the question , &quot; how did you feel in the last time ? &quot;
or , &quot; how was your journey to albania ? &quot; or something .
these are two very different units , the erlebende self and the erinnernde self , and the two is part of the durcheinanders of happiness .
now , the erinnernde itself is a storyteller .
and that really starts with a basic reaction on our memories -- it starts immediately .
we don &apos;t tell stories about telling us when we &apos;re doing things about it .
our memory tells us stories , which means that we &apos;re going to keep our erlebnissen , and we &apos;re going to keep a story .
and let &apos;s start with a example with a example .
there is a old study .
these are real patients who have been able to get a painful procedure .
i &apos;m not going to go into the details . it &apos;s not painful , but she was painful as a study in the 1990s .
they were asked to report all the 60 seconds about their pain .
and here are two patients . that &apos;s your record .
and they &apos;re asked , &quot; who has been more suffered more than both ? &quot;
and that &apos;s a very simple question .
patient b has more suffered . its darmspiegelung was longer , and every minute of pain that patient had a patient b and more .
but now there &apos;s another question : &quot; how much did these patients have been suffering ? &quot;
and here &apos;s a surprise .
and the surprise is that patient &apos;s a much more likely to erinnrung , and the patient has been a much more powerful erinnrung to the darmspiegelung , as a patient , as a patient , a patient .
the stories of the darmspiegelungen were different , and because it &apos;s a very important part of history , as they came out .
and none of these stories is very erbaulich or great -- but one of them is that clearly ...
but one of them is clear than the other .
and the fact that is worse than the pain was the pain at the end of the ende , and it &apos;s a terrible story .
where do we know that ?
because we asked these people after their darmspiegelung , and also a lot later , &quot; how bad was the whole thing ? &quot;
and she was much worse for a als for a b .
now , this is a direct conflict between the erlebenden self and the erinnernden itself .
from the sicht of the erlebenden itself , b was clearly a schlechtere .
now , what you could do with a patient &apos;s a little bit , and we &apos;ve done clinical trials , and it &apos;s been done , and it &apos;s been able to do , you could actually put the darmspiegelung of patient , you could simply put the darmspiegelung of patient by simply leaving the tube without to just explaining it .
this is going to lead that the patient is suffering , but only a little bit less than before .
and if you do that for a few minutes , you &apos;ve got a bewirkt , and you have a bad way , and you have made that the erinnernde self is a much better , because you have a better story about his experience .
what does a story is that is a story ?
and that &apos;s true for the stories that gives us the memory and it also is the stories that we invent .
and what a story is , they &apos;re turnarounds , major moments and end .
and end , very , very important , and in this case , the end is end .
now , the erlebende itself lives lives lives in his life .
it has moments of the erlebens , one after the other .
and they ask : what happens to these moments ?
and the answer is really simple . they &apos;re always lost forever .
i mean , most of our lives -- and i think that &apos;s what i think -- you know , the psychological present , as a result of about three seconds , and what it means is that there &apos;s about 600 million of them , and in a month , it &apos;s about 600,000 . most of you don &apos;t leave behind .
most of you are completely ignored by the erinnernden itself .
and yet , somehow , you can get the sense that they should count , that what happened during this period of life .
it &apos;s the finite resource that we use as we are in the world .
and how we use them to be seemingly important , but it &apos;s not the story that keeps the erinnernde itself .
so we have the erinnernde self and the erlebende itself , and they &apos;re really different .
the biggest difference between them is the progress with time .
from the perspective of the erlebenden itself , if you have a holiday and the second week , as the first week , the first week is , the zweiwöchige vacation is twice as well as the einwöchige vacation .
so that &apos;s how this does not work for the erinnernde itself .
for the erinnernde itself , a zweiwöchiger vacation is barely like when the einwöchige vacation is , because there &apos;s no new memories .
they don &apos;t have the story .
and in this way , is actually the critical variable , which is a erinnerndes self , which is a erinnerndes self itself , and time has very little effect on this story .
now , the erinnernde self makes more than to remember and tell stories .
it &apos;s actually that , because if you have a patient , we say , two darmspiegelungen surgeons , and if you have two darmspiegelungen surgeons , and he decides to choose what he should choose , then the source of the memory that is the memory of the bad , and that &apos;s the surgeon that will be selected .
the erlebende itself doesn &apos;t have a voice in that election .
actually , we don &apos;t choose between the erlebnissen . we choose between the memory of the experiences .
and even if we think about the future , we think of our future usually don &apos;t usually think about the future .
we think about our future for a vorausgesehene memories .
and basically , you can see that , you know , as a tyranny of the erinnernden itself , and you can think of yourself as a tyrannei self , which is a sort of erlebende itself , which is the most potent myself themselves , which doesn &apos;t need the erlebende itself .
i have the impression that when we &apos;re doing this very often , the case is , we &apos;re doing perception in the service of the erinnernden .
and that &apos;s a little hard to justify .
i mean , how much we do we zehren from our memories ?
this is one of the explanations that you &apos;re given for the dominance of the erinnernden itself .
and when i think about it , i think , in a holiday that we &apos;ve made a little bit of a couple of years ago , the greatest vacation of the best vacation i had ever had , and i think very often in the relationship of how often i think i think about other urlaube .
and i probably have to travel from my memories to this dreiwöchige journey , i would say about 25 minutes long for about 25 years .
now , if i had to have the folder with the 600 images in the 600 , i would have spent another hour .
now , these are three weeks , and that &apos;s been a höchstens .
there seems to be a population .
now , i may be a little extreme , you know , how little appetite i have on the zehren of memories , but even if you make more of it , there &apos;s a real question . why are we spending a lot of weight in the verlgeich of the weight that we &apos;ll give up there ?
so i want you to think about a thought experiment .
imagine your next holiday you know that the end of the committee are going to be used to all their pictures , and you get a amnestisches drug , so they &apos;re not going to remember .
now , would you choose the same vacation ?
and if you would choose to pick a different vacation vacation , there &apos;s a conflict between your own species and you have to think about how they &apos;re going to be , and that &apos;s really obvious to you , because when you think of time , you think you &apos;re going to think a response . and if you think of the way you think you could get
why we pick the urlaube , we &apos;re a problem that provides us with a choice between the two types of self .
now , the two kinds of self popping two terms of happiness .
there are actually two concepts of happiness we can deploy , one per capita self .
so you can ask : how happy is the erlebende itself ?
and then you would ask : how happy are the moments in the life of the erlebenden ?
and they &apos;re all -- happiness for the more complex process is a pretty complicated process .
what are the emotions that can be measured ?
and by the way , we &apos;re actually able to get a pretty good idea of happiness itself over the time .
if you ask the happiness of the erinnernden itself , it &apos;s a whole different thing .
this is not about how happy life lives .
it &apos;s about how happy or delighted is , when this person is thinking about her life .
very different term .
everybody is not different from the happiness , and i &apos;m going to have a lot of researchers to a lot of researchers about well-being that have been around the exploration of happiness for the world that we &apos;ve transformed in the world &apos;s long long ago .
the distinction between happiness itself and the happiness of the erinnernden self is recognized in the last few years , and now you &apos;re trying to measure the two of the two superpowers .
the gallup organization has been a worldwide survey where more than half a million people have been asking to what they think about their lives and about her experience , and there was other efforts in the direction .
so in the last years , we started to learn about the two types of self .
and the main thing we think i think is , i think , is that they &apos;re really different .
you can know how happy somebody with his life , and they really don &apos;t really tell you how happy he lives and vice versa .
just to give you a sense of the correlation , the correlation is about .5 .
what is that if you would meet somebody , and you would tell you , oh , his father is a zwei-meter-mann , how much would you know about his greatness ?
well , you would know something about his size , but there &apos;s a lot more uncertainty .
they have so much uncertainty .
if i tell you that somebody &apos;s living on a scale of 10 , they have much uncertainty about how happy it &apos;s about his erlebenden itself .
so the correlation is so small .
we know something about what the happiness of happiness is .
we know that money is very important , targets , targets .
we know that happiness means being happy to be happy with people who we like to spend time with people we like .
there are other pleasure , but that &apos;s a lot .
so if you want to teach the two types of self , they will be done by the end .
the implication of the thing i told you here is that we really should not really imagined as a replacement for well-being .
it &apos;s a completely different term .
now , a different reason that we cannot think about happiness is that we don &apos;t look at the same things when we think about life and if we actually live .
so if you ask the simple question , how happy people are not going to get the proper answer .
if you ask these question , that people have to be in california happier , if you say , in ohio lives .
and what &apos;s happening is that when you think about life in california , you think of the difference between california and other places , and that difference is , we say , in the climate .
well , it turns out that climate is not very important for the self itself , and it &apos;s not even important for the most peaceful itself , which decides how happy people are .
but , because the nachdenkliche self is responsible , you can go at the end -- some people might move to california .
and it &apos;s interesting to follow what happens to people who go to california in hope .
now , your erlebendes itself is not going to be happier .
we know that .
but one thing will happen . you &apos;ll think they &apos;re happier , because if you &apos;re going to be reminded about it , you &apos;re going to remember how awful the weather in ohio , and they will feel that they met the right decision .
it &apos;s very difficult to think about well-being , and i hope i have a sense of how hard it is .
thank you .
thank you . i have a question .
thank you very much .
now , when we were talking about a few weeks ago , they were told that it was a pretty interesting result of this gallup poll .
is something that you can make us participate in the way , because you have a few minutes ?
daniel kahneman : sure .
i think the most interesting result we found in the gallup poll is a number that we didn &apos;t have to find absolutely .
we found that in terms of the happiness themselves .
if we looked at how feelings of the income will vary .
and it turns out that under a income , in the year , in the year , in the year , for americans , and that &apos;s a very large sample of americans , about 600,000 , but it &apos;s a big representative sample , among a dollar of a $ 600,000 dollars in the year .
60,000 .
dk : 60,000 .
so 60,000 dollars in the year , people are unhappy , and they will be increasingly more freshwater , the poorer they will .
we get a completely flat line .
i mean , i have seen as serious lines .
so what happens is that money is not going to be a erlebnis-glück , but that lack of money on a certain misery , and we can measure this very , very clear .
in the spirit of the self , the erinnernden itself , you get another story .
the more money you deserve the same .
that &apos;s not true for emotions .
but danny , in the entire american community , it &apos;s about life , freedom , freedom , the pursuit of happiness .
when people would take these befund seriously , i mean , it seems to put it all on your head , all of the things we believe in terms of steuerpolitik and so on .
is there a chance that politicians generally generally generally generally generally generally would take a befund like the seriousness and based on politics ?
dk : you know , i think it &apos;s the anerkennung for the role of the glücksforschung in politics .
the appreciation of the anerkennung is going to be slowly in the united states , no question , but in the united kingdom , they just happened to happen .
people are the people that you should think about happiness , if they think about politics .
it &apos;s going to take a while , and people will be able to study whether they want to study erlebnis-glück or whether you want to study lebens-bewertung , so we have to go pretty soon .
as you can be very different , very different depending on how they think and whether you think about the erinnernde themselves or whether you think about the most erlebende themselves .
that &apos;s going to affect politics , i think , in the years .
in the united states , you &apos;re going to see the erlebnis-glück of the population .
that &apos;s going to be , i think , in the next one or two decades of the nih .
now , it seems to me , this topic , or at least the most interesting debate about the next year , is going to be over the next few years .
thank you very much for the invention of the behavioral economics .
thank you , danny kahneman .
i &apos;m jane mcgonigal . i design video games .
i &apos;ve been working for 10 years now for 10 years , and my aim for the next decade , it &apos;s easy to save the world in the reality , like it &apos;s in online-spielen .
i have a plan for this . i want to convince you more people , including all of them , more time with play larger and games .
currently we spend three billion hours a week .
some of you may think , &quot; that &apos;s a whole lot of time for games . &quot;
maybe a lot of time too much when you think how many problems we need to be in the real world .
but in fact , my research on the institute of the future , is the opposite .
three billion hours a week is not nearly enough to solve the most global problems of the world .
in fact , i &apos;m convinced that if we want to survive the next century on this planet , we need to increase these days .
i calculated that the needed time at age 21 hours a week .
now , this seems perhaps something more abwegig , so i can do it , so if we want to solve problems like starvation , global warming , global conflict and obesity , i think , for a 21 billion , a week , to play a week of the next decade .
no , i mean , i mean it really serious .
why ? this picture describes quite exactly why i think games are so critical for survival for the survival of human species .
this is a portrait of the photographers toledano .
he wanted to catch the feelings of games . so he &apos;s got a camera in the players .
this is one of the classic ausdrücke in play .
if you don &apos;t have a player , you might have some of the nuances in this picture .
you probably see this kind of dringlichkeit , something fear , but also , also , focus , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really ,
if you also play , you see some nuances here , looking up to the top and the mouth is a sign of optimism . the eyebrows show surprise .
this is a player who &apos;s on the edge of a sogenannten .
oh , you know , it &apos;s ok . ok . so we have some players here .
a epischer sieg is a result that &apos;s so positive that they didn &apos;t even know that it was possible at all .
it was almost none beyond the imagination .
and if you reach it , they &apos;re shocked that they &apos;re actually capable of something that is capable of doing this . that &apos;s a epischer victory .
this player is a little bit of a epischen victory .
and this is what we have to see on millions of faces on the world , if we take the barriers of the next century , the face of all the widrigkeiten on the edge of a epischen .
well , unfortunately , we &apos;re looking at this face in real life if we encounter difficult problems .
i call it as life &quot; in life , i &apos;m bad . and it &apos;s actually my face , see ? ok ? ok .
that &apos;s me , like i am , &quot; in life i &apos;m bad . &quot;
this is a graffiti in my hometown of heimat in berkeley , california , where i was in my ph.d. , why we &apos;re in the games are better than in real life .
this is a problem that many players have .
we think we &apos;re not as good as in play .
and i don &apos;t just mean less successful , though that &apos;s heard .
we do more in more spielwelten . i mean good relationship with motivation , something more powerful to do with the collaboration with each other .
if we &apos;re in a spielwelt , i think many of us turn into our best version , and immediately , the problem is trying to solve the problem , as long as necessary , it &apos;s going to bring it after the fehlschlag again .
and in reality , if we fail to fall out when we collide in obstacles , we feel different .
we feel overwhelmed . we &apos;re feeling defeated . we feel threatened , maybe depressed , frustrated or zynisch .
these feelings have never , we never play if we play games , they don &apos;t just play .
and that &apos;s what i wanted to study as a world class .
why is it impossible to do , to think , you could not get anything ?
how can we put these feelings out of the games ?
so i looked at games like the world of warcraft that we have to have the ideal environment to the greater .
and i found some things that are the epic economic health in online-welten .
so , first , if you go into one of these online-spiele , particularly in world of warcraft , there is a lot of different characters who are willing to anzuvertrauen , and it immediately .
but not only do any mission , but a mission that perfect is perfectly fit in the game , right ?
so , they do it .
you never get a job that you can &apos;t solve .
but always the way your ability , so they have to get together , but there &apos;s no unemployment in world of warcraft .
you don &apos;t sit around and dreht däumchen . there &apos;s always something very important to do .
and there &apos;s a haufenweise staff .
where they go , hundreds of thousands of people who work with them to work with their epic mission .
so , we don &apos;t have the real life that feeling that feeling that at a fingerschnipsen level , it &apos;s ready to be ready .
and there &apos;s these epic story , these funny story , why we are and what we &apos;re doing .
then we get this whole thing .
they &apos;ve driven from &quot; level &quot; and &quot; + &quot; + &quot; + , &quot; or &quot; + &quot; + &quot; a intelligenz . &quot;
this constant feedback is not in real life .
if i leave this stage , i haven &apos;t : + one : + 1 , 1 , the world &apos;s crazy idea , is the 20 idea of the world &apos;s first names .
i &apos;m not getting in the real life of this feedback .
so the problem of the kooperations-online-welten is like the world &apos;s world , that it &apos;s so satisfying , at the edge of a epischen , that we &apos;re rather verbringen our time in this time .
they &apos;re just better than the reality .
until today , all the world trade by warcraft-spieler zusammen combined with 5,93 million years of thinking about solving the virtual problems of azeroth .
that &apos;s not necessarily bad .
it may sound immigration .
but to see it in context , 5,93 million years ago , we started to go to the first primatenvorfahren .
so the first one .
ok , so if we talk about how much time we spend with play , it &apos;s only going to make sense , when you think about the time in terms of the human development in front of the human development , what is extraordinary .
but also , it turns out , because we use this whole time to play , actually , in fact , in fact , to change what we &apos;re capable of .
we &apos;re developing in the world , much of these things .
that &apos;s the truth . i think .
and look at this interesting statistics that was published by a researcher of carnegie mellon university , the average boy of the world &apos;s average boy has been shown by a country with huge stunden , with online-spielen stunden to the 21st century .
so , 10,000 hours is a very interesting number , two reasons , for two reasons .
first , first of children , in the united states , the precise hours of the genaue gesamtzeit that they spend in school , from the fifth grade , from the high grade , to the high school , to degree , to the degree of high school , if you never miss .
so we have a complete parallelbildungsweg on the young people , and the young people , what it means to be a good player to be what they &apos;re learning in school .
and maybe some of you have the new book from malcolm , &quot; überflieger , &quot; überflieger . &quot;
so you know his theory of success , the theory of the success of the house .
it &apos;s based on the great research that we find , if we study 10,000 hours a beliebigen , to the 21st century , to the 21st century , we will be able to master it .
we &apos;re going to be so good at doing whatever the most important people in the world .
so , what we have here is a complete generation of young people who are meister-spieler .
so the big question is , &quot; what are the very players to be good ? &quot;
because if we could find that , we &apos;d never have an animal potential human potential .
so many people have now in the world that at least one hour per day at a day .
these are our meister-spieler . 500 million people , the extraordinary good thing in &quot; something . &quot;
and in the next decade , we have another billion players , which is the remarkably good good in whatever they are .
if you haven &apos;t heard it yet .
the spieleindustrie entwickelt entwickelt energy savings and arbeiten energy savings and mobilfunknetzen work , instead of the breitband-internet , with the spieler around the world , especially in india , china , brazil online .
you expect a extra billion player in the next decade .
so we have a billion players .
so i started thinking about what it is to make us a difference .
here are the four things i found . first of all .
ok , so , imagine that like extreme selbstmotivierung .
dringlichkeits-optimismus is the desire to do something , a hurdle to master , together with believing that we have a terrible hope for success .
players always believe that a epischer victory is possible , and that it &apos;s always worth to try and the same .
no players don &apos;t sit around .
players are masters in the spiders of social nets .
there is a lot of interesting research that we &apos;re going to do more , which we &apos;ve like to do more , after we played them , even if they have two defeated .
the reason it &apos;s to be a lot of trust , with someone playing a game .
we trust that somebody with us that the rules will be eingehalten that we have the same thing and then to stay in the spielende .
so this is actually allowed the growing growing of the bindungen , trust and together .
as a result , we build stronger social relationships .
productivity . fantastic !
you know , there is one reason why the durchschnitts-word durchschnitts-word of warcraft-spieler 22 22 22 per week , as a woche .
the reason is that if we play , we &apos;re actually happier to work hard , as if we relax , we relax , or nothing .
we know we &apos;re working as human beings as well as we work , and we &apos;re working hard work .
and player are always willing to work hard , if you get the right task .
and ultimately , epic matters .
players love it to be part of awe of the missionen of the u.k.
here &apos;s a hintergrundinformation to get into the right light . you know all wikipedia , the world &apos;s largest wiki &apos;s largest wiki &apos;s world .
the second largest world in the world , with almost 80,000 einträgen is the world of warcraft .
five million people use it every month .
they have more information about world trade in the internet than over any other subject in every other person in every other person .
they created an epic story .
they created a epic source of knowledge about the world of warcraft .
ok , so that &apos;s four superpowers that lead to a single result . players are super-mächtige , the hoffnungsvolle .
it &apos;s people who believe that they can change the world as a single world .
and the only problem is they believe they can change the virtual worlds , but not the real thing .
this is the problem that i &apos;m trying to solve .
edward castronova is a volkswissenschaftler .
his work is great . he &apos;s looking at why people spend so much time , energy and money in online-welten .
and he says , &quot; we &apos;re going to witness from a massenemigration in virtual worlds and online-spielumgebungen . &quot;
and that &apos;s one of an economist . so he &apos;s logical .
and he says ...
not as i -- i &apos;m going to play , i &apos;m a little bit disoriented .
so he says that , in fact , that makes sense because players can achieve in more online-welten than the real life .
you can make a lot of social social ties in games as real life . they get more feedback and reward in games .
so he says , it &apos;s totally completely logical that players are more time in the virtual world as in real time .
i just wouldn &apos;t go to that , that &apos;s logical .
but it &apos;s definitely not a optimalsituation .
we need to start to turn the real world into a game .
my inspiration comes from a event that &apos;s been 2,500 years .
there &apos;s this ancient cube out of schafsknöcheln . you know ?
before this fantastic spielecontrollern , there were schafsknöchel .
and that was sort of , the first of people evolved from humans .
and if you &apos;re familiar with the werken of the old greek herodotus herodotus , you may know this story . the story of how and why they were invented .
according to herodotus , games , specifically , würfelspiele , in the kingdom of famine , in the city of famine .
and they &apos;re supposed to be such a great famine that the king of lydien was decided to get a crazy idea .
people were suffering . people fought .
it was an extreme situation . you needed an extreme solution .
so she invented laut , according to herodotus , the würfelspiel and vereinbarten a national strategy , and you would eat a day . the next day you would play .
and they would be so vertieft to the würfelspiel , because games are so fascinating , and with befriedigender , productivity , they &apos;re interested in , they would forget that there was nothing to eat .
and then , the next day you would play , and the next day you would eat .
and according to laut , they survived that famine years , and they were eating this famine , by eating on a day and ended up on the next one .
just as i think , i think we &apos;ll play games today .
we &apos;re going to play games to escape the world &apos;s suffering .
we &apos;re putting games to avoid the fact that doesn &apos;t work in the real world , not the real life in real life , and we &apos;re going to bring us out of what we need to play .
but that doesn &apos;t have to be the end .
that &apos;s the exciting .
so , according to 18 years , after 18 years , the famine didn &apos;t better better . so , the king , was a last würfelspiel anzusetzen .
they divided the kingdom in two .
they were playing a würfelspiel , and they were allowed to be a epischen adventure .
she left lydien and made a search for a new home . they just had so many people to survive , how it was food to survive and were looking for the rest of the rest of them .
that sounds crazy , right ?
but latest dna-beweise show that the etrusker , which is the roman empire , the same dna as the old lydier .
so scientists came to the idea that herodotus &apos;s history is actually true .
and geologists found the evidence of a global abkühlung , which was almost 20 years , which could explain the famine .
so that &apos;s what the crazy story might be true .
you may have saved your people by playing by playing , by 18 years , they have taken around games for 18 years , and then they learned that eingebung and learned that they have saved the entire civilization .
so , we can do that .
we &apos;ve been doing it for a world recently .
that was the first strategiespiel of the world at the world war , and that was 16 years ago .
they were spielten for 18 years , we &apos;ve been playing for 16 years .
i &apos;m saying , we &apos;re ready to play for our own play play .
so , they sent half of their civilization looking for a new world . so i take my 21 billion spielstunden a week .
we should be übereinkommen that half of us have a hour of play with play , until we have solved the problems of real world .
i know you &apos;ll ask yourself , &quot; how do we solve problems in games ? &quot; and that question i &apos;ve been doing this question for the last several years for the past years .
we have this banner in our office in palo alto , it &apos;s how we should understand the future .
we don &apos;t want to try to say the future .
what we want is to create the future .
we want to imagine the best outcome , and then people who are going to do , to make this notion in reality .
we &apos;re providing a epische siege and give people the opportunity to achieve it .
i &apos;m going to show you a very briefly about the very briefly trying to try to try to try and try to give people human beings in their own future .
this is &quot; world without oil . &quot;
the game is by 2007 .
it &apos;s a online-spiel where they have to overcome a ölknappheit .
the ölknappheit is invented , but we have enough online-inhalte to be realistic , and they &apos;re going to be nachrichten-filme , and you can &apos;t see how much oil is , and you can see how it &apos;s aufstände , and you have to figure out how to make their real life , and you have to figure out how to make their real life , if they were
we tested this game with 1,700 players in 2007 , and we &apos;ve been since since the last three years .
and i can tell you , it was an experience experience .
nobody wants to change your life because it &apos;s good for the environment or because we should .
but if you &apos;re in a epischen adventure , and they said , &quot; we &apos;re going to be the oil . &quot;
that &apos;s a fascinating adventure that you go .
find out how they would survive , most of our player have been put in the game of gelernten .
so we &apos;ve been taking a bigger game play a bigger , higher goal than just ölknappheit .
we have the game to the game called &quot; superstruct &quot; to the center of the future .
and start the idea of the start , is the computation of a supercomputers that people are only left over 23 years on the planet .
this supercomputer is called &quot; global aussterbungs- . &quot;
the call on the player , it &apos;s anzumelden , we &apos;ve been doing almost like a &quot; jerry-bruckheimer . &quot;
you know jerry bruckheimer-filme , where it &apos;s called the &quot; dream-team , &quot; they have the astronauts , the scientists , the scientists , and only one together , they can save the world .
but in our game , instead of just five people , we say , everybody is in the dream-team , and it &apos;s our job , the future , food , security , security and the future of social justice .
8,000 players played played for the game for eight weeks .
they found 500 incredibly creative solutions that you can read when they &apos;re googlen .
and the last game we put on the third march , and it &apos;s a game in collaboration with the world bank .
if you finish the game , you get the world bank award , social media lab , graduated from 2010 .
we &apos;re working with universities in very specific states and invite the social learning .
we have a comic effect . we have &quot; level high , &quot; level , &quot; level , wissensvernetzung , sustainability , vision and ingenuity .
i want to invite you all to share this game with young people everywhere , especially in entwicklungsgebieten , which are benefit to their own social enterprises , to save the world .
i &apos;m going to come to the end .
i want to ask you to ask you .
what do you think that &apos;s going to happen next ?
we have all these fantastic players , we have games that show us what we can do , but we haven &apos;t yet rescued the real world yet .
well , i hope that you have a agree that players are human resources that we can use to work in real life , and that games have a great meaning for change .
we have these superpowers , glückselige productivity , the ability to build narrow social networks , and desire for the desire to make the desire .
i hope that we can play together together major games to survive on this planet .
and i hope you &apos;re going to play with me like playing with me and play with me .
so when i go into the next decade , i &apos;m two things : that we can create every local or future , and we can play all kinds of games .
so i say , let &apos;s start the weltverändernden games .
thank you .
i &apos;d like to tell you something about what i &apos;d been writing a few months ago , a artikels of an article for an artikels .
i &apos;ve always been writing my synonym-wörterbuch , but i was done with the bearbeiten of the world &apos;s bearbeiten , and i noticed that i &apos;ve never been able to live in my life , which is the word &quot; disabled &quot; . &quot;
i read the entry .
&quot; disabled , adjektiv , nutzlos , nutzlos , zerstört , lahm , abgetrennt , abgetrennt , abgetrennt , impotent , impotent , impotent , impotent , impotent , geschwächt , geschwächt , geschwächt , erledigt , erledigt , erledigt , ausgezählt , nutzlos and weak .
antonyme : healthy , it &apos;s much more powerful . &quot;
i have been able to laugh at this list of a friend according to a friend of mine , and i had to laugh , but i just came to read , and i couldn &apos;t stop reading and i had to get to read , and i had to get to the collecting after this überfallartigen and the damit shock .
of course , this was a ausgefranstes , old synonym-wörterbuch . i just thought that the issue has to be quite old .
but in fact , it was a copy of the early &apos; 80s when i started to build on the elementary school and began to build my self outside of my family and shapes , also in terms of other kids and the rest of the world around me .
and thank god , i didn &apos;t have a synonym-wörterbuch .
i &apos;d like to take this journey to that world that i was born in a world that would be like a person who can be lost in a very comfortable way , but i &apos;m going to be able to live for the opportunity and adventure i &apos;ve experienced .
so i immediately went to the online-ausgabe of 2009 , and expect me to find a ansprechenderen contribution .
here &apos;s the aktualisierte version of this eintrags .
it &apos;s not much better .
in particular , i &apos;m the last two words under &quot; near antonyms &quot; &quot; and &quot; healthy . &quot;
but it &apos;s not just about words .
it &apos;s about what we think about the people that we describe with these words .
it &apos;s about values that are in these words , and how we build these values .
our language affects our thinking and how we see the world and the people around us .
many altertümliche societies , including the greeks and the finance , really , really , that the pronunciation of a fluchs has a great force because what you can do with loud , they can also manifestieren .
so what do we want to do -- a disabled people or a individual person ?
just to say a human being more than a child , could be , could be , you know , you &apos;re vorstellungen .
would it be not beautiful to open up ?
a person who opened for me , my pediatrician was the most kinderarzt dupont institute in wilmington .
he &apos;s called dr. pizzutillo . a italo-amerikaner , whose name is , as you can think , most americans couldn &apos;t feel correctly , so he was always called dr. p. name .
and dr. p. trug was very colorful and was just like to do work with children like this .
i found the time i spent in this hospital , just great -- to my physiotherapie .
i had to do a single lot of übungen übungen with these thick , elastic bändern -- in different colors -- and i &apos;ve taken this bänder hated , and i hated it , and i hated it . i hated it .
and imagine , even before , i &apos;ve already been watching a child kid with dr. p. negotiate and try to stop this manual , natürllich without success .
and one day , he had seen me in a early side of my early university -- these were just ermüdend and gnadenlos -- and he said to me , &quot; wow , aimee , you &apos;re so strong , and young girls , you &apos;re going to be one day one of those skin .
and if you make it , i give you a hundred dollars . &quot;
and of course , that &apos;s just a simple trick by dr. reed , so i wanted to do the drills that i want to be in the world with the prospect of the world , but he actually got me to see my everyday übungs-horror with new eyes , so that &apos;s so a new and vielversprechendes experience .
and i &apos;m asking myself today , as a very short vision of me and a powerful young girl , and i could imagine that as a nature of nature , to see , powerful and atlethischen person .
this is just one example of many , how adults can be able to be allowed to be able to stimulate a child &apos;s imagination .
but as the already zitierten examples of the synonym-wörterbüchern evidence , our language is not going to imagine something that we would wish to imagine , and it would be a single individual , to enable any individual people .
our language hinkt the social change , which were caused in many cases through a technological change .
from the medical standpoint , of course , is that my legs , the laser-chirurgie for sehbehinderungen , kniegelenke aus for titan and künstliche hüftgelenke for the limits of titan and künstliche , to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to
so maybe the technological change that &apos;s been so many of the technological change that is always a different truth , which is that everybody &apos;s human being quite very important and very powerful is the human ability to adapt to adapt , our biggest plus .
the human ability to adapt , because people are always asking me to tell you , how i &apos;m going to say , &quot; this sentence has never been gepasst for me , and i &apos;ve always felt very uncomfortable with people who are asking questions about people , and i think i &apos;m always understanding why .
this sentence of the knowledge of widrigkeiten lives is the idea of being able to master , without having to be geprägt with the damit experience , and as if my life would be so successful , because i could drop the possible drop of a life with a prosthetic , or whatever people can perceive me with my disability .
but the truth is that we &apos;re going to change . of course we &apos;re geprägt by the challenge , whether they &apos;re physically , emotionally or even both of them or even both either or even both .
and i &apos;m saying that this is good .
widrigkeiten are no obstacle that we need to be umkurven to get to our lives better .
widrigkeiten are just our lives .
and i tend to see widrigkeiten as a shadow .
sometimes i realize that he &apos;s very present , sometimes he &apos;s hardly looking at all , but it &apos;s constantly all the time .
and i want to do that , the effect of the kampfs of the kampfs of a human herabsetzen .
there are in life and challenges , and the challenge is just real , and every person is going to be different from it . but the question is not whether we get to widrigkeiten or not , but how we get to .
so we &apos;re not just responsible for that people we love to preserve , and also , they also get to get good to it .
and we don &apos;t like our kids not to do when we feel that they cannot adapt .
you have to separate two things : to one medical fact , to be amputated , and the other opinion of the social opinion , whether i am disabled or not .
and to be honest , the only real and sustained body disability , which i had to be apart , is that the world is always doing , you can describe me with these definitions .
in our desire to protect us from the heart , who are the kalte , or even a healthy to provide the medizinische of their medical marriage , or to provide a civilizational part of the quality of life that you might expect , we don &apos;t have to do that that somebody &apos;s actually disabled .
maybe it &apos;s the kind of concept that &apos;s just like , just what is in a broken , and how we fix it , every single one of them is a larger disability than the fuel .
if we don &apos;t treat a person at ground , and not all of his forces and possibilities , and we can also recognize , we can also bring in the natural fight , you may have to have to have to bring another disease .
we degradieren a human being , for our society .
so we have to focus on the ecosystem , and we &apos;re going to focus on all the domain of human possibilities .
but most importantly , it &apos;s between the perception of our flaws and our great erfindergeist , a link .
we should not abwerten these herausfordernden times or verleugnen , we shouldn &apos;t try to avoid them , but should we take them under the carpet , but it &apos;s about the widrigkeiten opportunity .
i &apos;m more about to imagine that we don &apos;t have to overcome the widrigkeiten , but we &apos;re open to that , they &apos;re going to be open to the support , and they also take a kampf-ausdruck , and maybe even dance .
and maybe we can do it as something natural , stimmiges and useful and feel like that we &apos;re not so able to save ourselves as much as their presence as a choice .
in this year , we celebrate 200 . birthday of charles darwin and as a 150 years ago , darwin has written about evolution , darwin , darwin , in my view , in my view , in my view , in a very true way of character .
i would like to be like this : not the most powerful way of his way , and not the most intelligenteste of its kind , but the way that change can be in the best .
from conflicts , creativity creativity .
not only the work of the puzzle we know that the ability of people , to survive and aufzublühen , from the fight of human mind is bestimmt by conflict .
so again , the same , change and anpassung , the great attributes of human beings .
and we may know that we &apos;re holz , if we &apos;re going to be geschnitzt , if we really get really infected .
maybe that &apos;s exactly the sense of widrigkeiten , a perception of the ichs , a sense of our own power .
we can give ourselves a little bit more .
we can give a new meaning of a new significance that goes beyond the heavy times .
maybe we can see more than change as a change .
widrigkeiten are facing a change that we haven &apos;t yet adapted .
i think the biggest damage that we have to ourselves is to believe that we should be normal .
once -- who &apos;s normal ?
there is no normal normal .
there &apos;s the usual . it &apos;s not the normal . and would you like to do that poor , gray person , really want to know if you really want to really be ?
i think , i think , rather than not .
it would be great if we can to normalität this paradigm against a different kind of possibilities , and the strength to make it even more dangerous to try and share the forces of very many children , and they invite to engage their special and more valuable skills in society .
anthropolgen found out that we have people from the members of our society , and that &apos;s how to be useful and to afford a contributions .
there &apos;s evidence that the neanderthals between 60,000 years ago , and people with severe physical injuries have carried with getragen and that may have happened because the lebenserfahrung in the überlebenskampf of these people was valuable to society , was the value of society .
they don &apos;t have the same people and we looked at that and useless ; they were treated as a special and value .
a few years ago i was in the city where i grew up in a lebensmittelmarkt in the nordosten of pennsylvania , &quot; in the northeastern part of pennsylvania , and i stood there in front of a scheffel tomato .
it was summer , and i had shorts .
and i hear , like a guy behind me , &quot; well , if that &apos;s not the aimee mullins . &quot;
and i &apos;m going to go to me and see this older man . i had no idea who he is .
and i said , &quot; excuse me , sir , we know ? i can &apos;t remember you . &quot;
and he said , &quot; well , you &apos;re going to remember that i remember .
when i first saw her , i was just laid out of her belly . &quot;
oh , so .
and of course , it made a click .
this was dr. kean , a man who i knew just from my mother &apos;s tales of my mother &apos;s day , because i was , of course , typisch , i came to my birthday at my birthday .
the doctor &apos;s diagnostik diagnostik my mother was in vacation , and so my parents became the man who brought me to the world at all .
and because i was born without wadenbeine , and my feet had been looking for them , and i just had a couple toes on this and a few toes on the other foot , he had to be the überbringer , that strangers had to be the bad news .
he said to me , &quot; i had to tell her parents that you never walk , and never would be as much as other children , and never would have been a meaningful life , and they just have me to lie . &quot;
and i really found that , i &apos;ve been able to have a really extraordinary thing that i had had zeitungsausschnitte in the second grade , whether i had my scholarship at the parade klasse , whether i had my scholarship or one of my sportlichen errungen , and he used to use these clips to teach his graduate students , medizin-studenten from the hahnemann medical school and the hershey
and he called this part of his kurses of his kurses , the x factor of mortality .
you can &apos;t just emphasize enough , how the crucial factor of life can be a human .
and dr. kean kept on , he said , &quot; i learned that kids will get the kids , and even if they &apos;re not going to get a little bit more backing , if you &apos;re going to get kids to yourself , children can get a lot . &quot;
see , dr. kean has changed its thinking .
he understood that the medical diagnosis , and how someone do it with two different things .
and i &apos;ve been thinking , in the course of time , if you asked me at the age of 15 years , if i had my prostheses to beine off the legs and bones , i wouldn &apos;t have any second .
i didn &apos;t want to do the normal .
if you ask me this , i &apos;m not sure that i &apos;m sure .
and that &apos;s what happens because i have something with my legs , and not despite that experience .
and maybe that change was too , because i &apos;ve been so many people who have been opened up with me , instead of getting people who wanted me to get me or i wanted to get me a funny .
you see , it really needs to be a person who &apos;s demonstrated to them how they can manifestieren their powers , and they &apos;re through .
if you allow someone to get to the jemandem , to activate the menschliche , the human mind is so empfangsbereit -- if you &apos;re going to open it , and for someone in a critical moment , they &apos;re a very good teacher .
they get them to open themselves up .
the real meaning of the worts is &quot; wurzelt &quot; in the word &quot; educe . &quot;
it means something that is a little bit that in one is the potential of potential .
again , what potential would we want to do ?
in the 1960s , in the u.k. , in britain , was converted in gesamtschulen .
they call this &quot; streaming trials &quot; in the united states , we call it as &quot; tracking . &quot;
the students will bring out to the notes .
and a lot of students are going to get mündlich schwerer , the better teachers get so much and so on .
you have a dreimonatigen book with a dreimonatigen book , &quot; a &quot; &quot; ausreichend &quot; -- they were told , they were asse , they were very clever , and after those three months , they really wrote a einser .
and of course , it &apos;s a heart to hear the heart that the united states was told , they &apos;re only enough .
and the same time , it was after the three months .
but just that those who were still in school -- except by the students who had school .
and the ganz thing was that the teachers were not eingeweiht .
the teachers didn &apos;t know that something changed .
they simply told you that the einser-schüler and that are the students with the grade , and they &apos;re just like you to do something and they treated them .
the only one is a spirit of mind , a spirit of mind , who has been broken , has no hope to have no hope , and he doesn &apos;t find any more schön. of him , and we can &apos;t neugier. our natural ability to do imagination and our current ability to solve the imagination .
but if we can help , to help the human mind , continue to hope and other people around themselves , curious and curious and phantasievoll , we can actually get our powers and then have a positive positive .
if a mind is over this qualities , we can create a new reality and new kinds of environments .
i &apos;d like to end with a poem that was verfasst by a persian poet , and the poem is , &quot; no god knows , &quot; no god knows the god , not the god of the name , not the god , and they repeat the god , and they repeatedly repeated the god , and they &apos;re always saying , always , always , he &apos;s always
come , dance with me . thank you .
how would they want better than they &apos;re currently ?
imagine that i told you that through a few changes of their genes , a better memory -- more precise , more specifically , more and faster .
or want to be fitter , stronger , more power .
would you want to be more and more confident ?
how about how to live in good health ?
or maybe they &apos;re one of those who are always going to sehnten more creativity .
which would you like most of them ?
what would you like to do if they could only have one ?
creativity .
how many people would choose creativity ?
put your hands . let me see .
a couple . probably about how many people there are there .
that &apos;s very good .
how many would have a good chance for a good memory ?
a few more .
how about fitness ?
a few less .
what about longevity ?
ah , the majority . i like to like to know as a doctor .
if you could only have one of them , it would be a whole different world .
is it all just laid off ?
or maybe it may be possible ?
evolution is a andauerndes issue here on the ted conference , but today i want to give you a doctor &apos;s point of the issue .
the great geneticist in the 20th century , t.g. dobzhansky , who was a kommunikant in the russian orthodox church , once wrote a paper , with the title , not a sense of purpose in the biology of evolution . &quot;
now , if you are one of those who are not proof of the biological evolution , it would take you the erlaubnis , take you the permission -- and you can just take you to the rule of the book -- and you can &apos;t see a peek in the kathryn , because nothing is going to be doing that in another course of this talk , you will
but if you accept biological evolution , remember this : is it just about the past , or is it about the future ?
is it for other geltend or it &apos;s also going to happen ?
this is another view of the tree of life .
in this picture , i have a center of the verzweigungen of the tree of life , because if you look at the edge of the tree of life , all of these branches of branches have been pointed in evolutionary , and they have survived , and it has its environment and strength .
the human part of this busches , far , far at the end , is that , of course , what we &apos;re most interested in .
we &apos;re turning on a shared ancestors to modern chimpanzees about six or eight million years ago .
in this period , maybe it was 20 or 25 different from hominids .
some of them are come and went .
we &apos;ve been here for about rund years .
it seems like we were quite remote from the other parts of the tree of life , but actually , to the most part part , the fundamental mechanisms we are pretty much like .
is that we can use it to take out of that , and the mechanisms of a common bacteria can make the protein to produce the protein of the human brain system , which is used to treat the diabetiker ?
this is not like humaninsulin ; this is the same protein that &apos;s chemically ununterscheidbar from the pancreas .
and we already talk about bacteria , is that each of us in our gut is more bacteria than it takes cells in the rest of our body ?
maybe 10 times a lot .
i mean , think about the antonio damasio occurs after your hero , you think about the bacteria ?
our gut is an wonderfully gastfreundlichen environment for this bacteria .
it &apos;s warm , it &apos;s dark , it &apos;s feucht , it &apos;s very comfortable .
and you &apos;re going to give you all nutrients that you might just want to offer without more comfortable .
it &apos;s a lightweight of bakterien for bacteria , with occasional interruptions of the unbeabsichtigten , jeodch , forced to start with the stoß .
but else , they &apos;re a wonderful environment for these bacteria , as they are important for your life .
they &apos;re helping the verdauung of the essentiellen . and they protect them against certain diseases .
but what &apos;s going to come in the future ?
are we in a kind of evolutionäres balance in the form of an species ?
or are we going to be something else -- something that might be even better than the environment ?
now , we now go back to the time of the big bang , 14 years ago -- the earth , the first signs of living , maybe three or four billion years ago , maybe the first mehr-zelligen of living , maybe a much more than 800 , and then the human species , which is in the last six years .
in this huge symphony of the universe , life is just a short of short ; the life on earth is just short ; the animal kingdom , and the human life , a little notenverzierung .
we were that we were .
this is also the unterhaltungswert of this speech , so i hope , i hope , d , it &apos;s got to have it .
now , when i was a neuling on college , i had my first biologiekurse .
i was fascinated by the elegance and beauty of biology .
i fell in the power of evolution , and i found something very fundamental : most of the existence of life in einzelligen organisms , they divide every cell , and all the genetic information in the cell will continue to work in both tochterzellen .
but at the time , when mehrzelligen organisms agreed , they started changing things .
sexual reproduction is catching up .
and most important : with the introduction of sexual reproduction , the genome is taken the genome , the rest of the body is entbehrlich .
in fact , you could say that the unausweichlichkeit of the death of the death of the death of our bodies in the same moment in the same moment as the sexual reproduction .
i &apos;m going to say if i was a college-student , i thought , okay , sex / death , sex / death , death for sex -- it seemed to be really passionate about the time , but with every year , it &apos;s been coming to my primary zweifeln .
i came to understand the feelings of george statements that was in las vegas , his show in the &apos; 90s .
and one night , there &apos;s a pat of its hotelzimmertür .
he opens the door .
and he &apos;s a beautiful spärlich spärlich spärlich spärlich .
she looks at him and says , &quot; i &apos;m here for super-sex . &quot;
&quot; this is wonderful , &quot; says , &quot; i &apos;m going to take the soup . &quot;
i came to the conclusion that i was a goal to make the difference in the way that the goal of evolution -- not necessarily , just to be different .
i tried to maintain the body .
i wanted to keep healthy .
i wanted to think about the health of a disease .
i wanted to live a long and healthy life .
evolution is all about the weitergabe of the genome , and the next generation , and i think , generation after generation .
and from a evolutionary standpoint , they are and i developed as booster rockets to send the genetic fracht into the next level of orbit to drop it into the ocean .
i think we would all be the mood , the woody woody to all of the expression , when he said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to make immortality unsterblichkeit through my work .
i want to do it by going to be a die . &quot;
evolution doesn &apos;t necessarily have to prefer the longest living .
it wasn &apos;t necessarily zwangsläufig the biggest , the strongest or the fastest , and not even the brightest .
evolution priviligiert the creatures that are best to adapt to their environment .
it &apos;s just the test of survival and success of success and success .
on the reason the ocean are there are bacteria , and by the hot steam surviving survive , if fish were there , there would be a vacuum , there would be a vacuum , fish fish , have been able to have a bewohnbare environment for it .
so what does this mean when we look at what &apos;s happening in evolution , and how we think about the place in evolution , and especially as we vorausschauen into the next stage , i would say that there is a number of possibilities .
the first is that we &apos;re not going to be going .
we &apos;ve reached a kind of equilibrium .
and the reasons for this , it would be a lot of medicine , in medicine , a lot of genes that had been otherwise turned off and out of the population .
and the second , we have been so konfiguriert that we &apos;ve managed to adapt to us , that they &apos;re going to adapt to us , and we &apos;re going to adapt to them , we &apos;re going to adapt to them , we &apos;re going to adapt to them .
and by the way , we wander and zirkulieren and mix ourselves so much that they cannot say that isolation is necessary to evolution .
one second way is that it &apos;s going to be evolution of traditional species , of course , naturally by the forces of nature .
and the argument , here &apos;s the wheels of evolution works , but they &apos;re unerbittlich .
and so far , the isolation , if we &apos;re going to colonize as a species , the planet , it will bring it together , and the changes of the environment could produce evolution in natural ways .
but there is a third option , a verlockende , fascinating and scary possibility of the possibility and terrifying possibility .
i call it neo-evolution -- the new development that isn &apos;t just simply natural , but it &apos;s led , and decided to make us as a individuen. in the choices we make .
now , how could this happen ?
how could it be possible to do that ?
let &apos;s look at the reality that people are making people in some cultures are doing their offspring .
they &apos;re in some cultures , the choice that have more men to have more than women .
it &apos;s not necessarily good for society , but it &apos;s what the individual and family choose .
so think if it &apos;s not only possible to choose the gender of your child , but also the body &apos;s genetic genetic technology is to cure disease and prevent the disease .
what if you could make genetic changes , to remove diabetes or alzheimer &apos;s disease or alzheimer &apos;s disease or to cause the cause of the cause ?
would you want to do it , that changes in their genes ?
if we vorausblicken , these kinds of changes are increasingly possible .
the human genome project began in 1990 , and it took 13 years .
it cost cost billions of dollars .
in the following year , when it was done in 2004 , they could do the same thing for 20 million dollars in drein , to four months .
today , you can now , you can now , you can now , a sequence of three billion base of human genome to a price of 20,000 dollars and in the space of roughly a week .
it &apos;s not going to take longer long , until the reality is going to be the 1.000 human genomes , and it will be increasingly available to everybody .
a week ago , the national academy of the national prize for francis arnold prize and willem stemmer , who developed the natural economic process of evolution that will encourage the natural process of evolution , and to lead to the proteins that are direkte in a sense of the brain -- which is called the direkte arnold evolution .
a few years ago , the scientist shinya verliehen verliehen verliehen verliehen für für for his research , a erwachsene , a fibroblasten , and through the manipulation of the manipulation , the cell , the cell , the cell , to turn it down to a huge stem cell -- a cell potentially , a cell , in your body , can be able to get in your body
these changes are in the coming .
the same technology that can make the human insulin in bacteria , they can &apos;t only make it only protecting themselves , but also to the immunity of any other viruses .
whether you believe it or not , it &apos;s a experimental trial to be a vaccine with a vaccine that &apos;s grown in the cells of a tabakpflanze .
can you imagine a little bit good , that comes from tobacco ?
this is all reality today and in the future , much more than that will be possible .
imagine only two other little changes .
you can change cells in your body , but what if you could change the cells of your descendants ?
what if they could change the sperm and eizellen , or the newly frisch befruchtete egg to give their children a better chance to live life -- and eliminating the diabetes , the diabetes , the risk of cancer ?
who wants to be healthier kids ?
and then the analytical technology , the same engine of science that can enable the change to avoid the changes , to prevent disease , could allow us to adopt the government super-attribute , hyper-kapazitäten , hyper-kapazitäten memory .
why don &apos;t we have the schlagfertigkeit of a ken hben , especially if you can still expand with the next generation of the watson-maschine ?
why not the fast muskelfasern that will allow them to be able to run faster and longer ?
why not live ?
these are going to be unwiderstehlich .
and if we &apos;re in a position where we can pass it on the next generation , and we can adopt the attributes that we want , we will be transformed by alt-stil evolution .
we &apos;re going to have a process that has been potentially 100,000 years of 100,000 years , and we can compress it on thousands of years -- and maybe even on the next 100 years .
these are decisions with those who are grandchildren , or their grandchildren , are going to be greatly deal with .
now we use these decisions to shape that better is better , the more successful , the real world ?
or are we going to choose the different attributes that we want to have for some of us and not for others ?
will we be a society and uniformierter , or robuster and vielseitiger ?
these are the types of questions we need to address .
and most of all , we will ever be able to evolve the wisdom , and the wisdom of the wisdom that we need to make decisions ?
in the good way in evil , and sooner than you may think , these decisions are going to be .
thank you .
i want you to imagine something , a portable robot that gives you to allow you to übermenschliche skills , or another , the rollstuhlfahrern of the rollstuhlfahrern to get up and go to go up .
we call the robots that robots .
they &apos;re not something else that you put in the morning and they use extra strength to increase their pace and they will improve their way to balance .
that &apos;s where the real vision of human beings and machine .
but not only that -- so that &apos;s gradually and then move it with the universe and other places out there .
that &apos;s not just a crazy idea .
now to show you what we &apos;re working on , we start talking about the american soldiers , who &apos;s about 100 pounds on his back , and it &apos;s the request that they should carry more equipment .
of course , this is a few major complications -- rückenverletzungen , 30 percent of it -- chronic rückenverletzungen .
so we thought we would embrace this challenge and create a exoskelett that would help us deal with this problem .
so let me introduce you now -- or to vorstellen the human universal universal carrier .
she &apos;s , with the hulc-exoskelett , i can carry 200 pounds over a mile for hours long .
his flexible design enables to really , deeply deeply to join , to kriechen and highly wendige movements .
it feels what i want to do , where i want to go and get my strength and ausdauer .
we &apos;re so far , with our industriepartner of this device , this new exoskelett of this year .
so it &apos;s true .
now let &apos;s look at our view , and we &apos;re looking at the rollstuhlfahrer , something that i &apos;m particularly passionate about .
there are 68 million people who are in the wheelchair .
that &apos;s about one percent of the population .
and that &apos;s actually a conservative estimate .
we often talk about very young people with spinal cord injury that are in the height of her life -- 20s , 40er , military , the fate of fate and the wheelchair is the only option .
but it &apos;s also about the aging population whose number of times multiplied .
and so , pretty much the only option -- if it &apos;s about a hirnschlag , or to other complications -- is the wheelchair .
and so , it &apos;s been since 500 years since , since then , since i say , i have to say , very successful introduction .
so we thought we could start to write a completely new chapter in the domain of mobility .
now let me introduce you to elegs , which is getragen by amanda boxtel , which was a rückenmarksverletzung erlitt , who has been a ergebnis , that they couldn &apos;t run over 19 years and now .
thank you very much .
as i said , amanda , our elegs .
it has sensors -- it has sensors -- it has got sensors .
his whole completely non-invasiven sensors in the crutches , the signals on our onboard-computer , who &apos;s on your back here .
here are also batteriepackungen , the motorantrieb is on its hips , as it &apos;s like their kniegelenken , which they move forward in this pretty geschmeidigen , and very natural gait .
i was 24 years old and in bestform , as a monströser purzelbaum while a skiabfahrt mich me .
in the fraction of a second , i lost every feeling , and every movement of my beckens .
it &apos;s not a little bit of time to go into my krankenzimmer and he said , &quot; amanda , you will never go again . &quot;
and that was 19 years ago .
he steel steel every single fünkchen hope of my consciousness .
anpassungsfähige technologies have been seitdem to learn to be able to go back to klettern and to drive with the hands of bike .
but nothing invented , that would leave me back to the point of all .
thank you very much .
as you can see , we have the technology , we have the platforms to make us and argue with them .
it &apos;s in our hands and we have the whole potential to change the lives of future generations -- not just for the soldiers , or for amanda , and all the rollstuhlfahrer , but for all of you .
thank you very much .
at home in new york , i &apos;m a boss of a non-profit organization called the primary hood hood .
if i don &apos;t bekämpfe poverty , i &apos;m going to be a gehilfe of a feuerwehr-hauptmanns at a feuerwehr-hauptmanns löschzug , the fire .
now , in our city , in the volunteers , in the volunteers , a hochqualifizierte berufsfeuerwehr , you have to be pretty early at the brandstelle to be able to be mitmischen .
i remember my first fire .
i was the second volunteer at the brandstelle , so i had quite good opportunity to go .
but it was still a race against the other volunteers to reach the tune of the verantwortlichen hauptmann to the verantwortlichen of the verantwortlichen hauptmann and find out what our tasks would be .
when i was a hauptmann , he had just been in a very serious conversation with the hausbesitzerin that certainly had one of the worst days of their lifetime .
it was in the middle of night , and she stood in the schlafanzug and barefoot amongst a screen in the strömenden rain , while her house stood in flames .
the other volunteers who was just arrived -- let &apos;s call him lex death -- all the hauptmann death -- and was asked to go to the house and to save the dog &apos;s dog &apos;s dog .
the dog ! i was a sprachlos .
there was some lawyer or vermögensverwalter who was able to tell the rest of his life , who was going to tell people to save a living creature , only because he was five seconds than i was .
well , i was the next one .
the hauptmann winkte me to themselves .
he said , &quot; bezos , you have to go to the house .
you have to go up to the top , and the fires , and you have to get some shoes . &quot;
i swear to swear .
now , not exactly what i &apos;d hoped that i went -- i went to the place -- the stairs , the flur , the flur , the echten , the echten , which was quite finished with the löschen , in the bedroom of a pair of shoes .
i know what you &apos;re thinking now , but i &apos;m not a hero .
i was living back to the bottom , where i met at the door of my erzfeind and the beloved dog .
we put our treasures out to the hausbesitzerin , where , not surprisingly , his highest attention , and his career &apos;s more attention than mine .
a few weeks later , the feuerwache got a letter of the hausbesitzerin that they were interested in the use of their house at saving their house .
one of all kinds of kindness , kindness : somebody who had some shoes .
and in my career , in our profession as well as a volunteer , i &apos;m witness by generosity and kindness with the big scale , but i also see the charity and the muts of individual .
and you know what i learned ?
they &apos;re all important .
so if i look at this room and people see that either have been achieved a beachtenswerten success or on their way , i want to offer that memory , i don &apos;t want to wait for it .
don &apos;t wait for a difference in a life of a different way to have your first million .
if you give something to give you now .
they &apos;re going to put a park in the neighborhood , and you &apos;re in a park in the neighborhood .
be a mentor .
every day , it &apos;s not a chance to save the lives of one person , but every day gives us the ability to change one .
so she goes ; they save the shoes .
thank you very much .
bruno guissani : mark , mark , come back .
thank you very much .
i &apos;m just going to come back from a community that knows the secret of the fortbestands of humanity .
a place where women are doing the zepter , with sex &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; s say -- where fun is a serious issue .
and no , it &apos;s not burning or san francisco .
ladies and gentlemen , your verwandtschaft .
this is the world of the wild bonobos in the urwald of congo .
bonobos are together with chimpanzees all the next living living .
that means we have a shared ancestor , a evolutionary grandmother , which lived about six million years ago .
well , chimps are known for your aggressivität .
but unfortunately , we have this aspect of the human evolution in the narrative of human evolution .
but bonobos show us the other side of the same page .
as the chimps of big , fear einflößenden , kerlen kerlen , will lead the bonobo-gesellschaft of the ermächtigten female .
they really have a lot , because this is a very ausgesprochen society in which the lethal force has been observed .
but unfortunately , bonobos are known to the primates .
they live in the depths of the kongolesischen , and the observation are hard to be very difficult .
congo is a paradox -- a country of außergewöhnlicher biodiversity and beauty , but the heart of the darkness -- the location of a television operating system that has been wütet for decades and almost so many lives of the world &apos;s world .
it doesn &apos;t surprise that this destruction , the survival of the bonobo is also the survival of the bonobo .
fleischhandel and the loss of the baumbestandes is that you don &apos;t have to fill a sports with the verbliebenen bonobos -- and even there are not certain we &apos;re not sure to be honest .
and yet , in this country of violence and chaos , you can hear a verborgenes laugh , that the trees is shattered .
who are these relative ?
we know them as &quot; love , &quot; because they have häufigen , also sex sex , also sex sex , with wechselnden partners , and rules and social networking .
i don &apos;t say that would be the answer to all humanitarian problems -- because life is more than the bonobos of bonobos .
bonobos -- like humans -- love it to play .
game is not only kinderspiele .
for us , and it &apos;s essential to be a game for the attachment of relationships and the care of the future .
we &apos;re learning trust and the rules of the game .
game dynamics , creativity and resilience , and it &apos;s all about the power of diversity -- variety of interactions , diversity of connections , diversity .
and if you look at bonobos , you see the evolutionary origins of human lachens , dance and rituals .
play is the kitt that we &apos;re going to confront us .
now , i don &apos;t know how they play , but i want to show you some unique footage from the wild .
first , a ballspiel on bonobo-art -- and i don &apos;t think of fussball .
so here we see a young female and males in a verfolgungsspiel .
look at what she does .
this could be the evolutionary origin of : &quot; you put him in the eggs . &quot;
just that i think it &apos;s more like it , it &apos;s not true .
yeah , yeah !
so sexspiele are spread , both bonobo and people in humans .
and this video is really interesting , because this video is really interesting , and this video is really interesting , because it shows the ideenreichtum elements -- like the testicles -- and also how the game abuse could be identified and also -- while it &apos;s been doing this at the same time .
but the game is a formwandler .
play is a formwandler , and it can adopt many forms of these things are actually shared , phantasievoll , curious , curious -- maybe to discover it again .
and i want to show you that is fuku , a young female , and she plays the peacefully with water .
i think , just like you play , sometimes we &apos;re going to play , and we loten limitations of our inner and outer worlds .
and it &apos;s the playful curiosity that lets us explore , and interact with the unexpected level of the unexpected review we are creating , are the real nährboden of creativity .
this is just a little vorgeschmack on the insights that &apos;s the bonobos in our past and present .
but they also also true a mystery for our future , a future where we need to adapt to increasing challenges , through greater creativity and druch cooperation .
the secret is that the game is the key to this skills .
in other words , play is our anpassungsjoker .
so to adapt to a unbeständige world , we need to play .
but are we going to do the best out of our spieltrieb ?
play is not silly , it &apos;s not silly .
it &apos;s essential .
for a bonobo , and people don &apos;t have the life of teeth and claws alone .
just if it seems to be appropriate , maybe it may seem to be a game .
and so my favorite , let &apos;s make this gift of evolution and together , while we &apos;re playing the creativity and the wonder .
thank you .
i want you to imagine two pairs of the middle , in the same 1979 , at exactly exactly the same moment , every single moment , every single one of the baby -- okay .
so two pairs , every zeugt one is a baby .
now i don &apos;t want to imagine that too much time to imagine the zeugung , because if you &apos;re going to imagine the whole time , they won &apos;t listen to me .
imagine that just for a moment .
and in this scenario , imagine that in a case , the sperma sperma a y chomosom , which is the x chromosome of the ocean .
and in the other case , the sperma is a x chromosome that &apos;s desperately true .
both of them are überlebensfähig , both sides .
we &apos;re going to get back to these guys .
most of my activities , i have two choices .
under a hat , i &apos;m involved with the story of anatomy .
i &apos;m studying a studierte , and in this case , i study how people with anatomy -- that human body , animal body -- how they were using körperflüssigkeiten umgingen , with körperkonzepten , with körperkonzepten , how they thought about body .
the other hat i carried in my work is the activist , as a patientinnenanwältin -- or , as i say , as a ungeduldige lawyer -- from people who are the patients of physicians .
in this case , i &apos;ve worked with people who have körpertypen , who are social norms in question .
and so , for example , i &apos;ve been working with people who are siamesische twins , two people in a body .
i worked with people with zwergenwuchs -- so people who were little as a common ones .
and very often , i &apos;ve been working with intersexuellen people , whose gender atypisch is -- so people who don &apos;t have the average male or female körpertypen .
and as a general term , we can use the word word .
intersexualität comes in a lot of different shapes .
i just give you a couple of examples of the potential guys of the geschlechtsvarianten of geschlechtsvarianten that are not the male or female standard .
in a case , you might have somebody with a xy chromosomenbasis , and the sry gene of y chomosoms , the protogonaden that we &apos;re all stage at the stage , to get to testes .
and that &apos;s why the testicles im in the fötalen testosterone .
but because this individual is missing the receptors to see the testosterone , respond to the testosterone .
and that &apos;s called androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so much testosterone , but no reaction on it .
as a consequence of the body is going to have more to the typical female .
when the kid &apos;s born , it looks like a girl .
she &apos;s a girl . she &apos;s going to be raised as girls .
but it takes mostly until they grow puberty and their breasts grow and develop , but not their ability to get their benefits until somebody else comes to the way that there is something else .
and they &apos;re doing some tests and find out that they &apos;re instead of eierstöcken and uterus in reality in itself , and that they have a y chromosome .
and it &apos;s important to understand that you could think of this person for really männlich , but they &apos;re not really .
women , like men , have something that you call adrenalindrüsen .
you &apos;re in the back part of our body .
and the nebennieren places , we &apos;re able to ensure that are hormones .
most women , as i -- i think a typical woman -- i don &apos;t know my actual time -- i think i &apos;m probably going to have the typischen one , but most women , i think , in the world , i think , in androgene .
we produce androgen , and we speak to androgene .
the consequence is that someone , like i actually exposed a brain that was exposed to more androgenen than a woman who was born with testes , and a androgenrezeptor-defekt has been born .
so gender , the gender stand is not just in the middle of the spectrum of gender -- in a way , you can be distributed across the whole range of the range of the range of the range of the range of the range of the range of the range of the range of the range of the range of the range of the range of the range of
another example , a couple of years ago , i got a 19 jährigen , who was a 19 named man who was born , he had sex with his girlfriend , lived with his girlfriend , lived as man , and he had just figured out he had eierstöcke and a uterus .
he had an extreme form of an innate angeborenen .
he has xx chromosome , and in the womb , his nebennieren were so strong that they created a male männliche .
and as a consequence , his genitalien were männlich , his brain was the typischeren male of the hormonenspektrums .
and when he was born , he saw a boy like a boy -- no one was something .
and it was only when he was 19 years old , he got enough medical problems , actually because he &apos;s menstruierte the way that the doctors found out that he was in the inner female .
okay , just a quick example of a set of intersexualität .
some people with xx chromosomes , something called the ovotestis , which is eierstockgewebe , which is eierstockgewebe umhüllt .
we don &apos;t know exactly why that happens .
so gender , gender , can be formed in many different varieties .
the reason why kids are using this kind of body -- whether it &apos;s zwergenwuchs or siamesische twins , it &apos;s intersexuell -- of surgeons , it &apos;s not because of surgeons , it &apos;s not because this is the norm of advantage .
in many cases , these people are completely healthy .
the reason why you often have a lot of different interventions , is because they threaten our social categories .
and typically , our system is based on the idea that there is a particular anatomical with a particular identity of a particular identity .
so we have the concept that a woman is to have a female identity , which is a black person , is meant to have a african anatomy in terms of your story .
so we have this horrible vereinfachende idea .
and if we &apos;re faced with a body who &apos;s actually being done for us , actually , something very different is , in fact , to be confused and verwirrt us .
so we have a lot of ideas about individualismus .
and our nation is really based on a very romantic concept of individualismus .
now , you can imagine how amazing it is when children are born , the two people in a body are in a body .
where i had seen most of the time , most of the excitement was läuferin caster last year , whose gender had been asked in the leichatlethik world in question .
many journalists started me with the question , &quot; which test you will do , that &apos;s what we &apos;re going to do , who tells us if caster semenya is weiblich ? &quot;
and i had to explain the journalists that it &apos;s not that this test .
we now know that gender is difficult enough to admit that the nature of us is not going to be between male and female and female and weiblich and weiblich and intersexuell , we &apos;re the ones that we &apos;re most of those are more beautiful than that .
so we have a situation where the further we returned to our science , we need to have to say that these categories we have , we had the kategorien of the stabile categories , which are very simple herstellten to create permanent identitätskategorien , much more comfortable than we have .
and that &apos;s not just in terms of gender .
it also is also about hinsichtlich , which is a lot more complicated than our terminologie .
in our bodies , we &apos;re going to get into all sorts of things .
we &apos;re preparing for the fact that we have at least 95 percent of our dna with chimps have joined together .
what we &apos;re going to start with the fact that we &apos;re just going to distinguish from them through a few nukleotide ?
while we continue to move our science , we get increasingly into a zone of the unbehagens where we need to recognize that the most simplistischen categories that we &apos;ve probably had too low .
we see that in all sorts of human life .
one of the things that we see this is the beipiel , in our modern culture , in the current world , are the fighting the fighting over the beginning and the end of life .
we have difficult conversations about what the point is going to be a body , and that he &apos;s going to be a different right to the fetal life .
we have very difficult conversations -- maybe not as public as in medicine -- the question of when someone &apos;s dead .
our ancestors had never been so hard to fight the question when someone was dead .
they have a feder under the nose , and if you moved , they haven &apos;t been buried yet .
if you don &apos;t move more , you &apos;ve been buried .
but today we &apos;re in a situation where we take people into people and want to put them together in other people .
and as a result , we &apos;re talking about the struggle with the really tough question when someone is dead , and that brings us into a really difficult situation where we don &apos;t have more like simple categories .
now you might suspect that the whole thing of categories was really happy to do .
i &apos;m a political scientist , i verteidige people with unusual bodies , but i have to admit it , makes me nervous .
understanding that these categories really are much more insecure than we thought , makes me .
and it makes me feel like i &apos;m making up the democracy .
so to tell you about this anspannung , i first have to do that i &apos;m a big fan of the founding fathers .
i know they were rassisiten , i know they were sexisten , but they were great .
i find that they were so tapfer and strong , and so radically that they did that i &apos;d come back to the schmalzige musical of the schmalzige 1776 , and it &apos;s not because of the music that &apos;s absolutely forgotten .
it &apos;s because of what &apos;s going on with the gründungsvätern .
the founding fathers were from my view of aktivisten activists , and that &apos;s why .
what she was zurückwiesen was a coherent concept , and she &apos;s recognizing it through a different , which was radically and beautiful and 200 years .
as you remember , our founding fathers that off the concept of monarchy , and the monarchy that i &apos;ve taken in a very distorted idea of anatomy .
the herrscher of the old world didn &apos;t have a concept based on the dna , but they had a concept of the geburtsrechts .
they had a concept of blue blood .
they were the notion that people who have been doing the political power , this political power , due to the vererbten blutlinie from grandfather to the father and so on .
so the founding meadows meadows , this idea , and when it comes to a new anatomisches concept , and that concept that all humans have created all the same .
they nivellierten the field , and decided that it &apos;s seen , the common ancestry , not the differences , and that was very radical .
now they made it part because they were part of a aufklärerischen system where two things together .
democracy has grown , but at the same time , science grew up .
if you look at the story of the founding fathers , clearly that many of you were very interested in science , and they were interested in a concept of a world world .
they went away from explanations übernatürlicher , and meadows things , like a supernatural concept of power , back where transmission is based on a very vagen level of geburtsrecht .
they moved to a naturalistischen concept .
and if you look at the declaration of the declaration of independence , you talk about nature , and the god of nature .
they &apos;re not talking about god and the natural god .
they &apos;re talking about power nature to tell us who we are .
and as part of this , you &apos;ve got a concept of anatomischen mortality .
and so they have been really weise in really wonderful ways .
they didn &apos;t think about it , but what they did for us was great .
so what happened after that ?
for example , women , the wahlrecht anstrebten , the concept of the founding gründungsväter , which says that , say , say , say , &quot; have the gebärmutter and eierstöcke , we have not significant enough to have the wahlrecht enough to have the right to have the right to have a hundred citizenship , the right thing to have the right thing , to have the right
and women argumentierten the successful .
next came the successful civil rights movement where we saw people like sojourner truth , who &apos;s spach , &quot; am i not a woman ? &quot;
we find men in the marschierenden rows of bürgerechtsbewegung , who say , &quot; i &apos;m a man . &quot;
again , people of different color that are berufen on anatomical gemeinsamkeiten , unterschieden differences , again , successful .
we see the same thing in the behindertenrechtsbewegung .
and of course , the problem is that , and we start looking at all the similarities , we start to ask why we have certain trennungen .
now , the way , i want to be a certain amount of trennungen that , in the culture of culture .
i want to give you a fish of fish that are the same rights as a human .
i don &apos;t want to say that we should take the anatomy very distance .
i don &apos;t want to say that 5-jährige should have been right , their informed consent to sex or to get married .
so there are some anatomical trennungen that make sense to me , and we think , i think , keep it .
but the challenge is to try to figure out what it is and why we keep them , and whether they &apos;re smart .
so , we get back to these two creatures that had been gezeugt at the beginning of the talk .
we have two creatures , both the middle of the united states at exactly the same day .
imagine that one of them , maria , maria , maria , three months verfrüht , she &apos;s born on the 1 june 1980 .
so , heinrich , on the other hand , is born to the geburtstermin , so he &apos;s born on the 1 1980 , and he &apos;s born on the 1 of the 1980 .
just because of the fact that maria maria geboren , they &apos;re going to do all three months before the heinrich of the last three months -- the right sex to choose the right to drink the right .
and it has to wait for all of these , not because he &apos;s actually a different biological age , only because of the birth of his birth .
we find other parts of the world that have their rights .
so , there &apos;s a little bit of annimmt , because i didn &apos;t tell you that he &apos;s mit -- because you &apos;re going to be annimmt , he &apos;s now going to be able to move out , which is not going to worry about .
maria , no , can &apos;t be in all states , the same thing that sits in all states , and that &apos;s the right to get married .
in any state , a woman can marry a woman , but maria is only in a few states today in a few states .
so we have these permanently anatomischen categories that are very different and questionable and questionable .
and the question is , what will we do is , what are we going to do is that we &apos;re doing such advances in the field of anatomy that we need to do , we need to get a democracy that could be based upon anatomy , could be based on anatomy ?
i don &apos;t want to give the science to give up , but at the same time , it feels like the science is interested in .
so where do we go ?
it seems like a kind of pragmatic haltung , which is , &quot; well , we need to draw somewhere a line , so we &apos;re going to move somewhere . &quot;
but a lot of people are getting caught up in a very strange position .
so for example , texas has decided to marry that , a man means that you don &apos;t have a y chromosome , and a woman is to marry that you have a y chromosome .
now , in practice , people are not tested on their chromosome .
but it &apos;s also very bizarre about the story that i told you about the androgenrezeptor-defekt .
if we look at a gründungsväter of modern democracy , dr. martin luther king , he offers us in his &quot; i have a dream of a solution .
he says , we shouldn &apos;t be able to do people , not to say , &quot; skin skin , &quot; but after the property of her character , &quot; and it &apos;s so beyond anatomy .
and i want to say , &quot; yes , that sounds like a really good idea . &quot;
but how do you do that in practice ?
how do you treat people due to their own ?
i also want to point out that we should be able to distribute right in terms of people , because i have to admit that i have to say a series of ethical retriever that probably is more likely than some people i know .
i want to make a couple of bright labradorhunde , the fähiger labradorhunde , the fähiger , more intelligent and more choices to meet their sexual relations as some of the ones i know .
so how do we have to put the question after the characteristics of the character ?
it turns out it &apos;s really difficult .
and part of me , what if the content would be to be something that would be something that would be in the future -- using fmri ?
do we really want to go to this direction ?
i &apos;m not sure where we go .
what i know is that it really seems to be really important about the idea that the united states is about to be concerned about democracy .
in our endeavor , our sache is really doing right , and i think we would be doing our thing in the future .
we don &apos;t have the situation where it &apos;s in iran , where a man who gets sexually to other men , it &apos;s going to be punished with death , unless it &apos;s ready to be able to stay alive .
now , in the process of this kind of exist .
i &apos;m glad to say that we haven &apos;t been talking to these states -- a surgeon that had been talking to a few years ago , a few siamesische twins had to separate them to separate them , partly to make a name .
but when i was telefonierte , and he asked him why he made these surgeries -- it was high surgeries -- his answer , his children , these kids were very poorly treated , and that &apos;s why he had to do it .
i answered , &quot; well , you have the political bed in erwägung instead of taking a surgery ? &quot;
the united states provide incredible opportunities to allow people to be the ones that they &apos;re in , without the state of the state .
so i think we have to be führend .
all right , just to conclude , i want to notice that i spoke very much about the fathers .
and i want to think about the possibilities like democracy , or maybe , if we could have more involved more comfortable .
and i want to say something that is radical , and i think it might be able to give different types of insights that are different from different types of anatomy , insbesonders , if people use a gruppendenken .
for years , since i &apos;ve been interested in the intersexualität , i &apos;ve been interested in research in the field of art .
and one of the things that i really found interesting is the difference between men and women in terms of how they think and in the world .
what we &apos;ve learned from studying studies is that women -- not every single thing -- not every single thing -- but more complex , more complex social relationships and the fürsorge for people who are in the group , are very much attention to give a lot of attention .
and so , if we think about it , we think about this , we think about it .
and years ago , when i was an graduate student , i asked myself one of my favorite studienbetreuer , which was my interest in feminism -- i looked at a feminist , so i &apos;m doing it -- a really curious question .
he said , &quot; tell me what &apos;s most feminism . &quot;
and i thought , &quot; well , this is the main question i ever &apos;ve ever heard .
in feminism , it &apos;s about stereotypes about gender gender , that &apos;s why it &apos;s not about feminism .
but the more i thought about his question , to make more , so i thought there might be something more profound in feminism .
it &apos;s supposed to be , there might be something to be able to do , the average , the female brains tell us about männlichen , unterscheiden of the soziale social relations and aufmerksamer for the schutzbedürftige .
so where the founding fathers were so much like individuals who protected the state of the state , it &apos;s possible that if we einbrächten more mothers in this concept , we can actually be a concept of concept , not just like how to be able to worry about .
and maybe it &apos;s the way we need to go into the future , if we have democracy democracy over anatomy -- less about the individual body , and think about the individual body , and more thinking about relations .
so that if we try to make a connection , we &apos;re going to think about what we can do for each other .
thank you very much .
i &apos;m a jessi , and this is my suitcase .
but before i show you what i &apos;ve done in it , i &apos;m going to do a very public confession and that &apos;s : i &apos;m obsessed with outfits .
i love to get any opportunity to find the outfit to be able to find the outfit to take and also to also bloggen to photograph and also to bloggen .
but i don &apos;t buy anything new .
i get all my clothes from the second hand , auf and in second-hand-shops .
ooh , thank you .
second-hand-shopping allows me to reduce the impact of my garderobe on the environment and also the geldbörse .
i meet all kinds of great people ; my dollars usually serving a good purpose ; i see quite unique ; i &apos;m seeing quite unique ; and it makes my personal personal schatzsuche .
i mean , what am i going to find today ?
will it be my size ?
will i like the color ?
will it cost less than 20 dollars ?
if all the answers , i feel like i won .
i come back to my suitcase , and tell you what i &apos;ve been looking for this exciting week here at ted .
i mean , what does someone do with so many outfits ?
so i &apos;m going to show you exactly what i brought to .
i brought seven to a couple of unterhosen in some of these guys , and that &apos;s all .
so , in the same week , for the week , everything i &apos;ve done in my suitcase .
i &apos;ve got it , i thought i &apos;d wear anything else i would like to find , if i just came to palm springs .
and since you haven &apos;t heard of me as the woman who &apos;s running at ted in the underwear -- called this , i found a couple things .
and i want to show you my outfits for this week .
does that sound ?
and i &apos;m going to do that , i &apos;m going to tell you some of the lessons i believe , or not , if you believe it or not , from these abenteuern , nothing to wear .
let &apos;s start with sunday .
i call this the strahlenden tiger .
you don &apos;t have to spend a lot of money to look at great money .
you can almost always look at less than 50 dollars .
this whole thing , including the jacket has 55 55 , and it was the most expensive piece that i &apos;ve been carrying in this week .
monday : color is a little bit powerful .
it &apos;s almost impossible to be bad , bad if you get hellrote pants .
if you &apos;re happy , you get other happy people .
tuesday : adapting it &apos;s totally überbewertet .
i spent a lot of time in my life trying to try and try and be myself , and i also start to adapt at the same time .
just be the ones who are you .
if you &apos;re in the right people , they &apos;re not going to be able to understand it , they &apos;re also appreciate .
wednesday : hug your child .
sometimes i say people , i would like to do it like i &apos;m doing spiele or i remember her .
i &apos;m happy to smile , and i say , &quot; thank you . &quot;
thursday : is the key to the key .
if you think you &apos;re going to see it in something good , it &apos;s almost certainly like that .
and if you think they &apos;re not good , you may have right .
i grew up with a mother who taught me the day for day .
but only i was 30 , i really understood what that means .
and i &apos;m going to sum the short for you .
if you believe that they &apos;re inside and the outside , and the outside one is a wonderful person , there &apos;s nothing you can &apos;t wear .
so there is no excuse to give you a excuse here in this audience .
we should be able to be able to do everything we want .
thank you very much .
friday : a universal truth -- five words : golden pailleten .
and finally , saturday : a big , unique , unique , personal style , is a great way to tell a little bit about the world without a word .
it was always proven to myself , and over and over again , when people were to me , just because of what i carried , and i had great conversations .
obviously , it &apos;s not going to fit all the rest of your body .
so before i go home to brooklyn , i &apos;m going to donate all of this .
because the lesson i &apos;m trying to learn to this week is that it &apos;s okay .
i have to do this thing in emotional because the ecke will be a different verrücktes , farbenfrohes , strahlendes outfit , that just wait for me , if i have a little love in the heart , and it &apos;s looking for a little bit .
thank you very much .
thank you .
good afternoon , everybody combined .
i have something i want to show you .
think of this as a bildpunkt , as flying bildpunkt .
that &apos;s what we call in our lab , wahrnehmbares design .
let me tell you a little bit about it .
now , if you take this picture -- i &apos;m originally in italy , and every young boy in italy , in his bedroom , but the reason i &apos;m showing you this is that the reason i &apos;m going to show you that is something that was a very interesting thing to do .
some time ago , it was like she wanted to win a formula , then they took her budget and put her money on a good driver and a good car .
and when the car and the driver good enough , then you won the race .
now , you need to have a race , in fact , if you &apos;re going to have a race , actually , something like this -- something that &apos;s the car in real time , the information from the car , this information is coming out of the car , and then they &apos;re using this information , and then they use this information to send and senden and
this would be , in ingenieurteams , a echtzeit-kontrollsystem .
and basically , it &apos;s a system that made two parts -- a spürenden portion and a reagierendenteil .
what &apos;s interesting about this is what &apos;s interesting about this is the echtzeit-kontrollsysteme in our lives .
our cities were in the last few years , just with networks and electronics .
they become too computers in the open .
and as computers , they start to respond to other ways , and they &apos;re going to be seen and driven .
if we herrichten cities , it &apos;s actually a big thing .
just by the way i want to mention that cities are only two percent of the land and 50 percent of the world &apos;s population lives .
they &apos;re 75 percent of the energiekonsums -- is to 80 percent of co2 emissions .
so if we do something with the cities , it &apos;s a big thing .
and the cities is going to move out of all of this , and you can be able to be a antreiben in objects in the everyday lives .
this is from a exhibition , paola antonelli for moma later , in the year , organized .
it &apos;s called &quot; your &quot; playing &quot; . &quot;
now , all of our objects , our environment , start to speak to us .
in a certain sense , it &apos;s almost as if every atom out there will be out there , a sensor and a antreiber .
and that changes radically radical , the interaction that we &apos;ve done with our environment .
in a way , it &apos;s almost as if the old dream of michelangelo &apos;s michelangelo .
you know , when you look at the moses , it means that he took the hammer and he threw it up on the end -- actually , you can still see a little spot of the hammer -- and he said , &quot; perché non parli ? why don &apos;t you talk ? &quot;
now , what we start to start to do is the first time to respond to us .
i &apos;m going to show you just some examples -- again , with the idea of our environment and value .
let &apos;s start with this .
now the first project i want to show you is in fact in truth of the first of our labs .
it was developed in italy , in italy .
and what we did was actually using new kinds of network that was used in the world -- this is a mobiltelefonnetz -- this is a mobiltelefonnetz -- and aggregierte information from this network , which are being collected from the network that will work together as the city .
summer was a happy summer -- 2006 .
it was as a italy of the fußball-weltmeisterschaft won .
some of you remember , it was like italy against france , and then the end ended up at the end of the frankreich .
and no , i don &apos;t have to have the end of the end at the end , and i won &apos;t win the end .
now look at what happened in this day , except in the field of activity that happens in the network .
here you see the city .
you see in the middle of the mitte , the fluß tiber .
at the morning , the game .
you see the timeline .
used to , the afternoon , people here and there , the calls and move .
the game starts to -- silence .
france make a portal , italy makes a gateway .
halbzeit , people make a brief call , go on a bathroom .
second halbzeit . the end of the normal .
first verlängerung , second .
zidane , in a moment of kopfstoß .
italy . yeah . yeah .
now , in this night , went to celebrate the center .
they saw the big operations .
the next day , all the center went to the center to meet the siegerteam and meet the prime minister at the time .
and then they go down .
you see the picture of the space station , where the roman time , people go to celebrate -- to celebrate people -- to have a big party , and you see the rash at the end of the day .
now , this is just one example of how we can feel the city today , in a way that we could not could do it in a few years ago .
so quickly another example of you : here &apos;s not about people , but to make things that we use and consume .
now , today , we know all of our things come from all of our things .
this is a map that tells you all the chips that a mac is made of a mac , as they came together .
but we know just a little bit about where things go .
so , in this project , we actually designed some small marker to track the garbage as it goes through the system .
so we started with a few volunteers that have been geholfen in a year ago , in seattle , the things they &apos;re wegwarfen -- different types of things , as you can see -- things that they would throw away .
then we have the little chips , the little brands , on the garbage and track it down .
here are the results that we &apos;re getting right now .
from seattle ... ...
after a week .
with this information we realized there are a lot of bacteria in the system .
we can do the same things in the same way .
the data wasn &apos;t available before .
but that &apos;s what happens a lot of unnützer transporte and more complicated things .
but the other thing is that we believe that if we see every day , the cup we throw away , not just disappears , that they still have been anywhere on the planet .
and the plastic bags that we still stay out every day .
and if we were to show that people , we can move behavior .
so that &apos;s why this project is .
my colleague at mit , assaf biderman , could tell you more about this , and the many other wonderful things that you can do with perceive , but i want to talk to the second part that we discussed at the beginning , and that &apos;s the most betätigung of our environment .
and the first project is something that we did a few years ago in zaragoza , spain .
it started with a question of the bürgermeisters that came to us and said that spain and südeuropa , a beautiful tradition have a beautiful tradition of public water as part of the architecture .
and the question was : how could you get technology to connect new technology ?
and one of the ideas that were in a arbeitskreis ermittelt , imagine that these tubes , and valves , magnetventile , valves , the valves , the open and closing .
they &apos;re like what a wasservorhang mit out of water .
if these bildpunkte herunterfallen , you can write on it , you can see patterns , images , text .
and they can approach it , and he &apos;s going to be opening up to make them durchspringen , as you can see on this picture .
well , we introduced the mayor of belloch .
it has very much like it .
and we got the assignment to design the building for the expo .
we called it the digital water .
all the building was made of water .
there is no doors or the window , but if you approach it , it &apos;s going to open up and you let them .
the roof was also covered with water .
and if it &apos;s windy , if you want to decrease the syringes , you can actually make the roof down .
or you could close the building and the whole architecture is , you know , this one day , you know , this days , if you get the roof , you get images of people who were there and say , &quot; you have the building . &quot;
no , they didn &apos;t have the building , it &apos;s just that architecture almost disappears .
and here you see how the building works .
you see the person who &apos;s going to ask you about what &apos;s inside .
and here you see me when i was trying to evaluate the sensors that opened the water , not getting wet .
now , i should tell you what a night when they were all sensoren sensoren .
but actually , it was a little bit more powerful .
all of the children came out of zaragoza came to the building , because the way it was playing with the building was entirely different .
no longer a building that would open to you , but a building that has still broken and holes in the water , you had to be jumping to get wet .
and that was , very exciting , very exciting , because as architects , engineers , as designers , we always think about how the people we design .
but reality is always an unpredictable .
and that &apos;s the beauty of creating things that are used and interact with people .
here &apos;s a picture of the building with the physical bildpunkten , the bildpunkten from water and the projections .
and this is what we &apos;ve got to think about this project , which i &apos;m going to show you now .
imagine that bildpunkte , you could start to fly .
imagine you could have small helicopter through the air , and each of them with a small bildpunkt with a little bildpunkt light with a little bildpunkt light , almost like a cloud in the space .
here &apos;s the video .
imagine a helicopter like the ones you saw earlier , who &apos;s going to have seen in other ways .
you can have these cloud .
you can have a kind of flexiblen or display , like this -- a gleichmäßige formation in two dimensions .
or , in three dimensions , where the thing changes , the light is , not the position of the bildpunkte .
you can play with different species .
imagine the screen just in the screen just in different parts of the screen or the sizes , in different parts of the different scales .
but then , this is just a 3d cloud of bildpunkten , which you can have to go to the zugehen and they move through them , they can move through many , many directions .
and here you see a real flyfire-steuerung , which is the herabsinkt to shape a gleichmäßiges transition .
if you turn the light , it looks like this . so , as we &apos;ve seen it before .
imagine that every single one of people will be controlled .
it could have any single bildpunkt that you have a impulse that comes from people , from the movements of people or so forth .
i want to show you something here .
we worked with roberto bolle , one of the best balletttänzer of our time -- the étoile of the metropolitan theater &apos;s metropolitan theater center and the university of the living in milan -- we &apos;ve taken his movements in 3d 3d to use it as a momentum for the flyfire .
here you see roberto dancing .
on the left , you see the bildpunkte , the different eingefangenen sensations .
it &apos;s the same time a echtzeit-3d-scan and a bewegungsaufnahme .
so that they can really feel the whole movement .
you can do that all the time .
but then , once we have all the bildpunkte , you can play with play and play with color , gravity and play .
we want to use a possible reason for the flyfire .
i want to show you the latest project we &apos;re working on .
it &apos;s something that we work for the olympics in london .
it &apos;s called the cloud -- the cloud .
so , the idea is , imagine that we can do people to do with people and the environment -- almost like we call it , almost like we call it , we know how to move it out , wolkenbewegung , like you move a scheunentor , but with a cloud .
imagine that everybody can give a little donation for a bildpunkt .
i think that the remarkable thing about the last few years , the last decade , is that we &apos;ve been changed from a physical world .
this has all digitized , knowledge , and it makes it available through the internet .
today , we can first take for the first time -- and the campaign obama has shown that -- can we can take from the digital world that the digital forces of networks in the physical world is changing .
that can be in our case , that we use it to design and create a symbol .
that is something that &apos;s built in the city .
but tomorrow can it to ask us to put the challenges of the challenges -- think about climate change or the co2 emissions -- how can we change from the digital world to the physical world .
so the idea is that we actually engage the people with the people in which they are things together , collectively .
the cloud is a cloud cloud , a cloud cloud , in the same way , as a real cloud of particles .
and these particles are water , as our cloud is a cloud of bildpunkten .
it &apos;s an physikalisches thing in london , but with bildpunkten covers .
you can move inside and different kinds of experiences .
you can actually look at it from below , the most important moments for olympia 2012 and share , and it &apos;s as a kind of connection to community .
so the physical cloud in the sky , and something they can go and go to the top , like the londons new berggipfel .
you can get inside .
and a kind of digital leuchtturm leuchtturm in the night -- but as a allerwichtigstes , a new kind of experience for everyone who want to go to the top .
thank you .
as an artist is very important .
i &apos;m trying to tell my work that people are not separated from nature , and that everything is connected .
the first time i was in front of a 10 years ago in antarctica , where i saw my first eisberge .
me , i was performing .
my heart said , i was schwindelig , as i was trying to tap out .
the eisberge around me , beinah 60 feet out of the water , and i was able to find a wonder that that was a snowflake on another snowflake , year .
eisberge become born as a calf or a glacier or by indem out of eisschollen .
every iceberg has its own individual personality .
they interact in clear ways with their environment and their experience .
some of the people and klammern to bitter , while others can &apos;t get more and more aushalten and in a photographed .
if you look at a iceberg , you think you &apos;re just isolated , apart , apart and just as we often see people .
but the truth is far away .
while a iceberg was melting , i atme his vorzeitliche atmosphere .
while the amount of falling continues , he frei drinking water , which is a lot of life .
i &apos;m going to go to my aufnahmen in my mind as i &apos;d make portraits of my ancestors in the mind , in consciousness , that they exist in these individual moments of these various times , and never will be so much again .
it &apos;s not death when you melt it ; it &apos;s not a end , but a fortführung of your pfades along the life cycle .
part of the ice in the eisbergen river i &apos;m very young -- a few thousand years old .
and part of the ice is more than 100,000 years old .
the last images i &apos;d like to show you , show a iceberg that i &apos;ve been in greenland in greenland .
very rarely , you &apos;re actually going to be zeuge a rollenden of eisbergs .
here &apos;s what you see here .
on the left , you see a little boat .
that &apos;s about five meters long .
please watch the shape of the iceberg and where it &apos;s on the wasserlinie .
you can see here , it starts to roll , and the boat has moved to the other side , the man there .
that &apos;s the average size of a grönland-eisbergs .
he was about 120 feet from the water , or 40 feet .
and this video is in real time .
and just like , just show you the iceberg a different side of his personality .
thank you .
my life is really extraordinary , through the work of some amazing projects .
but what &apos;s happened in the coolest , which i ever worked on , it was about this guy .
his name is tempt .
tempt was one of the leading graffitikünstler of the &apos; 80s .
then , one day , he came back from running back and he said , &quot; paps , my legs kribbeln . &quot;
and that was the outbreak of the outbreak .
tempt is completely paralyzed .
he can only use his eyes .
i was facing him .
i have a company that design and animations , so it &apos;s necessarily inevitably about a complex part of what we admire in the system and pay attention .
so we decided to have , tony -- tempt -- and to support its cause .
i met with his father and his brother and said , &quot; we will give you this money .
what do you do ? &quot;
and his brother said , &quot; i just want to talk again with tony .
i just want to go back and i said , &quot; wait a minute , i don &apos;t have -- i saw stephen hawking -- can &apos;t be all the paralyzed people using these devices ? &quot;
and he said , &quot; no , only when you hear about the higher gesellschaftsschicht and a remarkable insurance , you can really do that .
normal people are not accessible to it . &quot;
and i said , &quot; how do you communicate ? &quot;
anybody has seen the movie &apos; and taucherglocke ? &quot;
so they communicate -- that &apos;s how they walk your fingers .
i staunte , &quot; very archaisch , how can that be ? &quot;
so i came up with the need , just a check , and i hired a check out of which i was not the way i should be able to get him .
i was going to bring to my brother and his father -- and his dad &apos;s , &quot; well , my suggestion is going to be true : tony &apos;s going to get a device , and we will get a road , and we will find a way to get his art .
because it &apos;s a farce that somebody else who &apos;s still going to communicate . &quot;
so i talked a few months later at a conference .
i met these guys , graffiti research lab and they have a technology that allows them to lead to each other , and then to draw a light on a surface of a surface , and then to draw a laserpointer to draw the negative surface .
so they &apos;re going around and make it kunstinstallationen like this .
they say all of the things that are going on there , a life cycle .
it starts to the testes , then the schimpfwörter , then the schimpfwörter , and the bush-verleumdungen , the people are actually making art .
but there was always a life cycle in her presentation .
so i went home and went to dinner and i was going to go and told it , &quot; well , if there &apos;s these technologies , if you can use your eyes to drive things , we should be able to control the things that tempt can be able to make a laser , so that he would be able to make a laser , that would be brilliant
that was the beginning of the journey .
and about two years later , about a year later , after a lot of organization and a lot of things , we &apos;ve achieved some things .
first , we have the insurance left doors and have actually gotten a device for tempt , which he can communicate -- a stephen hawking-maschine .
that was incredible .
and he &apos;s really extremely funny -- i call him yoda , because you &apos;re talking about him , or gets a email , and you can think , &quot; i &apos;m so unwürdig , this guy is incredible . &quot;
also , we have seven programmers from all over the world -- literally from all the corners of the world -- to us , to us .
my wife , my kids , and i moved into the garage , and these hackers and programmers and verschwörungstheoretiker and anarchisten have taken our house .
many of our friends thought that we were beautiful , and we were zurückkämen and all the images on the walls were graffitis gewichen .
but for two weeks , we programmed to strandpromenade , we went to the strandpromenade in venice , my kids were born , my dog , and we created this one .
it &apos;s called eyewriter , and you can see the description .
this is a cheap sonnenbrille that we bought on the strandpromenade of venice , something kupferdraht and some things out of the actual and the elektronikhandel .
we took a ps3-kamera , they put it on a led-licht , and we have a device that is freely available -- you can build it yourself , we &apos;re going to build the code for free , the software you can download free .
so we have a device that &apos;s completely devoid of limitations .
no insurance can be querstellen , querstellen .
no hospital .
every single person can actually communicate with your eyes or draw .
thank you .
thank you very much , that was incredible .
so at the end of the two weeks , we went back to tempts .
i love this image because it &apos;s the room of somebody else &apos;s room and that &apos;s his room .
now , there &apos;s all of this rummel of the great unveiling of the great unveiling .
and after about a year of planning , two weeks , nudelparties programmierarbeit , nudelparties and durchgemachten nights , i was going to take a look at the first time after seven years .
and this is a very simple image because this is his life support system , and he &apos;s seeing it out .
we have his bed on the left , so he can see it out .
we have a projector to a wall to the spinal cord .
and he drew back again , in the beisein of his family and friends -- and you can only imagine what a feeling that was on the parking lot .
we also had to have a lustigerweise in the parking lot of parkplatz , so we felt as part of the sprüher-szene .
at the end of the end , he asks us to the end of the content , &quot; for the first time , i &apos;ve been drawn a little drawn .
i feel that i was going under , under water , and finally someone left and my head to go to my head so that i can breathe . &quot;
isn &apos;t that mind-blowing ?
that &apos;s something like our kampfschrei .
that &apos;s holding us in the business and we continue to continue to continue .
and we have to improve a lot of this device .
it &apos;s an amazing device , but it comes to a zaubertafel .
and someone who has a such potential potential , deserves more .
so we &apos;re starting to figure out how to make it better and stronger .
since this time , we have all been erhalten .
we won a few awards .
remember , it &apos;s free , none of us deserves it .
it comes all from our own pockets .
so the awards were , &quot; oh , that &apos;s fantastic . &quot;
armstrong twitterte over us and then , in december , we have honored the time-magazine , one of the 50 percent of the 50 invention , which was really great .
the coolste thing is -- and that includes all the circle -- that it &apos;s this april april , when it &apos;s geffen in the downtown los angeles , which is a exhibition called &quot; the way of the streets . &quot;
and there &apos;s pretty much the toughest representatives of the straßenkunstszene to be there -- banksy , shepard fairey , caws -- all these boys will be there .
tempt is part of the show , which is pretty extraordinary .
so , basically , what you &apos;re looking at is , if you see something impossible , it can be done .
everything in this room was impossible -- this stage , this computer , this computer , this microphone , this microphone , the eyewriter -- it was impossible .
do you make it possible -- all of you here .
i &apos;m not a programmer , and i had never been doing something with augenerfassungstechnologie , but i just have captured something to work with amazing people , so we could put together a little bit on the legs .
and this question should be in any of you and every single day , on every single day , you have to do something that needs to be done , if not now , when ? and if i am , who ?
thank you .
so i write for children , and i &apos;m probably america most largely meist .
and i &apos;m always saying people that i don &apos;t want to come to the world .
you can have a farmer , or in leather , but nobody has ever voted in .
today , i want to tell you about circles and offenbarungen .
now , a enlightenment is typically something that you find out because you have a somewhere .
you &apos;re going to take the block and take it as a revelation .
this is a painting of a circle .
one of my friends did it -- richard bollingbroke .
it &apos;s the kind of complicated circle that i want to tell you about today .
and my circle started in the 1960s at the high school in stow , ohio , where i was the klassenschwuchtel .
i was the one who was a week in the jungentoilette green and blue , until a teacher was saved my life .
she saved my life by using me the toilet in the lehrerzimmer .
that did she secretly , secretly , secretly .
she did it for three years , for three years .
and i had to go out of the city .
i had a thumb , i had 85 , and it was taken me to the francisco in california -- i found a lover -- and then in the &apos; 80s , i was going to work with a work at aids-organisationen .
about three or four years ago , i received a call from this teacher , woman post , who said , &quot; i have to see them .
i &apos;m sad that we &apos;ve never learned to each other .
you can please go after ohio , and please come together with the man that i know you &apos;ve seen him .
and i should say that i &apos;ve been bauspeicheldrüsenkrebs , and i want you to move your mind . &quot;
now , the next day we were in cleveland .
we saw them , we were laughing , we cried , and we knew it would be a hospice .
we found one for them , we brought them , and we were kümmerten to them , and we gave them to her family , because it needed to be , because it needed to be , because it needed to be .
it was something that we knew .
and just as the woman who wanted to learn me as adults , i met , and i turned to a box in a box and became my hands .
what happened was that the circle was closed , it was a circle -- and the revelation of the me was talking about .
the revelation is , the death part of life is .
she saved my life , and my partner and i &apos;m dancing yours .
and you know , this part of life needs everything that needs to be the rest of life .
he needs truth and beauty , and i &apos;m so glad that this was so many times as many as many times .
he needs it -- he needs , love and delight , and it &apos;s to give us these things .
thank you very much .
imagine a big explosion , as they go on on 1,000 feet .
imagine a plane full of smoke .
imagine a dividing , das , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack .
that sounds fear .
now , i had a unique spot on this day , i sat down to 1d .
i was the only one that could talk to the flugbegleitern .
so i looked at her , and they said , &quot; no problem , we &apos;ve got a few birds . &quot;
the pilot had the machine already gewendet , and we weren &apos;t so far away .
you could see manhattan .
two minutes later , two things happened three things later .
the pilot made the machine after the hudson .
that &apos;s usually not the route .
he &apos;s turning the triebwerke .
imagine a geräuschloses plane .
and then he said three words -- the most words i ever have ever heard .
he says , &quot; bereitmachen to the target . &quot;
i didn &apos;t have to talk to the bordpersonal .
i could see it in your eyes , there was a lot of horror to end life .
i want to share with you three things that i learned about that day .
i learned that in a moment that &apos;s different .
we have this lebensplan , we have these things that we do in life , and i thought to all the people i wanted to do , and it wasn &apos;t doing all the fences i wanted to get , all the experiences i wanted to do and never made .
while i was thinking about it , i realized a phrase that says , &quot; i &apos;m collecting bad stuff . &quot;
because when the wine is far , and the person is there , i open him .
i never want to make more a little bit more .
and this urgency , this goal , my life really changed .
the second thing i learned about this day , and that was when we verfehlten the george washington bridge , so pretty much about haaresbreite -- and i thought , &quot; man , there was one thing i really really bereue .
i had a good life .
in my own humanity , and with my mistakes , i strebte , and i &apos;m going to be better in everything i &apos;m going to do .
but in my humanity , i &apos;ve also given my ego space .
and i bedauerte the time i wasted for bedeutungslose things , with people who mean something .
and i thought about the relationship with my wife , friends , to people .
and after me , when i was thinking about it , i decided to ban negative energy from my life .
it &apos;s not perfect , but it &apos;s much better .
i &apos;ve been in two years of my wife .
it feels great .
i &apos;m not trying to have a right , right ; i &apos;m going to be happy to be happy .
the third thing i learned -- and in the internal clock , &quot; 15 , 14 , 14 , 13 , ... &quot;
you see the water .
i said , &quot; please flieg in the air . &quot;
i don &apos;t want this thing in 20 parts of the way you know it from dokumentationen .
while we were traveling , i had this feeling , man , too , is not scary .
almost like , as if we were preparing our lives for us .
but it was very sad .
i didn &apos;t want to go ; i love my life .
and these sadness really focused on a thought , which is that i just want to wish .
i just wish i could see my kids grow .
so , about a month , i went to a performance of my daughter -- erstklässler , not a lot of künstlerisches .
not ...
and i &apos;m feiere , i &apos;m just like a little kid .
and in the world , everything has a sense of me .
i realized that i realized by watching the dots together , that it only makes a great father .
more than anything , everything else is my life in life , a good father .
i was not going to die the miracle of that day .
i got a another gift , which is in the future , and i &apos;m going to live and live with it .
my call to everyone who is today , imagine that you &apos;re going to be on your flight -- but ask -- but imagine it -- and how would you change ?
what would you do that they would be aufschieben because they think they &apos;re always going to be there ?
how would you change your relationship and the negative energy in it ?
and more than anything else , they are the best parents they can only be ?
thank you .
the idea behind the stuxnet is pretty straightforward .
we don &apos;t want to build the iran .
the most important thing for the development of nuclear weapons is the uran-anreicherungs-einrichtung in natanz .
the gray boxes that you see here , that &apos;s echtzeit-kontrollsysteme .
now , if we &apos;re able to do that , the systems of the systems , which is the drehzahlen and valves control , we can actually create a lot of problems with the centrifuge .
these gray boxes not with windows-software ; they are based on a completely different technology .
but if we can make it a effective windows-virus on a laptop , which is used by a wartungsingenieur , to konfigurieren this gray box , then we &apos;re in business .
and that &apos;s the planning behind stuxnet .
so we start with a windows-dropper .
the nutzdaten are going to be in the gray box , and the centrifuge , the iranische and the iranian kernenergie-programm of them -- mission .
that &apos;s a piece of a piece , right ?
i want to tell you how we found that .
when we started to stuxnet our research , six months ago , we were completely unknown , and the purpose of this konstrukts was .
the only thing we knew is very , very complicated , which is the most reliable part of the windows- , the dropper- part , he made unzähligen schwachstellen .
and it seemed something vorzuhaben , with these gray boxes , this echtzeit- kontrollsystemen .
this is the erregte our attention and we started a project project that we &apos;re doing our environment with stuxnet infected , and we studied this building .
and then something happened .
stuxnet , as a laborratte , who doesn &apos;t liked our cheese -- schnüffelte , but didn &apos;t want to eat it .
that made that my eyes doesn &apos;t make sense .
and after we were experimenting with different species of cheese , i was a gezielter attack .
totally , on a particular goal .
the dropper streift is active in the gray box , when a special configuration was discovered , even when the special program that is going to be on the ground .
and if not , then , it does not .
so , that really , really , really , really , and we started working on it , almost around the clock , because i thought , well , we don &apos;t know what the goal is .
it could say , for instance , say , a us- american , or a chemieanlage in germany .
so we should better figure out what the goal is .
so , and dekompilierten and dekompilierten we found the angriffs- code and found that he &apos;s in two digital sprengköpfe -- a smaller and a larger .
and also , we also noticed that they were very professional designed by people who have all the information information .
they knew any bits and bytes that they had to attack .
probably the most obvious thing that you know , even the schuhgröße of the maschinenbedieners .
so they knew everything .
and if you already have been shown that the dropper of stuxnet complex and high-tech is , let me tell you , the nutzdaten is a science for themselves .
it &apos;s much more comfortable than anything we &apos;ve ever seen .
here you see a clip from this code code .
we &apos;re talking about -- about 15,000 lines .
it looks pretty much like altmodische assemblersprache .
and i want to tell you how we were going to be successful in this code .
so what we were looking for first was systemfunktions- aufrufe , because we know what this thing does .
and then we looked forward to timern and datenstrukturen and tried to bring these with real world in connect -- with potential targets in the real world .
so we needed theories about those goals that we could possibly be able to do .
to this theories , we call ourselves in reminder that it &apos;s definitely hochgradige sabotage , it &apos;s to act a hochwertiges goal , and it &apos;s very likely to be in iran because most of the infections were reported .
now , in this area there are not several thousand goals .
basically , it &apos;s going to be out on the top of the buschehr , and on the urananreicherungsanlage of the urananreicherungsanlage .
so i said to my assistant , &quot; bring me a list of all the experts for zentrifugen and growing out of our kundenstamm . &quot;
and i called them up and zapfte her knowledge to compare their expertise with what we found in the code and the data .
and that worked very well .
so , it was possible to bring the small digital sprengkopf with the rotorsteuerung in relation to connect .
the rotor is this moving part of the centrifuge within the centrifuge , these black object that you see .
and if you tamper that way , you &apos;re actually able to crack the rotor and eventually , even the zentrifuge to explode .
what we found is that the target of the attack was actually to be slow to the angriffs and to make it unheimlich -- obviously , in trying to get into trying to get it to try and get to the way that they would be able to get to the very quickly .
the big digital sprengkopf -- we got a glimpse of that by looking at very precise data and datenstrukturen .
so for example , the number 164 is very , very much from that code ; you can &apos;t touch it .
i started to durchzuarbeiten scientific literature , which is how these zentrifugen are built in natanz and found that they &apos;re structured in so-called kaskaden , and every kaskade contains 164 .
so that made sense , it &apos;s going to be .
and it &apos;s still better .
these zentrifugen in iran are aufgeteilt in 15 levels in 15 levels .
and guess what we found in the angriffscode ?
a almost identical structure .
so again , this really thing really good .
and this gave us great confidence that we &apos;re here to here .
now , don &apos;t get me wrong , that didn &apos;t just work .
these results were getting done by several weeks of hard work .
and often we just ran into a sackgasse and we had to get to us .
anyway , we found that both of the digital warheads in reality and the same goal , but from different directions .
the little sprengkopf takes a kaskade , and überdreht the property and slow them and down the large sprengkopf of tritt with six kaskaden in interaction and manipulated .
so , in large , we &apos;re very hopeful that we actually determines what the goal is .
it &apos;s natanz , and it &apos;s just natanz .
so we don &apos;t have to worry about that other goals could be met .
here &apos;s something really cool stuff that we discovered -- has really been echt out of the socks .
down there is the gray box , and you see the zentrifugen .
now , what this thing is , is that it &apos;s the eingehenden values of sensors -- so for example , drucksensoren and vibrationssensoren -- and it provides legitimen code , who &apos;s still verfügung , with the wrong piece of data , is walking around .
and in fact , this false eingehenden of stuxnet has been taken before .
so it &apos;s like in hollywoodfilmen , where the verfolgungsjagd die is fed with vorher videoaufnahmen .
that &apos;s cool , right ?
the idea of this is obviously not just the maschinenbediener in the kontrollraum .
in fact , it &apos;s still dangerous and aggressiver .
the idea is to say a digital sicherheitssystem .
we need digital sicherheitssysteme where a human race can &apos;t respond fast enough to respond to a human race .
so in a power plant for example , if the big dampfturbine is going to open up , you have to open up within the milliseconds of milliseconds .
of course , this can &apos;t be done by a human being .
so at that point we need digital sicherheitssysteme .
and when the species are , then really bad things can happen .
that power can explode .
and neither the maschinenführer , nor the sicherheitssystem will notice it .
that &apos;s scary .
but it &apos;s going to worse .
and what i &apos;m saying is very important .
think about it . this attack is generisch .
he has nothing to do with zentrifugen , with urananreicherung .
so , for example , he would work very well -- in a power plant or a automobilfabrik .
it &apos;s generisch .
and you don &apos;t have to -- as the attacker -- you don &apos;t have to be a usb- of a usb- , like we saw it at stuxnet .
you could also use regular technology technology .
you have to spread it only as far as possible .
and if you do that , you get a cyber- .
that &apos;s the implication that we need to ask .
so unfortunately , the biggest number of goals for these attacks are not in the middle east .
they lie in the united states , in europe and japan .
so all of these green areas , these are the most zielreichsten environments .
we have to ask the consequences and we start to get better at us .
thank you .
i have a question .
ralph , it was reported that people assume that the mossad is the hauptorganisation .
is that your opinion ?
okay , you want to really know this ?
yeah . okay .
and i think that &apos;s mossad involved , but the driving force is not israel .
so the driving force is the treibende , the cyber- superpower is the cyber- .
there &apos;s only one and that is the united states -- happiness , happiness , happiness .
because otherwise , the problem is even bigger .
thank you for a heidenangst eingejagt . thank you ralph .
i spent the last few years to put me in situations that usually usually really difficult and get dangerous .
i went to prison -- difficult .
i worked in a kohlebergwerk -- dangerous .
i was filming in kriegsgebieten -- and dangerous .
and i spent 30 days trying to eat nothing like this -- that &apos;s where the beginning , a little bit of a very difficult thing in the middle , very dangerous at the end .
i actually got the biggest part of my career to fürchterlichen situations , and that all of the things that we &apos;re doing is to look at it for the attempt to study the way they &apos;re looking at it and so interesting to the way , and hopefully , in a way that they &apos;re doing for the audience and making it accessible .
so when i knew that i would come here to look at the world of branding and sponsoring , i knew i &apos;d make a little different .
some of you may have heard of that , i &apos;ve just got a display a display on ebay .
i &apos;m a few facebook-nachrichten , some twitter-nachrichten , and i gave people the opportunity to erstehen the namensrechte of my tedtalk .
really , some happy people and companies , for-profit and companies , who &apos;s going to be a unique opportunity -- because i &apos;m going to be able to get the namensrechte gelegenheit , which you &apos;re seeing is not seeing a title of the time that you didn &apos;t have a lot of content and not having a lot of evidence on the point of that .
so what you got , this is what you were saying : my name here : my tedtalk , who you have no idea what the topic will be , and the one that you could see after the ears in the ears , especially if i &apos;m going to make their company &apos;s beteiligung .
but that &apos;s a very good chance of opportunity , it &apos;s a very good opportunity .
you know how many people look at this tedtalks ?
a lot of things .
that &apos;s just the übrigens .
so despite that warning , i knew anyone would buy the namensrechte .
if you were asked me to be asked me , i would have been able to tell you that you would have to tell you this with certainty .
but in the new project i work , my new film , we study the world of marketing , the ad .
as i said , i &apos;ve been able to get in some pretty terrible situations , but nothing could be prepared to me , nothing could be able to get me out of something like this , and so dangerous as these guys are going to go into a room .
you know , i had the idea for a movie .
what i want to do is a movie about product placement , marketing and commercials , and the whole film will fund by product placement , marketing and commercials .
and the film is called &quot; the greatest movie . &quot;
so what happens in &quot; the greatest movie sold , &quot; is that everything from top to the bottom , from the bottom up , totally with brands -- from the titelsponsor that you see in the movie , that &apos;s the brand new york city .
now , this brand , the qualcomm stadion , the staples center ...
these people are going to be connected to the film in eternity .
and so , the film is that this whole idea -- this is what ? in eternity , for eternity ?
i &apos;m a redundante person .
that was more to the content .
it was &quot; in eternity , for always . &quot;
but we &apos;re not only going to have the brand as a titelsponsor , but we will make sure that we will be sell every possible category in the movie .
we might be going to take a shoe and he will have the greatest shoe that you &apos;ve ever got ...
the greatest car you &apos;ve ever got , they &apos;ve ever got the risks , from the greatest movie , which you &apos;ve ever had , you &apos;ve ever had , a attention from the greatest movie . &quot;
so the idea is to show that brands are part of life , actually , to get them to finance the film ?
and we actually show the whole process of how it works .
the goal of all the film is transparency .
you &apos;ll see the whole thing in the movie of you .
so this is the whole concept that all film , from the beginning to end .
and i would be happy to get out of that if ceg would help this to happen .
you know , it &apos;s funny because when i first heard it first , it &apos;s the ultimate respect for the audience .
but i don &apos;t know how to be empfänglich people .
have you a perspective -- i don &apos;t want to use &quot; perspective , because this has a negative konnotation -- but you know how that will be ?
how much money is needed to realize that ?
one million one million .
i think it &apos;s hard to meet them , but i think it &apos;s worth every case of a few really real-world brands .
who knows if the film then comes out , we might see how a horde vollidioten .
what do you think how the answer is going ?
the answer is probably going to be a lot .
but is it a difficult thing to do about the film or a difficult thing to do ?
jk : both of them .
so ... means not so optimistic .
so , my lord , can you help me ? i need help .
i can help .
okay .
fantastic .
we have to think about what brands .
yeah .
if you look at the people who you have to do it ...
there are some places that we can engage .
imagine the camera .
i thought , &quot; imagine the camera &quot; would be that we wanted to lead a hintergrundgespräch .
it turns out that it meant in reality , &quot; we want to have a film with your movie . &quot;
and just as a disappeared , all these companies , one after the other .
no one wanted to do something with the movie .
i was amazed .
they didn &apos;t want to do anything with the project .
and i was confused , because i thought , the whole concept of advertising , your product as many people as possible as possible , so many people can see .
in the world today , in the world today , in the world of new media and the zerstückelten media , and the zerstückelten media landscape -- it &apos;s not the idea of being in this new exciting vermittlungsinstrument that the crowds will bring this message .
no , that was what i thought .
but you see , the problem was that my idea had a fatalen mistake , and that was the thing .
actually no , no , that was not the mistake .
that would be no problem at all .
that would have been okay .
but that , what this picture is , is a problem .
you see , if you &apos;re transparency at the google-suche of the google-suche , this is -- this is one of the first images that seems to be .
i really like your way , sergey brin . now .
this was the problem : transparency -- free of deception and tücke , just charakterisiert ; immediately , charakterisiert , and access to information , especially what geschäftspraktiken -- the last line is the biggest problem .
you know , we &apos;re going to hear a whole lot of transparency .
and our politicians say , our president says , even our ceos say , even our ceos say .
but when it comes to that , it &apos;s supposed to be implemented , is going to change something .
but why ? well , transparency is fear of einflößend -- like this strange bear , which is still brüllt .
it &apos;s unvorhersagbar -- like this strange landstraße .
and she &apos;s also very risky .
what else is still risky ?
a whole bowl of food food .
that &apos;s very risky .
so when i started talking to the companies and tell them that we wanted to tell this story , they said , &quot; no , we want you to tell a story .
we want you to tell a story , but we just want you to tell our story . &quot;
and look , when i was a kid , and my father got me up to lie -- and there he sits and look at me -- he would say , &quot; my son , &quot; my son , there are three of the story of three versions .
there are your version , there &apos;s my version , and there &apos;s the real version . &quot;
so you see , with this film , we wanted to tell the real version .
but there was a agency , a agency , and it &apos;s just because i &apos;ve been familiar with john bond and richard kirshenbaum for years -- i realized that i had to do it alone , i had to deal with the mittelsmann and go directly to the companies .
so what you started to understand -- or what i started to understand -- was that if you start to speak with these companies , the idea of how your brand is understood , a common problem is a common problem .
i have friends , the big , gigantic hollywood-filme , and i have friends who make little independent-filme as i do .
and my friends , the big , gigantic hollywood-filme , say , why their movies are so successful in the markenpartnern that they have .
and then my friends , the little independent-filme , &quot; well , how do we compete with these big , gigantic hollywood-filmen ? &quot;
and the film is called &quot; the greatest movie . &quot;
so how are we going to see in the movie ?
whenever i do it , and whenever i open the camel , you will see ban deodorant .
and every time i &apos;m interviewe , i can say , &quot; are they fresh enough enough to interview that interview ?
they &apos;re far ? you &apos;re seeing a little nervous .
i want to help you to calm down .
so maybe you should be a little bit of a little bit of this . &quot;
and then we &apos;re offering one of these great düfte .
either &quot; floral nonsense &quot; or a paradise winds , they will have the choice .
we &apos;re going to be both for men and women -- fest , roll-on , or a stick , whatever .
that &apos;s the kurzfassung .
now i can all answer your questions , and you can give you a ausfühliche socket .
we &apos;re a smaller brand .
as you &apos;ve talked about the smaller movies , we &apos;re as brand as a brand .
so we don &apos;t have a budget of how other brands .
so , these things -- you know , remember people in behavior -- that &apos;s kind of why we are interested .
in words , what would you like to describe the way ?
ban is blank .
that &apos;s a great question .
woman : überlegene technology .
technology is not the way to describe something that somebody is doing under the achseln .
we speak from bold , fresh .
i think , &quot; fresh &quot; is a great word that this category is really important to , opposed to the opposed to the opposed to &quot; free odor and moisture . &quot;
it keeps you fresh .
how can we keep them in the way -- better fresh , more fresh , three times more .
these things have created a positivere effect .
and that &apos;s a millionen-konzern .
what about me ? what about the druchschittstypen ?
i have to speak with the guy on the street who are like i , otto-normal-verbraucher .
they &apos;re supposed to tell me about my brand .
how would you describe your brand ?
hmmm , my brand ?
i don &apos;t know .
i really like beautiful clothing .
80er revival : 80er auf , except on the waschtag .
well , what is the brand ?
unique .
i think the genre , the style i have is probably &quot; dark glamour . &quot;
i like many of these black colors , lots of grautöne and so many things .
but usually i have a accessoire , like sonnenbrillen , or a jewelry and so like this .
when dan would be a brand , he would probably be a classic mercedes .
man 2 : the brand that i &apos;m , i would say , lässige fly .
frau , teils , partly yogi , partly brooklyn-mädchen -- i don &apos;t know .
man 3 : i &apos;m the schmusetyp .
i sell 50 miles across the country .
so i think that &apos;s my brand .
that &apos;s my brand in my little , verzerrten industry .
man 4 : my brand is fedex because i were ausliefere .
the man five : brand gescheiteter schreiberling .
is this ?
a lawyer : i &apos;m a anwaltsmarke .
i &apos;m tom .
now , we can &apos;t all be the tom-marke , but i &apos;m often seeing the intersection of dark glamour and lässiger fly .
and what &apos;s noticed , was that i needed a expert .
i needed someone who could go in my head , someone who really could help me understand what you call &quot; markenpersönlichkeit . &quot;
and so i found a company called olson zaltman in pittsburg .
they have companies like nestle , febreze , hallmark , diese , to find these markenpersönlichkeit .
if you could do it for you , they could also help me .
they brought their pictures , yes ?
i have this . the first picture is a picture of my family .
tell me a little bit about how this is with your mind and feelings about them .
these are people who shapes my worldview .
tell me about the world .
md : this world ? i think the world &apos;s world is the world where people live -- like humans , the friends , the friends , the way you live , the way you live , and so .
all of these things came from one place , and for me , and then , and they start with my family in west virginia .
what &apos;s next to you .
next . this was the most beautiful day .
what &apos;s related to the mind , and emotions are about you ?
it &apos;s like i like to be .
i like things that are different .
i like things that are . i like curious things .
tell me about the &quot; why &quot; -phase -- what do you get us ?
what is the machete ? in which puppenstadium are you right now ?
why is it important , neuzustarten ? what is the red ?
tell me a little bit about this part .
a little more about them that they &apos;re not .
what other people have done , they have a lot ?
that doesn &apos;t have to be afraid . in which kind of rollercoaster are you ?
eeeeee ! no , thank you !
thank you so much for your patience .
yeah . well , well .
yeah , i don &apos;t know what it is going to be done .
there &apos;s a lot of kooks things up .
the first thing i saw was this idea that their markenpersönlichekti getrennte two separate , but sich pages -- the morgan spurlock-marke is a achtsame / aids / aids .
that &apos;s a very good idea .
and i think there &apos;s almost a contradiction .
and i think some companies are going to focus on a strength instead of both .
many companies tend to -- and this is the human nature -- things that they &apos;re not sure they &apos;re being afraid to avoid , and they &apos;re called the elements , and they &apos;re going to call them , and they turn them into something positive , and that &apos;s a geschickter .
what else do you want to act like ?
the first one is a classic apple .
and you can see it here , target , wii , wii , mini mini mini and jetblue .
well , there are verspielte brands and achtsame brands , these things that come and go , but a verspielte , brand brand is a pretty strong thing .
a achtsame , verspielte brand . how is your brand ?
if somebody &apos;s asking you to describe your markenidentität , your markenpersönlichkeit , how would you ?
you &apos;re a up-attribut ? are they something that blood pressure brings in wallungen ?
or are you more like a down-attribut ?
they &apos;re something that is a little bit of a ruhiger , reservierter , conservative .
up-attribute are things that are playful , fresh like fresh prince , zeitgemäß , abenteuerlich , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , wendig and agile , profan , profan , magisch , magisch and mystisch like gandalf .
or are they more like a down-attribut ?
are they achtsam and mondän like 007 ?
are you , traditionally , traditionally , pflegend , beschützend , mitfühlend , like oprah ?
are they reliable , stable , familiär , safe , geborgen , holy , and how the dalai lama or yoda ?
in the course of the film we had more than 500 companies who were running and down-firmen and they said , &quot; no , &quot; because they were not part of the project .
they were all going to do with this film , because they didn &apos;t have control , no control over the finished product .
but then , what found was 17 markenpartner who were willing to do so much of the control that would have to do so much of that , and i think , verspielt , and the playful people that we &apos;re doing , we don &apos;t usually have to tell stories -- stories that would never have been able to support a werber .
they &apos;re befähigten us to tell the story of the neuromarketing , so how we use the story in this movie , that you use to use the lustzentren of the brain to make apps and filme .
we drove to sao paulo where the außenwerbung is forbidden .
in the entire city , five years has no anzeigentafel , no posters , no flyer , nothing .
and we were driving in school in which companies are in their way in the verarmte schools in america .
the incredible thing for me is that the projects i got most of the feedback or where i had the biggest success , where i was working with things directly .
and that &apos;s what these tags have done , what they did .
because she umgingen the mittelsmann , they umgingen the agencies , and they said that the most important thing may not really have their interest in mind .
i &apos;m going to negotiate with the artist directly .
i &apos;m going to work with him and something different , something that people think that our liberal is more .
and how was that for you ? what it was successful ?
now , there &apos;s a film of film film , and we can look at this .
according to burrelles , the first premiere in january , and it &apos;s not even the whole thing -- there was 900 million aufrufe of this film .
that &apos;s actually just one of two weeks of two weeks .
that &apos;s just online -- no press , no television .
the film was not even abandoned .
there &apos;s not even one online . no streaming .
it &apos;s not in other countries .
now , eventually the film has a very large healthcare .
and that &apos;s not bad for a project where almost every aspect of the werbeagentur that we talked about , their customers , the finger to do it .
something that i &apos;m sure is that when you &apos;re going to choose the chance to hold risks that in these risks .
i think if you think people from them , you get them closer to fail .
i believe that if you &apos;re making his employees to avoid risks , you &apos;re prepared to get the whole company to acquire a profit .
i feel that we need to encourage the voranschreiten people to take risks .
we need to encourage people , not fear of possibilities , which you may have verängstigen .
finally , at the point , we should be called the fear .
we should put the bear in the cage .
they &apos;re called the fear , welcome to the risk .
a great taste full of that we &apos;re welcome .
and finally , we should welcome transparency .
today , more than ever before , it brings us a little bit far .
and that said , &quot; honesty and transparency , &quot; my entire life &quot; is called transparency , &quot; they were told by my good friends of emc , who was $ $ for the namensrechte .
great data will be turned into the world around the world in large opportunities .
emc präsentiert &quot; &quot; hot &quot; heißen &quot; heißen &quot; &quot; &quot; heißen &quot; &quot; heißen &quot;
thank you very much .
now , morgan , in the name of transparency , this is what &apos;s happening right now with the $ 500 ?
that &apos;s a great question .
i have a check in my pocket , ausgestellt on the oberorganisation of the ted-organisation , the sapling-stiftung -- a check in height of $ $ , to fund my ted-auftritt year .
my name is amit .
in 18 months , i made something different , and i &apos;m going to regte to do something with museums and art , my chefin , which is now , i have green light .
and it took 18 months .
a lot of spaßiger and stories , i can tell you , 17 museen museums from nine countries .
but i &apos;m going to focus on the demo .
there &apos;s a lot of stories about why we &apos;ve done this .
i think my personal view is very simple with this slide and her access to your access .
i grew up in india .
i was given a great education -- i didn &apos;t know me -- but i had to have a lot of museums and this artwork .
and then i went to visit , and this museums , i started learning a lot .
and while i was working for google , i tried to do this desire -- art to do with technology .
and then we trained a team , a great team , and we started with this .
i &apos;m going to start with the demonstration , and you &apos;re going to start with some interesting things that happened since the beginning .
so you can just go to the googleartproject.com. .
you can look at all of these museums here .
there is the uffizi , the moma , the hermitage , the rijks , van gogh .
i &apos;m even in one of my favorite , the metropolitan museum in new york .
you get in two ways in it -- very simple .
click , and wumms , you &apos;re in the museum .
it doesn &apos;t matter where they are -- bombay , mexico , it doesn &apos;t make any difference .
you go around and amüsiert .
they want to be in the museum ?
open the map , and you jump with a click .
in the way they &apos;re , they want to be to the end of the gangs .
just keep it . lots of fun .
they &apos;re going to help .
thanks , but the best part is .
now i &apos;m a vor of my lieblingsbilder , erntearbeiter breugel in the field .
i see this pluszeichen .
when the museum gave us the picture , you click on it .
now this is one of the images .
this is all metadata .
those of you who are really interested in art , can be click -- but i just click that now .
this is one of the images we &apos;ve been carrying with the so-called gigapixel-technologie .
this image for example , about 10 billion bildpunkte , i think .
and a lot of people ask me , &quot; what do you get for 10 billion ? &quot;
i &apos;m going to show you now , i &apos;m going to show you .
you can be very easily in it and rauszoomen .
you see something funny here .
i love this guy ; his expression is unaffordable .
but then they really want deep inside .
and so i started playing around and realized that there &apos;s something going on .
and i thought , &quot; wait a minute , that sounds interesting . &quot;
i went close to , and noticed that the children actually do something .
i &apos;m talking a little bit about a little bit , talking about a few known known as a spiel , and found that it &apos;s a game called squail , which is a gans to a stick with a stick .
it seems to be popular .
i don &apos;t know why they did it , but i learned about it .
to go really close to you , you can go to the cracks .
just to give you the flavor , i zoome , so you see what you get .
here we were , and this is the paintings .
the best part is , but -- in a second .
let &apos;s jump to moma , jump , again , in new york .
another lieblingsbild of me , sternennacht .
and the previous example , the previous example was about finding out .
but what if you want to see the pinselstriche ?
and what if you want to see , like van gogh , &quot; which is the masterpiece of that masterpiece ?
you put inside . you can actually go in .
i &apos;m going to zoom in a lieblingsteile of this photograph , until i really get to the cracks .
this is sternennacht , maybe never seen before .
now i &apos;m going to show you my favorite feature .
there are many more , but i don &apos;t think the time .
that &apos;s the really cool part , it &apos;s called collections .
each of you , everybody -- you know , whether or poor , whether they have a great house -- it doesn &apos;t matter .
you can go and create their own museum -- from all these images , you can put your own collection .
you just go in -- and i created this , it &apos;s called the power of the zoom -- you can umherzoomen .
this is the gesandten &apos; , in the nationalgallerie .
you can put anything with them , and they &apos;re going to send your friends , and so , like a conversation about what they feel like they &apos;re feeling like you to see these masterpieces .
i think , in closing , is the main thing that the main thing that is not coming from google here .
they &apos;re not going to come from the museums .
i should not say .
they come from the artists .
and this was a experience in humility for me .
i mean , i hope that we &apos;re going to be able to do this digital medium of art , and they &apos;re going to represent online .
and this is the largest question that i &apos;ve asked me , &quot; did you do this to replicate the experience of a museumsbesuchs ? &quot;
the answer is no .
it &apos;s going to add the experience .
that &apos;s what i &apos;m about . thank you .
thank you .
this is a representation of your brain . your brain can be unterteilt in two states .
this is the left half that &apos;s the logical page , and then the right half that the intuitive side is .
if we had to measure a scale to measure the aptitute of each hemisphere , we could be your brain .
for instance , this one would be that somebody who is completely logical .
this would be someone who &apos;s completely intuitive .
now where would you be on your brain on this scale ?
some of us may have thought perhaps for one of these extremes , but i think most people in the audience , your brain is like this , and it &apos;s a high aptitute , which is a high aptitute that &apos;s at both two .
it &apos;s not like they &apos;re exklusiv or whatnot .
you can be logical and intuitively .
and so , i look at one of the people , together with most of the other experimental quantenphysikern , who need a good percentage of logic to put the complex ideas together .
but at the same time , we need a good percentage of intuition to actually do the experiments .
how do we develop this intuition ? well , we love playing with things .
so we go out and play with it and look like it responds to , and then we start to develop our intuition .
basically , they &apos;re basically doing the same thing .
so one of the intuitions they &apos;ve developed over the years is probably a thing that can be a thing at the same time .
i mean , it can strangely sound that a thing that is a thing about the same time in the same time , but they were not born with this idea , they &apos;ve evolved .
i remember a kid playing playing with play on a bodenschwelle .
he was a toddler , and not very good at it and he fell on .
but i bet it &apos;s going to be a very valuable lesson for the bodenschwelle , which is the big things that you &apos;re not going to do with you and you stay on a place .
and that &apos;s a great konzeptionelles model of the world , so long , they &apos;re not a teilchenphysiker .
it would be a terrible model for a teilchenphysiker because they don &apos;t play with bodenschwellen , but with these little strange particles .
and if you play with their particles , they &apos;re all going to be determined to see all kinds of weird things -- how they &apos;re going directly to fly straight through walls , or that they can be at two different places .
and so they would all write this observation , and they called the theory of quantum quantum theory .
that was the state of physics in a few years ago ; you needed quantum mechanics to describe the little particles .
but you don &apos;t need it to describe the large alltäglichen objects around us .
this hasn &apos;t liked my intuition , and maybe i &apos;m just not just because i don &apos;t play with some particles .
well , i &apos;m playing sometimes with you , but not very often .
and i &apos;ve never seen them .
i mean , nobody ever saw a particles .
but my logical side has not liked it .
because if all of things are made of particles , and all these particles follow the rules of quantum mechanics , not just the rules of quantum mechanics , should not be able to follow all the rules of quantum mechanics ?
i don &apos;t see why that shouldn &apos;t be so .
so i &apos;d better do better with all the things that we could see , if we could somehow show that , that alltagsgegenstände may follow the rules of quantum mechanics .
so i made a few years ago that we do .
i created one .
this is the first object you can see in the quantenmechanischen .
so what we &apos;re looking at here is a tiny computer chip .
and you can see this green dot in the middle there .
this is the bit of metal about the same .
that &apos;s a picture of the object .
here i &apos;m going to put it . we look at the center here .
and here is a really big deal of this little stücks metal .
so what we &apos;re looking at is a little bit of metal it &apos;s like a springboard and it &apos;s about the edge .
so i made this thing on a similar way to do a computer chip .
i went a a clean room with new siliziumscheiben , and for 100 hours to the big deal .
for the last bit , i had to build my own machine -- to get this like a swimming pool and get the thing .
this thing has has the ability to be in the quantenmechanischen , but it needs a little bit of help to do it .
look , let me give you an analogy .
you know how do you uncomfortable can be a full of aufzug ?
i mean , if i &apos;m alone in the elevator , i &apos;m going to do all kinds of weird things , but then other people &apos;s weird thing , and i &apos;m going to hear all the things to do , because i don &apos;t want to get them to , or frankly , they &apos;re offen .
so quantum mechanics says that unbewegliche objects are the same .
the mitfahrer for most of the objects are not just people , but the light that seems to you , and the wind that &apos;s over and the heat of space .
and so we knew that if we wanted to see that this piece of metal was verhält , we had to get all the entire mitreisenden .
and then we did .
we put it in a vacuum and saugten the whole air and kühlten it to almost , and it &apos;s almost the aufzug , and in the elevator , the piece of metal was free to behave like it was always .
so we measured his movement .
we found that it really works really weird .
instead of thinking that there &apos;s just lying there , it &apos;s like it was like this , the way it was like this -- like this -- like a ausdehnender and zusammen blasebalg .
in the one , we gave him a little push , we could actually vibrieren it to the same time , and not to vibrate -- something that &apos;s been allowed in quantum quantum mechanics .
so what i &apos;m telling you is what &apos;s really fantastic .
what does it mean for a object at the same time , and not to do not write ?
let &apos;s think about the atoms .
so the first case , all the 17 points of atoms that the piece of metal is silent , and the same time moving dramatically , and they move the same atoms .
just to get präzisen zeitpunkten , they agree .
the rest of the time they &apos;re delokalisiert .
that means that every atom at the same time in the same time is what the same piece is called the entire piece of metal to two different locations .
i think that &apos;s really cool .
really .
it was worth for all of this year in the realm of space , because , check it , the massstabsunterschied between one single atom and this piece of metal is about the same as the difference between the piece of metal and you .
so if a single atom at the same time at two different places , this piece of metal can be a little bit of metal to two different places , why don &apos;t you also ?
i mean , this is just what my logical side is .
so , imagine you would be too about at the same time in multiple places like that ?
how would your mind awareness about that your body is delokalisiert ?
there is another aspect of history .
when we aufwärmten it , the light anschalteten and the box reinschauten , we saw that the piece was always in a piece of a piece .
and so i had to develop this new intuition that it looks like all the objects in the elevator is actually just quanten objects that are in a small space together .
they hear a lot of time about how quantum mechanics says that everything is connected with everything .
now , that &apos;s not quite right ; it &apos;s not quite right .
there &apos;s more even more than that , it &apos;s even deeper .
it &apos;s so that these compounds , their relationships with all the things around them , literally define who they are , and that &apos;s the most tiefsinnige and curious of quantum quantum quantum quantum quantum quantum quantum quantum quantum theory .
thank you very much .
in 2007 , i decided that we should be rekonzeptualisieren as we think about economic growth .
it should be our goal , that when families think they live and work , you &apos;re given to them that the way you &apos;re given to the way to get the way to the möglichkeit of a hand , of a hand of different cities , which are all in the competition in all the competition .
right now , we &apos;re far away from this goal .
there are billions of people in developing countries that don &apos;t even have a single city that would welcome to you .
but the amazing thing about cities is that they &apos;re so much more value than it costs them .
so we could very easily with duzenden , maybe even hundreds of new cities .
now , that may be absurd for you , if you &apos;ve never thought about a whole lot of cities .
and they just take the building of the apartments against the cities .
imagine half of the people who want to live in homes , they already have this one , but they don &apos;t .
you could try to expand the capacity of existing apartments to expand existing apartments .
but you know what you would find out there , in these homes and their environment is to avoid beschwerden and abzulenken .
so it turns out to be a very difficult nachzukommen .
but you could go to a completely new place , a completely new building , provided the laws there would be a solchen , and it &apos;s not going to be behindern .
so i proposed that governments can create new kinds of value that have enough space for a city and have you given them a name .
i found out that , about the same time , javier and octavio about the challenge of a reform in honduras .
they knew that every year is about 75,000 honduraner their country to auszuwandern their country to the united states , and they wanted to know what they could do in order to ensure that these people can stay in their country and do exactly the same thing in honduras .
and on this point , javier javier said , &quot; what happens if we just want to go to a unbesiedelte of our kanadischen , and if we &apos;re going to go to the one hand of the american embassy , and if you want to go to the u.s. , the united states or the united states , can they work on the side of the botschaften , and
in the summer of 2009 , were among a heftigen verfassungskrise .
in the next planmäßigen elections , won pepe lobo in a turnaround that the program both both and versprach promised .
he forderte octavio to become his stabschef .
in the meanwhile , i &apos;ve been talking to a talk at tedglobal .
because of improvement , try and through the study of consumers , i &apos;ve tried to put this complicated concept of the charter city of the wesentlichen city .
the first thing is the importance of laws , laws that determine that you cannot be allowed to be stören .
we &apos;re going to start to start with new technologies , but for the progress , it &apos;s technologies and laws , and it &apos;s the common laws that are zurückhalten us .
in the fall of 2010 , a friend from guatemala , the link to the tedtalk .
again , the again showed him .
the two call me .
and they said , &quot; let &apos;s go to the head of our country &apos;s head ! &quot;
so we met in december of the sitzungssaal of a hotels in miami .
i &apos;ve tried to make it clear how valuable cities are how much more much of them are , how much more they are .
and i used this graph to show the show like valuable rohland , like new york , thinking , that one area in some cases per square meter is worth thousands of dollars .
but it was a pretty abstract discussion , as a pause , has said octavio , &quot; paul , maybe we could see the tedtalk . &quot;
so the tedtalk is in very simple form that a charter city is a place , whose anfang land , is a gründungsvertrag , a gründungsvertrag , who are the laws that are there to be there , and the people who lead to entscheiden to live either among those rules or not .
i was asked by the president of honduras , who said that we have to make this project , that it &apos;s important , and that this is the way we think we &apos;re going to be able to get our country .
i was asked to come up to tegucigalpa and even on the fourth and fifth january .
so i have a weiteren talk , the grafik of this one , the versucht that tries to make it a lot like you want to make a lot of value in a city , it has to be a very large city .
this is a picture of the city , and the sketch of the skizze is the new airport that was built in denver .
in fact , in the flughafen , a 100 percent quadratkilometern .
so i tried to convince the honduraner of that if you want to build a new city , you have to start with a field of hiv .
that &apos;s more than 250 thousand tomorrow .
now , they &apos;ve got all the applaudiert .
the faces of the audience were very serious and alert .
the director of the congress came to the stage and said , &quot; professor romer , i thank you for your talk , but maybe we might look at the tedtalk .
i have this slide on my laptop . &quot;
so i sat down , and they have a tedtalk .
and i came to the point that a new city has come to new possibilities .
there were the opportunity to live in a city that would be in honduras , instead of hundreds of miles away from the north .
and a new city includes new opportunities for leaders .
the leaders of the government would be angewiesen to the help of partnerländern , they could benefit from their partnerländern , they would have to be able to support the laws of the law for this charter , and that anyone would be trust that the charter is really going to be really .
and the insight of president lobo was that the fundamental thing that i thought about the gewissheit of the world &apos;s gewissheit and to build this way could be able to build these city in honduras that have been in many years of fear and mistrust .
we &apos;re driven in an area .
this picture is from this place .
it sums up a thousand square miles .
and shortly after the 19th , they have congress for a change for the constitution to have a verfassungsgemäße of a regelung that is for specific entwicklungsgebiete .
in a country that &apos;s just been a heftige crisis , and it was elected for this verfassungsänderung verfassungsänderung with 124 124 .
all parties , all the fraktionen of the society , they supported this .
to be part of the constitution , but it has to be authorized by congress .
on the 17th 17th , it was genehmigt with the second time 114 to a voice .
immediately after that election , between the 21st and the 24th of february , traveling by about 30 hunduranern to the two places of the world that most cares about the business of the städtebaus .
the one is south korea .
this is a picture of a big , new core of the südkorea that built in south korea , in the südkorea of the city .
all you can see on this picture was built within four years after it has taken four years after it &apos;s got four years to get the permits .
the other place that was very interested in the end , singapore .
it already had two cities in china and the third is in preparation .
so if you &apos;ve seen this , you know , it &apos;s where we are today .
they already have a baugrundstück , and they &apos;re already starting to build this area for the second city .
it &apos;s been working on a legal system that managern allows you to participate , and it &apos;s also working on a commercial system .
a country has already been offered its supreme court to provide the gericht for the entgültige appeal of the dortigen system .
also , also städtedesigner and -bauer are very interested .
they &apos;re actually bringing funding to a funding .
one thing you already know , already has already been already , there are many mieter .
there are many of you who &apos;d like to be in america , especially in a place with a freihandelszone , and there are many people who would like to live there .
around the world there are 700 million people who &apos;d like to live in a different place .
one million people would abandoned a year and a half million america and migrate into the united states .
many of you are fathers who are forced to meet their families to suchen- work , sometimes they &apos;re alleinerziehende mothers who need to make enough money to get food and clothing .
unfortunately , sometimes the kids are trying to find their parents again , which you have , in some cases , have been seen since a decade since .
so what is it for an idea about to build a completely new city ?
or even duzende of these cities , or hundreds of all around the world ?
so what is it for a idea that every family has a choice between several cities that are in competition in competition ?
this is an idea that &apos;s worth spreading .
my friends were asked to say , thank you ted .
you know how many decisions you do in a typical day ?
do you know how many decisions you make in a typical week ?
i &apos;ve done a survey with a lot of the 2.000 , and the median number of choices that makes a typical american amerikaner to a day &apos;s typischer .
and it was also made a study in the case of ceos in the world for a week .
and these scientists have documented the different topics documenting these ceo beschäftigt and how much time they make decisions that make decisions about the subjects .
and they found that a average man was busy in the week with 139 tasks .
each of these topics was , of course , from many , many smaller decisions .
50 percent of their decisions were made within nine minutes or less .
only for 12 percent of their decisions , they took them a hour or more of your time .
think about their own decisions .
you know how many decisions you have in the nine minutes of category in the neun category ?
how good , think , are you to deal with the decisions about it ?
today i want to talk about one of the biggest entscheidungsprobleme of our modern time , which is the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem .
i want to talk about the problem and about some of those kinds of things .
now , if i talk about this problem , i &apos;m going to ask you some questions , and i want to know your answers .
if i ask you a question , you raise your hand , just the hand if you want to burn some calories .
otherwise , i &apos;m going to ask you , if i &apos;m going to ask you , and your response is yes , my first question for today is : are you willing to hear something about the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem ?
thank you very much .
when i was a abschlussstudent at stanford university , i went to this very exklusiven lebensmittelladen , at least at least at least at least at least .
it was a bin laden , the draeger .
this business , it was almost like a vergnügungspark .
they had 250 different kinds of mustard and essig and gemüse and mehr over 500 different types of fruit and vegetables and more than two dozen different kinds of water -- and that was at a time when we actually have a zeit .
i loved it to this business , but at a moment , i wondered , well , how come you never would have something more ?
here &apos;s the olive gang .
they had over 75 different kinds of oil , including those who were locked in boxes , who came from thousands of years old old old days .
so i decided to visit one day to visit the visit , and i asked the manager , &quot; works this model that they really offer all of these possibilities ? &quot;
and he pointed out to the busladungen of tourists that came every day and usually do their cameras .
we decided to companies and we chose marmelade for our experiment .
here &apos;s your marmeladen gang .
they had 348 different types of marmelade .
we have a little verkostungsecke directly straight on the right side of the geschäfts .
we have six different pathways , or 24 different geschmacksrichtungen marmelade , and we &apos;ve looked at two things : first , i mean , i would have more people stand more people and marmelade ?
there are more people who are left when it were 24 , about 60 percent when it was six , about 40 percent .
and then we looked at what people bought a glass of glass to a glass .
now we saw the world &apos;s market .
from the people who were the 24 , they were only kauften three percent of the glass .
from the people who are standing in the other than that six , now we &apos;re going to see that 30 percent of them bought a glass of glass .
now , if you calculate it , people bought six times more than a glass of marmelade , who they had six to the choice when they had 24 .
now , to get a glass of glass to the glas , is probably good for us -- it &apos;s good for our waist -- but it turns out that the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem is also influenced by very limited choices .
we don &apos;t decide to decide even if it &apos;s going to go against our own best interests .
so for the theme of the day , save financial save .
i &apos;m going to describe a study that i &apos;m doing with gur huberman , emir jang , wei jang , where we &apos;re making decisions for the rente of almost a million americans in the united states of approximately the entire united states .
and what we were looking at was whether the number of fondsangebote that were possible to be a rentensparplan , the 401 plan that affects the probability of being more for tomorrow .
and what we found was that there was a context .
so in these plans , we had about 657 plans that allow us to get something between two to six years .
and what we found was that the more fund have been offered that , in fact , that was the rate of participation .
now if you look at the extreme , the plans that have been put together , they had a teilnahmerate in the &apos; 70s -- still not as high as we want .
in the plans , the almost 60 fonds , the teilnahmerate is about the sechzigsten prozentanteil .
now , even if you add yourself , even if you were teilzunehmen , when more choices were to choice , even there &apos;s negative consequences .
so the people who decided to participate , rather than the more opportunity , the more opportunities to give you the more , the more they put it to the more and fund fund .
the more opportunity , the more choices they were , the more they put their whole money in pure dollars .
no one of these extremes &apos;s choices that would make decisions that someone would recommend people if we think of your future well-being matters .
now , in the last 10 years , we &apos;ve seen three crucial potential of potential consequences that offer more and more choices .
they do the decision on -- they do it even if it &apos;s going to be interested in their own best .
they make more complicated decisions -- worse and physical health care .
they &apos;re more likely to do things that you &apos;re doing less content , even if they make it objective better .
the reason that we may have this huge regale of mayonaise , mustard and essig , essig and marmelade , but we can &apos;t actually move the compare and the boundaries , and then you can actually choose the fantastic service .
so what i want to suggest today is four simple techniques -- techniques that we &apos;ve tested on different species and various sources of forschungsorten -- they can apply it in their business .
first of all , knowledge .
you &apos;ve heard it before , but it was never true than today that less is more .
the people always say , &quot; hey . &quot;
they always make themselves realize that they &apos;re losing regalfläche .
but in fact , we &apos;re going to see it more and more that if you &apos;re willing to be willing to be too , and the unwichtigen gleichartigen possibilities , you &apos;re going to have a increase in sales , it will be the cost , &amp; amp ; and there &apos;s a improvement of the entscheidungswahrnehmung .
as a proctor and gamble , the different kind of head and shoulders types of 26 in 15 , has a rise of sales to verkaufszahlen .
and the golden cat corporation , they corporation 10 verkauften verkauften loswurde , who , they were erlebten by the profits around 87 percent -- a result of the one that we have in sales and the cost of the cost of sales and the cost .
you know , the average supermakrt today , they give you 45,000 products .
a typical walmart offers it to be a 100,000 products .
but the most supermarket supermarket , the neuntgrößte supermarket in the world is aldi , and they just provide them a couple of different products -- a kind of tomato sauce in the cans .
now in the world of the sparens , i think one of the best examples that have been brought to the market , how to be the best part of the choice , was something that david laibson has been very strong , it &apos;s a program that will offered to harvard .
every single harvard employees now takes a lebenszeitfond part of a part .
the ones that really want to make a choice , are 20 fonds , not 300 or more fund .
you know , how people often say , &quot; i don &apos;t know how to do it .
it &apos;s all important possibilities . &quot;
and the first thing i &apos;m going to be the staff is , &quot; tell me how the possibilities of each other .
and if your employees can &apos;t auseinanderhalten you , it can &apos;t be your clients . &quot;
now before we started today , i had a conversation with gary .
and gary said that he would be prepared to all of the people in this audience in this audience to offer the most beautiful urlaub of the world .
here &apos;s a description of the road .
and i want to read you to you .
and now i &apos;m going to give you a couple of seconds to read and ask them to clap if you &apos;re willing to take gary &apos;s engaged .
okay . everyone &apos;s ready to embrace the service of the service .
are that all ?
well , let me show you something more about it .
they knew it was a trick , right ?
now , who &apos;s ready for this journey .
i think i &apos;ve heard more hands .
good .
the fact is that you view the first time , the first time more information , when the second time , but i would guess it would have a dare to guess that they have real time .
because the pictures were made for them to be real .
what makes me bring to the second technology that helps you with the problem of the entscheidungsüberlastung , it &apos;s the konkretisierung .
it &apos;s about understanding that people to understand the difference between the possibilities that are associated with single possibilities , and that &apos;s what they have to be lebhaft and konkret .
why are people about 15 to 30 percent more than the 30 percent more , if you use a ec-karte or an credit card , when you &apos;re in ?
because it doesn &apos;t feel that we &apos;re real money .
and it turns out that if you think it &apos;s going to be specific , it &apos;s a very good tool to save the people to save more .
so we &apos;ve done a study in a study that i did with shlomo benartzi and alessandro previtero , we &apos;ve done a study with the people in ing -- employees that were all working for ing -- and these people were all in a gathering of their participation for their rentensparplan .
and during that meeting , we have this year as much as she was , just to have a little bit of a look .
the thing that we &apos;ve added for , was that we asked people to think about all the positive things that would happen in their lives , if they were going to save money .
we did this simple thing , there was a increase of the participation for 20 percent and there was a increase of the number of people who were willing to save or a sea level to the amount of betrag that they were willing to pay for the sparkonto .
third technology : kategorisierung .
we can better better than more than more than more choices .
here &apos;s for example , one study we made in a zeitschriftengang .
it turns out it &apos;s down in the wegmans supermärkten and down at the bottom , the number of 331 different species of magazines all the way through the zeitschriften to 664 .
but you know what ?
when i show you 600 papers , and you zeige them in 10 categories , and i think you &apos;re going to give you a little bit of magazines , and then you believe that i gave them more choices and a better way , and i think you had a better choice , when i gave you the 400 to you , if i gave them the 600 one
because the categories tell me how i can keep them apart .
here are two different schmuckauslagen .
one is called &quot; jazz &quot; and the other is called &quot; swing . &quot;
if you think that the left display is swing and the display on the right , and you &apos;re clapping in the hands .
okay , there &apos;s a few .
if you think that the on the left is jazz , and the one on the right is swing , please clap .
okay , a few more .
well , it turns out they &apos;re right .
the on the left is jazz and the on the right is swing , but you know what ?
this is a highly hochgradig kategorisierungsschema .
the categories have to tell the auswähler , not something that makes the choice .
and this problem often , if you look at the long bullet points of all of these fonds .
who &apos;s going to actually tell you that ?
my fourth technology : i find a complexity
it turns out that we can actually interact with more information than we think we &apos;re only going to simplify them .
we need to get the complexity slowly .
i &apos;ll show you an example of what i mean .
let &apos;s take a very , very complicated decision : the purchase of a car .
here is a german autohersteller who gives you the opportunity to have the ability to konfigurieren their car .
you have to make 62 different decisions about their car .
now , these decisions are in the number of choices that they offer per choice .
autofarben , außenfarbe of the car -- i have 56 possibilities .
motors , motors , gears -- four possibilities .
now what i &apos;m doing is , i think i think the order of the decisions that are made .
half of the customers is going to be a lot of possibilities , 56 autofarben to the low possibilities of the ability to get four .
the other half of the clients goes from the low choices , four gears , to the 56 of the 56 world , many possibilities .
what do i look at ?
how are you interested in .
if you take the standardauswahl at the decision , that means that they &apos;re going to be overwhelmed , i &apos;m losing you .
what you find is that the people who are from the many of the many times , the small price gehen and the standardauswahl .
we &apos;re losing them .
go from the little choices to the many , then you &apos;ll stay in .
it &apos;s the same information . it &apos;s the same number of possibilities .
the only thing i did is the order of the order of the information that is being presented .
when i start with the simple one , i &apos;m learning , learn how i &apos;m auswähle .
even though the fact that they &apos;re describing , i don &apos;t have any kind of a preferences of my preferences in the interiors , and it still still stuck with me .
it also versetzt me in the great product i &apos;m going to do , and so i &apos;m willing to be with me to be with interest .
let me sum up .
i told you about four techniques that are the problem of the entscheidungsüberlastung -- -- they &apos;re going to take the überflüssigen alternatives -- it &apos;s -- it &apos;s -- we &apos;re doing it better ; we can do better with more categories , less possibilities , less possibilities .
every one of these techniques i think is going to be able to help you to manage the possibilities -- good for you , you can use them for themselves , good for people who are offering people .
because i think the key to the best choice is that you &apos;re in the selection to choose .
and the more we choose to choose , the better we will be able to deal with the art of the decision .
thank you very much .
hi . i &apos;m kevin allocca , trends-manager at youtube . i &apos;m looking at youtube-videos .
that &apos;s true .
today , we want to talk about how video viral are going to be , and then , why is that really important .
we all want to be the stars -- berühmtheiten , singer -- when i was young , it seemed so difficult to difficult .
but webvideos , that we all have been able to be famous or all our creative activities , wahnsinnig , in a part of our world .
every single one of you could be on the internet to nearest saturday .
but youtube is more than 48 hours a minute .
again , it &apos;s going to be a tiny tiny percentage ever , and it &apos;s going to be looked at thousands and thousands of times as much as cultural moments .
so how does this work ?
three things : tastemaker , teilnahmecommunities , and the unexpected .
well , let &apos;s want to do it .
oh my god . oh , my god .
oh my god !
woah !
ohhhhh , wowwww !
last year sendete vasquez vasquez this video that he had shot in his house in the yosemite house of his house .
in 2010 , it was 23 million times .
this chart is how it looked like , as the video was popular for the first summer .
actually , i didn &apos;t want to do a viral video .
he just wanted to share a rainbow , sharing .
because you &apos;re doing this as if you &apos;re going to bear the bomb mountain .
he had a lot of naturvideos to naturvideos .
and this video was actually been broadcast in january .
what happened here ?
there was jimmy kimmel .
jimmy kimmel sendete the tweet that the video was so popular .
because tastemaker like jimmy kimmel are providing new and interesting things and show you a big audience .
it &apos;s friday , friday . gotta get : everybody s forward forward , weekend , friday . gettin on , down . she didn &apos;t think that we would have this conversation without talking about this video , i hope .
rebecca blacks , &quot; friday , &quot; one of the populärsten videos .
it was nearly 200 million times .
so , the graphics looked like this .
just like &quot; double rainbow , &quot; seems to be the &quot; you &apos;d come out .
what &apos;s happened in this day ?
well it was friday , that &apos;s right .
if you want to know , these other spikes are also freitage .
but what about this day , this particular friday ?
now , tosh.0 gabelte it , and i started writing a lot of blogs on it .
michael j. was theater by the mystery science of the mystery science that was a very significant joke about this .
so important is that a man or group of tastemakers have a point of a großen audience and so to bring the process .
and then the community &apos;s community was going to be the great insiderwitz , and started talking about it and started to talk about it .
now there are 10,000 times parodien of &quot; friday &quot; in youtube .
already in the first seven days there was a parody of every single day .
unlike the einseitigen entertainment of the 20th century , the participation of our weg is to become part of this phenomenon -- either by doing it or something new to it .
&quot; nyan cat &quot; is animation and music in endlosschleife .
that &apos;s it , very simple .
this year , it was almost 50 million times .
and if you hold this for insane , you know , you know , you know , there &apos;s a dreistundenversion , which was seen four million times .
even cats are looking at this video .
cats look at cats who look at this video .
important , the creativity that are in the internetkultur of the techies and geeks .
there were it .
somebody &apos;s got a altmodische version of it .
and then it became international .
one of the remix-gemeinde fired from the ground that it was made from a stupid joke to something that we all .
now we don &apos;t find the pleasure from the ground , we &apos;re doing things .
who would have been able to get this out ?
who would have been rainbow &apos; &quot; double &quot; or rebecca black or nyan cat ?
what drehbücher did you write about that , in which such a drinsteht ?
in a world where every minute two days is uploaded , it &apos;s only really einzigartiges and unerwartetes hervorstechen , like the movie videos .
i admit , i wasn &apos;t interested in , i was not interested in a friend , i &apos;m going to look at this great video , a guy who &apos;s in new york for the fahrräder national academy .
i got a ticket because i &apos;m not on the radweg dangers , but often there are challenges that you can &apos;t drive a decent auf to the radweg .
that &apos;s completely surprising and humorous , was casey witzige , and his argument was five million times .
this approach is true for all new ways to do creative .
and that &apos;s all leads to the one big question .
what does that mean ?
ohhhh ohhhh .
what does that mean ?
tastemaker , creative teilnehmergemeinden , totally unexpected , are the features of a new kind of media and culture , to the audience , and the audience is certainly bestimmt .
like i said , one of the most common stars -- justin bieber -- did his beginning at youtube .
nobody needs to give your ideas green light .
and today , we &apos;re all comfortable with us as well as the owners of our culture .
and these are not the characteristics of the old media and they also don &apos;t even have to do the media from today , but they &apos;re going to determine the conversation of the future .
thank you very much .
how i can talk about the connectedness of the connectedness of women in the world of women , and how amazing is the astonishing strength of the verbundenheit of the verbundenheit of a vierjährigen boot , and her grandmother was in a small boat in a small boat , and a half that he was on the leben of the chinese sea , and he never disappeared , and he
the story is not yet gone .
it &apos;s a puzzle that &apos;s going to be done .
i want to tell you about some of the puzzlestückchen .
imagine the first piece : a man who &apos;s going to be his lebenswerk .
he &apos;s a poet , a writer , a man who &apos;s full of the simple promise of the simple hope of oneness and freedom of his home .
you see it in saigon , augen der in saigon , as he has to admit that his life was a single waste .
the words , so long his friends , spotteten his friends .
he pulled back to silence .
he died , broken through the story .
he &apos;s my grandfather .
i never met him personally .
but our lives are so much more than our memories .
my grandmother never would let me live .
i had to worry that it was not free , and it was my job to learn that the story was supposed to be tried to zerdrücken us , we &apos;re really .
the next puzzleteil shows how a boat in the early morgenrot silent were silent .
my mother may was 18 , and she died when her father died -- already in a arrangierten marriage , with two little girls .
for you , they had asked her to do a task : the escape and a new life in australia .
it was completely excluded that they could fail .
after a vierjährigen and filmreifen saga glitt a boat , a boat , still silent , as a fischerboot .
all adults were aware of the risks .
the biggest fear they had been both pirate and rape and death .
like most adults on the boat , my mother carried a little giftflasche .
in a gefangennahme , it would have only my sister and i &apos;d just put my sister and i , and then you have my grandmother &apos;s grandmother .
my first memories are from this boat -- the potential tuckern of the engine , the clapping of a jeden , the vast and empty side .
i don &apos;t remember the pirates that came from many times , but from the todesmut of men , would be täuschen on our boat , or an the ausfall of the motors , the six hours of the engine .
but i remember the lights off the malaysischen coast of the malaysischen coast , and the young man who collapsed and died , the end of the journey was too much for him , and then to the taste of the first apfels that was one of the men on the front of the platform .
no apple has ever tasted again again .
after three months in a refugee camp , we ended up in melbourne .
and the next thing about four women &apos;s women in three generations , who are struggling together with a new life .
we were able to put ourselves in footscray , one of the arbeiterklasse vorort , which is the population of immigrantenschichten .
unlike the alteingesessenen mittelklassevororten , whose existence was completely unknown , there was no anspruchsdenken .
the smells from the ladentüren came from the ladentüren of the world .
and the fetzen broken gebrochenen of the people were among people who have one thing to do , they started reinventing . they started reinventing .
my mother was working on farms , then on a assembly line , six days , doppelte layers .
it somehow managed to find the time to find english and it-qualifikationen .
we were poor .
every dollar has been taken , and it was put in other education for english and mathematics , whatever we needed to do , and mostly the new stuff that came out of the world .
two paar for school , every few of the school , every one to cover the holes in the other .
one schuluniform to the knöcheln , because they had to stretch six years .
and there were the rare chöre of &quot; schlitzauge , &quot; and here , and there &apos;s a &quot; list , go home . &quot;
home , where are you going ?
something else is moving into me .
there was a meeting to reconciliation and a ruhige voice , &quot; i &apos;m going to go out of the way . &quot;
my mother , my sister and i slept at the same bed .
my mother was a night , but we were told each other about our day , and they heard the movements of our grandmother in the house .
my mother suffered from alpträumen from the boat .
and it was my job to stay every night until their alpträume came to her , so i could get them out .
she opened a computergeschäft , then a kosmetikerausbildung and a eröffnete was a business .
and the women came with their stories about men who don &apos;t feed the change , angry and unflexibel , and sorgenerfüllte children , trapped between two worlds .
loans and sponsors were going to be .
now , centers .
i lived in parallelwelten .
one of the classic eastern student , the classic asiatische student , who made the unerbittliche demands itself .
in the other , i was involved in love with the tragic scars of violence , the drogenmissbrauchs and the insulation .
but so many of the years have been so many .
and because of this help i was been in my last year , as a young boy of the year .
and i was katapultiert from a puzzlestück to the next zero and the edges of the japanese .
tan le anonyme anonyme bewohnerin , nun le , tan le , flüchtling and social activist who had never been invited to the places that they never heard of , and in their own existence , they never could never imagined .
i was not familiar with the etikette .
i didn &apos;t know how to use the besteck .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about wine .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about something .
i wanted to put the bequemlichkeit in routine and the comfort of life -- a grandmother , a mother and two daughters , who was so abschlossen as a mother and a half daughters , which was like einander the stories of their day and einschliefen , we still have three and more of the bed .
i told my mother , i didn &apos;t do it .
and she reminded me that i was so old as she was looking at the boat .
no , no one was never .
&quot; do you just say , &quot; she said . &quot; and not what you &apos;re not . &quot;
so i spoke about jugendarbeitslosigkeit and training , and the vernachlässigung of the marginalisierten and entrechteten .
and the more i was talking to speak , the more i should tell .
i met people in all lebenslagen , so many of you did what they loved , lived living in the limits of the bounds of possible .
and although i graduated from my degree , i realized that i couldn &apos;t get to a career in a jura .
it had to be a different scenario .
and i realized at the same time that it &apos;s okay , a maverick , a neuankömmling , new , new , neu , but not just what you need to be grateful , maybe a gift of the boots .
because dazuzugehören can lead to collapse of the horizonte , can be easily embraced that you accepted the assumptions of the environment .
now i &apos;m now enough to know enough from my bequemlichkeitsbereich to know that , yes , the world , but not as you befürchtet it .
opportunity hasn &apos;t been allowed to be allowed to be ausdrücklich .
there was a energy , a unerbittlichen optimism , a strange mixtur of humility and wagnisses .
so i followed my gut .
i collected a little team of people around me , for the schublade , &quot; don &apos;t have a slow challenge .
a year we didn &apos;t have a dime .
at the end of a handful of tags , i was a huge topf soup that we shared .
we worked to the night , we worked at night .
most of our ideas were crazy , but it was a couple of brilliant dynamics , and we did the breakthrough .
i met the decision to draw in the united states .
after just a journey , there &apos;s a journey .
my gut back .
three months later , i was moved and went to the adventure .
before i talk about the talk , i want to tell you about my grandmother .
she grew up at a time in the konfuzianismus movement , and the local norm , the local person .
life hasn &apos;t had changed since centuries .
your father died shortly after her birth .
her mother , they moved on .
with 17 , she became the second woman who &apos;s got to beat her mother .
without any given to her man , she was worried her for a sensation by gericht it , and anklägerin in her own case , and a larger sensation than she won .
&quot; don &apos;t go to &quot; erwies . &quot;
i &apos;m just sitting in a hotel room in sydney , when she died . 1,000 miles away .
i looked through the duschtrennwand and looked at the other side .
i knew she was coming to see himself .
my mother called me a few minutes .
a few days later , we went into a buddhist temple in footscray and sat in their own .
we told her stories and she versicherten that we were still in her .
to midnight the monk and said , he &apos;d have to end up the coffin .
my mother asked us , their hand .
she asked the monk : &quot; why is your hand so warm and the rest of her is so cold ? &quot;
&quot; because she &apos;s been here since this morning , &quot; he said .
&quot; they don &apos;t have it . &quot;
if there is a band in our family , it &apos;s going to be through the women .
see , who we were and how life is shaped , we can see that the men that would have come in our lives would come to us in the quere .
the defeat would be to just simply .
now i &apos;d like to have my own children , and i think i think of the boat .
who would ever be going to wish ?
yeah , i &apos;m afraid to privilegien , before , before , before .
can i give you a little bit of a bug in your life that &apos;s mutig mutig , the unbeirrte , stetige tuckern of the engine , the long horizon , that would be nothing ?
i don &apos;t know .
but if i could give this to this , and they could make it safely , i would do it .
also , tans is a mother &apos;s mother today , in the fourth row .
i &apos;m here to share my photography with you .
is it even at all ?
because this is , of course , a picture that you can &apos;t take with your camera .
yet , my interest in photography , when i received my first digital , at age 15 years .
i combined it with my former list of drawing , but it was a little different , because when the camera was the process of the process .
and if you take a picture , you end up with a camera , the process , if you squeeze the trigger .
so , for me , it seemed to be a lot more about the right place at the right time .
i believed , everybody could do that .
so i wanted to create something else , something that starts to happen when the trigger is going to be .
pictures like this : a construction site , a lot of befahrenen road .
but it has an unexpected twist .
and behaltet , yet a realistic level .
or photographs like these -- dark and farbenfroh , but all with the common goal , a realistic plane .
when i say reality , i &apos;m going to foto-realität .
because , of course , she &apos;s not something you really can get , but i want to look like it &apos;s like this , as you can , you can see it , on a picture .
pictures , where you have to think a little bit , to be able to figure out the trick .
so it &apos;s about a idea of an idea when really a moment .
but what is the trick that it makes it realistic ?
is it about the details , or the colors ?
is it about the light ?
what does it created that ?
sometimes , sometimes the perspective is illusion .
but ultimately , it &apos;s about how we interpret the world , and how they can be made on a two-dimensional surface .
it &apos;s not about what realistic is , but what we think about realistic .
so i think the basics are very simple .
i see it as a piece of reality , where you can take different pieces and push it to create an alternative reality .
and let me show you a simple example .
we have three of these perfect vorstellbare objects that we can all identify in a three-dimensional world .
but in a certain way , can create something that &apos;s always going to be a little bit more three-dimensional and if it could exist .
but at the same time , we know that that &apos;s not possible .
so we überlisten our brains , because our brain just accepted just not just making meaning .
and i see the same process in the combine of photos .
it &apos;s really just about designing different realities .
so the things that make a picture of the picture , i think it &apos;s the things we don &apos;t think about things in our daily lives .
but if we combine photographs , it &apos;s really important to think , because otherwise it looks kind of wrong .
so i would say that there are three simple laws to follow a realistisches outcome .
as you can see , these are not three special images .
but can you use something special about this .
so the first rule is that in the same way that are kombinierte the same perspective .
secondly , the two fotos are supposed to have the same thing .
and these two images are both erfüllen these two , from the same height , and the same thing .
and third is it &apos;s impossible to do it , to do it , to do that , to do that , to tell the individual images and end up with it .
it &apos;s impossible to say it &apos;s actually impossible to say how this picture was taken .
so by looking at color , contrast and contrast to the edges of the top images , fotografische mängel , wie inks , entsättigte inks and disorders , we &apos;re going to see the limitations of the different images , and let &apos;s look like a picture of a single photograph , and it &apos;s a picture of a picture of levels of levels .
here &apos;s another example .
you might think that this is just a landscape , and the bottom part is manipulated .
so this image is actually completely composed , from photographs of different places .
i personally think it &apos;s easier to create a place to find a place when a place to find a place , because you don &apos;t have to go to your ideas with the ideas .
but it requires a lot of planning .
and when i had this idea in winter , i knew i needed several months to try to plan to find the different places for the pieces of the jigsaw .
for example , the fish was taken on a anglerausflug .
this is the bank from the ufer of a different place .
the unterwasser-teil came from a quarry .
and yes , i even have the house on the island of red , to make it look like .
to get a realistisches outcome , it &apos;s going to be seen from that point .
i always start with a sketch , one idea .
after that , it &apos;s about the combination of the various images .
and here &apos;s a piece of very well .
and then when you make good footage , the result is pretty beautiful , and also pretty realistic .
so it &apos;s all the tools there , and the only thing that we &apos;re limited is , is our imagination .
thank you very much .
i &apos;d like to talk to you about why so many electronic gesundheits-projekte fehlschlagen .
and i think the most important point is that we stopped talking with our patients .
and one of the things that we &apos;ve introduced to the radboud-universität was , a haupt-zuhörer .
it &apos;s not particularly scientifically before -- it &apos;s a cup of coffee or tea and ask the patients , families , and , &quot; how do we go ? &quot;
how can we help you ? &quot;
and we think we want to think that this is one of the main problems that everybody else -- why all the electronic gesundheits-projekte is fehlschlagen , because we stopped listening .
this is my favorite wlan-waage . a very simple thing .
she has a button .
and every morning i &apos;m going to go .
and yeah , i have a job of how you might recognize .
i have my job to 95 kg .
it works very simple , every time i put on the scale , you get my data in google health .
and they &apos;re also going to abgerufen from my allgemeinarzt , so he can see where my favorite body is , and not only in the moment i need to get out of support or so , but also with a look at the past .
but there &apos;s something else .
maybe you have this famous , i &apos;ve got 4,000 follower on twitter .
so every morning i &apos;m going to talk to my wlan-waage and people who are sitting in the car , &quot; the lunch is just a little salat today today . &quot;
but this is the netteste thing that can happen because this is the gruppenzwang , gruppenzwang , to help patients , because that could be used for obesity , or it might be the smoking of the smoking .
it may also be used to get people from their chairs , and to get them to play together , in some kind of game to control their health better .
and the next week is coming out of the market .
it will give this little blutdruck-messgerät that you &apos;re going to be on a iphone or so anschließt .
and it will allow people to measure their blood pressure , to send him to their physician and share it to the other , for something more than 100 dollars .
that dot is going to play in the game . they can &apos;t just take control of the control , captain on their own ship , but can help us provide us in the face of the challenges that we &apos;re facing to us , and the detection of health care , double nachfrage , double nachfrage , and so on .
make ways they &apos;re using the easy to use and start with this , to give patients in the team .
and that can be able to achieve through such methods , but also by using crowdsourcing .
and one of the things that we did , i want to share with you through a quick video with you .
we all have the navigationssysteme in our cars .
maybe even in our cell phones .
we know exactly where all the atms are around you .
we know one of the one , where all the stations are .
and we realize we can find fastfood-ketten .
but where would the next aed to help this patient ?
we have herumgefragt , and nobody knew it .
nobody knew where the next wave came to find out the next few times .
so what did we did ? we did have this in the netherlands .
we have a website and a menschenmasse asked , &quot; if you see a aed , please share us with where he &apos;s , and he &apos;s going to be , &quot; because sometimes he closed , and it &apos;s sometimes to closed away .
and over 10,000 aeds , they &apos;ve been in the netherlands .
the next step was to find apps for this .
and we have a ipad-app .
we developed an app for layar , augmented reality to find these aeds .
and if you &apos;re in a city like maastricht and someone can be easily , you can use your iphone , and within the next weeks , you can see the next few weeks , to save the next aed .
and now we want to do this as a aed4u , as the product turns , but also as a aed4us .
and we want to bring this to a global level .
and we &apos;re asking our colleagues around the world , from other universities , to help us behave like knotenpunkte , to help these aeds around the world .
and when you &apos;re in vacation , and somebody &apos;s zusammenbricht , it &apos;s your own kind of own kind or anyone else , you can find that way .
the other thing that we want to ask is that companies are all over the world around the world at the moment of these aeds .
these could be kurierdienste , or engineer , for example , just to make sure that the gemeldete is still still in its place .
please help us and try to do that , and try to do the health of the health , but to take your hand .
thank you very much .
today , i &apos;m going to report a crazy discovery now .
i work in the solartechnologie-branche .
and my little startup wants to make us think that we &apos;re forcing us to make sure that it &apos;s ...
... it &apos;s going to get the crowdsourcing off .
here &apos;s a quick video about what we do .
oh . one moment .
it may be , until it &apos;s nice .
now -- we can just go on the way -- i &apos;m just going to go to the video of this .
no .
that &apos;s not ...
okay .
solartechnologie is ... ...
oh , my time is over ?
okay . thank you .
so a few years ago i started to get the star stars in technology and design to take a year and work in a year , and in a environment that &apos;s pretty much everything you hate , and we have them in government &apos;s government .
the program is called &quot; code for america , &quot; and it &apos;s a little bit like the friedenscorps .
we choose every year we &apos;re going to do some of them and we let them work with stadtverwaltungen .
instead of sending them into the third world , we &apos;re sending them in rathäuser .
and they developed great apps , working with urban employees .
but what they really do is show what technology is possible today .
so they &apos;re making al .
al al is a hydrant in the city of boston .
this is what he looks like when he looks after a date , but what he really addiction is , is someone who &apos;s eingeschneit , because he &apos;s white , he &apos;s not very good at the brandbekämpfung , if he &apos;s zugedeckt by a meter .
how did he get to look for this particular way ?
we had a team of advice in boston in boston in boston , the code for america . &quot;
they were there in february , and it has last february of februar .
and they realized that the city never freely frei .
but a bestimmter fellow , a man named erik michaels-ober , and it was something that residents was going to be opening out , right now , right now .
so he did what any good developers would do , he wrote a app .
it &apos;s a nice little app where you can adopt a fire hydrant .
you send to ihn it , if it &apos;s worth .
if you do that , you can give him a name , and he called the first al al .
if you don &apos;t do that , you can take it away .
so there is a nice little game dynamic .
this is a modest piece of app .
it &apos;s probably the smallest of the 21 apps that have been written for the last year .
but they do something that does not do other regierungstechnologie .
they &apos;re spreading very quickly .
there &apos;s this guy in the i.t. division of the city , who has seen that he could use this app , not for snow , but to get the citizens .
it &apos;s very important that these tsunami-sirenen work , but people steal the batteries .
so he got the citizens to check them .
and then , seattle , to use the app to get the citizens to clean the verstopften gullys .
and chicago has just been introduced , so people who are buergersteige the buergersteige when it comes .
we now know nine cities that are planning to use these app .
and it &apos;s mostly spread , organic , of course .
if you know something about regierungstechnologie , you know that it &apos;s not that way .
the beschaffung of software takes a few years .
we had a team that was working on a project in boston working in boston , for the three people for three people .
it was a way to find a way to find out which parents are going to be the right public schools for their children .
we told us later that when it would be about the normal channels , it would have taken over two years , and it would have been asking over two million dollars .
and that &apos;s not even anything .
there is a project in the california that has been the taxpayer two billion dollars and it doesn &apos;t work .
and there are projects like this level of government .
so a app that is written in a few days , and then the selbt is spreading , is a kind of shot in front of the government .
it shows how the government could work better -- not how a private company , how many people think they should .
and not even like a technik-unternehmen , but rather like the internet itself .
and that means free access to free , which means &quot; free and productive .
and that &apos;s important .
but more importantly , that it &apos;s a new generation that &apos;s the problem of government -- not as the problem of a verknöcherten institution , but as a problem of collective action .
and it &apos;s a very good news , because it turns out we &apos;re very good at collective technology with digital technology .
now there is a great community of people who make the tools we need to take things together .
it &apos;s not just &quot; code for america , there are hundreds of people in the country , the aufstehen and regierungs-apps writing everyday in their own communities .
they didn &apos;t give up the government .
they &apos;re fürchterlich , and they don &apos;t complain about it , they &apos;re going to fix them .
and these people know something that we lost from the eyes .
and this is when you &apos;re all engaged in politics and the snake in the arbeitsamt and all the other things that we really upset with , is the government in the worten o reilly , &quot; which we collectively do alone . &quot;
today , a lot of people got to the government .
and if you &apos;re one of the people , i ask you , you know , because things change .
politics don &apos;t change ; the government is in the change .
and because the government ultimately turned out their power from us -- erinner you , &quot; we &apos;re going to think that ? -- how we think about how this change happens .
i didn &apos;t know much about government , when i started this program .
and how many people thought that it was about the government to choose to choose people in a office .
now after two years , i &apos;ve come to the conclusion that it &apos;s particularly known as the people in the absence of knowing .
this is the call to service and information .
there you get out of that , when you &apos;re 311 in your city .
if you have the opportunity to work in your städtisches , like our fellow scott silverman , as a part of the program -- in fact , you &apos;re all doing that -- you &apos;re going to see the people who have to call many different problems , including that a beutelratte in your house .
so scott gets this anfruf .
he &apos;s yelling &quot; beutelratte &quot; in the official database .
and he doesn &apos;t really have an idea . he begins with the tierfänger .
and finally , he says , &quot; look , you just can open the doors in your house and see very cool music , and see if that livestock ? &quot;
and that worked . a round of scott .
but that was not the end of the beutelratten .
boston has not just a call call-center .
it has an app , a web- and handy-app , called &quot; citizens connect . &quot;
we didn &apos;t write this app .
this is the work of the very smart people in the office of the new urban mechanics .
one day -- this is a tatsächlicher report -- this was in my mülltonne . can &apos;t tell you whether it &apos;s dead .
how do i get them removed ? &quot;
but what happens to &quot; citizens connect &quot; is different .
scott unterhielt from man .
but on &quot; citizens connect &quot; is everything that anyone can see .
and in this case , it looked a neighbor .
and the next entry we got , &quot; i went to there , i found the mülltonne behind the house .
beutelratte ? yes . alive ?
and turned the mülltonne on the side . went home .
good night , cute beutelratte . &quot;
pretty simple .
that &apos;s great . here &apos;s the digital physical physical .
and it &apos;s also a good example of how the government is in the crowdsourcing .
but it &apos;s also a great example of government as a platform .
and i don &apos;t mean a technical definition of the platform .
i &apos;m talking more about a platform for people to help themselves and help others .
a citizens helped one another citizen , but the government was a central role .
they connected these two people .
and you would have to connect them with government services , if they were needed , but a neighbor is a far better and cheaper alternative to the state services .
if a neighbor helps the other , we &apos;re letting our communities .
we call the tierfänger , it costs a lot of money .
one of the most important things is that we need to think that government is not the same thing as politics .
and most people understand that , but they think that one of the input of the other .
that our contribution is to choose .
how many times we &apos;ve been voted , and sometimes we &apos;ve been using a lot of energy to choose -- and we recall ourselves , and we expect that government , our values and our needs , and then it hasn &apos;t changed much ?
that &apos;s because the government like a farther is and policy that &apos;s the top of the top .
and what &apos;s underneath , what we call is bürokratie bureaucracy .
and we use this word with such a verachtung .
but it &apos;s this contempt that we own , and we pay for the pay for us to work something that works , something else , and then we entmachten ourselves .
people seem to think politics is sexy .
if we want this institution to work for us , we have to choose more sexy .
because that &apos;s where the actual regierungsarbeit is .
we need to be the machinery of the government .
so the occupythesec-bewegung did it .
you have seen this guys ?
it &apos;s a group of besorgter citizens that wrote a very detailed 325-seitigen report , who is a response to the sec-memo of the gesetzesvorlage .
that &apos;s not the way that it &apos;s going to be active , that &apos;s bürokratisch active .
now , for those of us who have given to have given given to the government , it &apos;s time that we want to leave the world that we want to leave our children .
you have to have to get the enormous challenges that you need to be .
do we really believe that we need to achieve what we need to achieve without improving the institution that can actually be done in the name of us ?
a government is absolutely necessary , but it needs to be more efficient .
the good news is that technology is possible to create the function of government in a way that actually make something to do something by society .
and there is a generation of mitdem internet grew , and the white knows that it &apos;s not so hard to do things , you have to build the really properly systems .
now the age of our minds is 28 , so i &apos;m a bit older , and i &apos;m almost a generation older than most of you .
this is a generation that grew up with that , their voice as a no-brainer .
they &apos;re not fighting to fight this fight , which we &apos;re all fighting , who can &apos;t talk to who you can &apos;t speak .
you can think of their opinion , on every channel and every time , and they do it .
so if you &apos;re faced with the problem of government , they don &apos;t care about their voices .
they use their hands .
they use their hands to write applications that improves the work of government .
and these apps use our hands to improve our communities .
that might be a fire hydrant , weed , a mülleimer , a trash with a beutelratte .
and sure , we would have these hydranten at all the time , and a lot of people do that .
but these apps are like small digital memories that we &apos;re not only consumers , and we &apos;re not just consumers of government who are paying for taxes and performance leistungen .
we are more than that , we &apos;re citizens .
and we &apos;re not going to improve the government to improve the government until we improve the world .
so the question i &apos;ve all got here for you : if it &apos;s about the big , important things that we have to do together , all together , we &apos;re going to be a lot of voices , or will we be a lot of hands ?
thank you .
and usually my role in explaining how wonderful the new technologies are , i &apos;m going to tell you what i really think , and i &apos;m going to tell you what i really think and see what &apos;s really going to be in the unglaublichen , and to understand what &apos;s going on with these incredible sprüngen , which so quickly that we can &apos;t keep up with this
i &apos;m going to start to start with you a single , boring thing .
... and you could just show you the slide show .
this is a slide that i &apos;ve chosen from my own .
it &apos;s not about the details of the slide , but rather the general form .
this slide shows a analyse of us about the performance of risc processors with the performance of a local .
the interesting thing here is that these slide , like the other ones that we often find in our field , a kind of semi-logarithmischen curve .
in other words , every step here is a potency in the leistungsskala .
and this is a novelty that we have to use this guy scale on a semi-logarithmischen of technology in the field of technology .
something very strange happened here .
this is basically what i &apos;m going to talk about .
so if you could go back to the light .
something else , because i &apos;m going to draw something on the paper .
now why do we draw the graphs in the technology of semi-logarithmischen curves ?
and the reason i would draw it to a normal curve , where we would say , this is the years , so that &apos;s the years , so the timeline , and this is a beliebiges satellite of technology that i want to share with a graphs , then the world is silly .
and then , look like this .
and that &apos;s not a lot of us .
now if i want to record another technology , we &apos;ll say a transporttechnologie , then it would be very unvernünftig , and then , on the semi-logarithmischen scale , in form of a flat line .
but if something like this is happening , then this is changing the qualitativen circumstances .
so if the transporttechnologie would be as fast as the mikroprozessor-technologie progression would be , then we could put into a cab in a cab and in 30 seconds we would be in tokyo .
but that &apos;s not so fast .
this was never before in history of technologie-entwicklung , this kind of rekursivem growth , which is the number of all the things that all of the things that are all about years .
the question i want to ask you about is when you look at this exponential curves , you &apos;re going to go on forever .
it &apos;s not possible that all of it was forever and forever as fast as well as well .
there are two options : there are two options .
either is going to be a classic s-kurve of the s-kurve like here , until something new is something that &apos;s going to happen .
that &apos;s about it .
now i &apos;m an optimist , so i think something like this is going to happen .
it &apos;s really that , then , that &apos;s what we &apos;re in here in a moment right now .
we &apos;re here on this line , in a transition from the world &apos;s a new kind of world .
so the question i want to ask is , i often think , is how this new world will be ?
what is this new state that the world is slow to you ?
because the transition seems very , very confusing if you &apos;re in the middle of the middle .
when i was a child , there was the future somewhere in the year 2000 , and people often talk about what would happen in the year 2000 .
now , here we have a conference where people are talking about the future , and you realize that the future is still in the year 2000 .
that &apos;s going on , we don &apos;t .
so in other words , the future is about every year for a year , i &apos;ve been a year since i am on the world .
i think the reason is that we realize that there is something that is happening .
the transition happens . we can all feel it .
and we know that it &apos;s not just a sense to try to look at 30 or 50 years into the future because everything will be so different , that a simple hochrechnung of what we &apos;re doing now doing a sense of meaning .
so i want to talk about what that could be in the field of we &apos;re in .
and to do this , i &apos;m going to talk about some other things that are really going to do with technology or computer .
because i think it really can understand this , we need to go back to step back and look at the thing on a longer level of flat .
and that &apos;s what i want to look at this on the earth &apos;s interest of life .
i think the big sense makes sense when you &apos;re unterteilt it in some milliarden-schritte .
so let &apos;s go back and it &apos;s 2.5 billion years . the earth was a big , steriler steinklumpen with many darauf chemicals .
now , if you look at the way that these chemicals were organized , then we have a pretty good image of how they anstellten .
i believe there are theories that started to understand how everything has started with rna , but i &apos;m going to tell you a little story of what &apos;s going on that time is that we have a little bit of öltröpfchen öltröpfchen , which is different types of rezepten for chemicals .
some of these öltröpfchen contain a special combination of chemicals that allow you to integrate them from the other chemicals to grow and so .
everybody who were so they were starting to themselves .
these little öltröpfchen were in the sense of the senses .
however , these weren &apos;t öltröpfchen in the process of today , because every single one of them was just a little , zufälliges recipe by chemicals .
and every time it divided , they have befindlichen befindlichen to the ungleichen of the ungleichen .
so every tröpfchen was a little different .
in fact , the tröpfchen , which is a für for growth optimalere , and we have more and more chemicals from the outside and the process .
so that is that , and that &apos;s how to survive , to survive and they &apos;re in vermehrten of their own citizens .
so this is just a very simple form of life , but more interesting , if these tröpfchen were a trick above abstraction .
in any way that we don &apos;t understand quite understand , these tröpfchen have the ability to get information .
you &apos;ve learned the recipe to store the recipe as information , and in a certain chemical form that we call dna .
in other words , they have found in this geistlosen , evolutionary kind of way of trying to get them to , niederzuschreiben , and they could be saved and copied .
the amazing thing is that this kind of information is to start talking about the clock billion years of the time , in which she was formed , right .
in fact , the recipe for us , which is our genes , from the same code and the same notation .
and every living creatures used exactly the same letters and the same code .
we &apos;re so far that we can only write the vergnügungszweck , and then , in this code .
and i have 100 mikrogramm of a white pulvers , which i &apos;m in the airports of sicherheitspersonal .
now , in fact , what i &apos;ve done is , i took this code -- the code is made of normal letters -- and i wrote my visitenkarte on a piece of dna , and i &apos;ve been making 10 ^ 22 .
so if somebody &apos;s going to end up with a hundred million copies of my apartment career , i have enough for everyone in this room and even for everybody in the world , and it &apos;s right here .
i would actually have been a egoist , then i &apos;d written it to a virus and i &apos;d written in the room .
so what &apos;s the next step ?
the niederschreiben of dna was a interesting step .
and the veranlagten these cells -- that made them happy to another billion years .
but then another , very interesting step where things were completely different , and that started to communicate these cells to communicate and information that we started using communities .
i don &apos;t know if they knew that , but bacteria can actually replace their dna .
that &apos;s why for example , for example , the consistency are growing .
some bacteria have figured out how to get from penicillin and have this information to the dna bacteria and have the information bacteria and we have a lot of bacteria that are resistent on penicillin , because the bacteria communicate .
now , these communication is allowed to be starting to do the reasons that in some sense , in the same boat ; they were synergetisch .
so they were either survived and they were able to survive , or they went together , and that meant that if a community was successful , all the individuals have been repeated and von of evolution .
now , the übergangsstelle is where these communities have so close to zusammenrückten that they decided to write the recipe for the entire community in a zeichenkette .
and the next interesting thing about this , about another billion years .
at that point , we have mehrzellige communities , communities , communities from many verschiedlichen zellentypen , which together as a single organism .
in fact , we &apos;re also a mehrzellige community .
we have a lot of cells that are not dependent on themselves .
your cells are mobile mobile phones without heart cells , muscle cells , electrical and so on .
so these communities started to imagine that the level level of evolution , the level of evolution was not longer the single cell , but all the stuff we call the organism .
the next step is now within this communities .
the zellengemeinschaften started to be able to do information .
and they developed special structures that made nothing different from the organism to process information within the organism .
and these are the neural structures .
so the neurons are the informationsverarbeitungsapparat that have built this zellengemeinschaften .
they started to train together in the community , special structures that were responsible for learning , understanding and the sounds of information .
and this was the brain , and the nervous system of these communities .
this gave them a evolutionary advantage .
because at this point , a individual -- now learn within the period of the lifetime of the lifespan of the lifespan of the lifespan of the lifespan of the lifespan , instead of the evolutionary period of time .
so , one organism was able to learn a particular fruit because she didn &apos;t have a bad thing , and it made him sick , the last time he had .
so , this is where the lifespan of a single organism has been taken from a single organism , whereas hundreds of thousands of years ago , because these information had to be evolutionär by the individuals that died because of those frucht , because these were not there yet there .
so the nervous system has the evolutionsprozess that evolutionsprozess for this particular informationsstrukturen device , because evolution could actually take place within a place .
she could take place within a zeitlichen place .
what happened was that the individual organisms have a way to communicate with each other .
as an example , the raffinierteste of us is known as the human language of this kommunikationsart .
but it &apos;s quite a really profound invention when you think about it .
i have a very complicated , unordentliche and verwirrte idea in my head .
i &apos;m sitting here in the hier , and i &apos;m basically going to give you a ähnlich verwirrte idea in your head that has a certain thing to do with my original idea .
so we take something very complicated , it turns into sound , a sequence of sound , and produce something very complicated in the heads of others .
so this allows us to work back as a unified organism .
and what we actually did is we have to do humanity , we have begun to do .
we &apos;ve been walking up the same steps , which have gone through the mehrzellerorganismen -- the abstraction of our methods , how we &apos;re going to move on , we process .
the invention of the language was a small step in this direction .
telefonie , computers , videobänder , cd-roms , cd-roms , and so on , all of our potential mechanisms that we built in our community to handle these information .
and it connects us all together to something that is much bigger , and also , even more than we can continue to developing faster than we were .
so today , evolution can happen in the span of microseconds .
you &apos;ve seen tys little kleines where he &apos;s got a little evolution in the convolution program , right in your eyes .
so , we have the zeitskalen again .
the first steps of history , which i told you , a billion years a piece .
the next steps , like the nervous system and the brain , a few hundred million years .
then the nächstens steps , like language and so on , less than a million years .
and these next steps , like electronics , seem to be a few decades .
the process itself is itself by itself and will be , i think , auto-katalytisch is the word for this -- if you put it in the same way .
the more changes it changes , the faster changes it .
and i think that &apos;s what we see here in this explosionsartigen curve .
we see the process that itself is fed itself .
i live in love from computers , and i know that i use the mechanism i use to build computers , not using computers , without the case , no further progress in the computing system .
my current activity is to design objects with such a high complexity that it &apos;s impossible to design that traditional meaning .
i don &apos;t know what every single transistor does in the verbindungsmaschine .
it has billions of them .
what i do instead , and what i do is , as designers are doing machines machines , we think about a certain amount of abstraktionsebene , and the machine does something that we have , and the machine makes sense to something that we could have far more and faster than we ever have done it .
and she makes it partially with techniques that we don &apos;t even understand properly .
one of the ways that is particularly interesting , and which i &apos;ve been used in the last time , is evolution itself .
we put a evolutionsprozess in the machine that is in the mikrosekunden-bereich .
to give a example , in the most extreme cases , we can build a program that are designed from random instructions .
we say , &quot; computers , generiere , please , generiere million zufällig of our lives .
now , please , please , please , please , the randomly chosen , the realm of the programs , and choose the ones that are the ones that are on the next one . &quot;
so in other words , i do know what i want to do .
let &apos;s say , i want to take numbers of numbers that would be a simple example of which i &apos;ve already been doing .
so find programs which can be found in the most number of things .
of course , the chance of zufällig is very small , that they have to take a chance of chance of numbers , so they don &apos;t have any of the instructions that are actually doing this .
but one of those things like this , with something very lucky to do two things in the right way .
now , i say , &quot; computers , take a decade of the sequences that come to the next one .
so , speichere , speichere , lösche the rest .
now , all of the übriggebliebenen all the übriggebliebenen that have the best thing .
and that &apos;s what we call a method of rekombinierens , analog to reproduction . &quot;
take two programs and they produce children through the exchange of their subroutinen , and the children vererben the features of the two programs .
so i have a new generation of programs that came across combinations of programs that are something that are closer to the other .
tell , &quot; please , &quot; please , &quot; please , &quot; please . &quot;
bewerte , she bewerte .
maybe a few mutations .
and again , again , the whole generation of a generation .
all these generations need only need to be a few milliseconds of milliseconds .
and so i can make a evolution of millions of years in the computer for a few minutes , or in more than a few hours .
i &apos;ll get there , i get programs that can be used the numbers of perfect texts .
in fact , these programs are so much more efficient than every program i would have ever write .
if i look at these programs , then i can &apos;t say how they work .
i tried to understand them .
it &apos;s resilience and weird programs .
but they do the job .
i know that they &apos;re very sure that they do the job because they come from a series of hunderttausenden programs which have done the job .
because your life depended on the way she did that you do the job right .
i sat in a 747 with marvin minsky , ale a card , and he says a map , and says , &quot; oh look , look at that . look at that .
there is this plane , this plane is made of hunderttausenden kleinteilen , which together are working together to make their flight safer . &quot; do you don &apos;t do that ? &quot;
we know that a entwicklungsprozess is not even more inspiring when it &apos;s too complicated .
so we &apos;re going to rely on computers , for a process that &apos;s very much , which is very different from the classical market .
he allows us to do things with a much higher complexity than the normal methods , to produce .
and yet , we don &apos;t understand the possibilities of it .
so gewissermassen überflügelt us so technology .
we &apos;re using these programs to make the computer much faster , so that we can be able to do that processes to go faster .
so it &apos;s going to be a rückkopplung .
it &apos;s going faster and faster and i think it &apos;s why it seems like that .
because all of these new technologies from themselves today .
we raise off .
we &apos;re at a point where it &apos;s analog to be at the time when einzeller-organismen evolved to mehrzeller-organismen .
so we &apos;re the amöben , and we can &apos;t really feel the very ganz things that we &apos;re going on here .
we &apos;re in the middle of this übergangpunkt .
but i really think that &apos;s going to be something .
i find it very hochmütig to tell us that we are the final product of evolution .
and i think we &apos;re all here , here are part of the creation of the creation of whatever it is .
now , the lunch is before , and i think i &apos;m going to hear here before i &apos;m going to get even more rausgewählt .
my story starts right here in rajasthan , about two years ago .
i was under the starry sky in the desert , with sufi-sänger mukhtiar ali .
we talked about that nothing has changed since the ancient indian indian epos . &quot;
if we wanted to travel back at the time , we were able to put in a cart and schwirrten across the sky .
now we &apos;re doing this with airplanes .
at the time , when the great indian kriegerprinz kriegerprinz arjuna durst , he took a bow , put it into the floor and water .
now we &apos;re doing this with bohrern and machines .
we came to the conclusion that magic and magic with machines .
that made me really sad .
i got a little bit scared .
i &apos;m afraid i could lose the ability to lose the sonnenuntergang without the camera without a camera and without friends .
i found that technology should be possible to do that , and not kill it .
when i was a little girl , my grandfather gave me his little silberne .
this piece of 50 years old , the most exciting thing was called the magischste thing .
it became a goldener access to a world of pirates and verunglückter ships and pictures in my imagination .
i &apos;d like to do it as a hielten , and it was a träumen of the watches of davon and cameras from it .
they were inspired by us to be inspired .
and so i went into the world of technology to see how i could use them to allow them to kill magic .
with 16 , i started to illustrate books .
when i saw the ipad , i saw it as a device to the storytelling , the readers of the world can connect all over the world .
it can know how we keep it .
it can know where we are .
it &apos;s all images and text , and animation , and then , sound and touch .
that storytelling has always been more senses .
but what do we do with it ?
i &apos;m just going to khoya an interactive industry .
here , &quot; please raise your fingers on every light . &quot;
and so -- here &apos;s -- this box is heard of -- &quot; i write my name .
and i &apos;m going to be a character in the book .
and again , a letter goes down , and it &apos;s got a letter for me -- and the ipad knows what i live -- who is right at me .
the kid in me is really excited about this .
i talked a lot about magic .
i don &apos;t mean magicians and kites , but the magic of childhood , those of the childhood that we all had as children .
fireflies in a glass , i always found quite exciting .
so you have to put the ipad and the fireflies rauslassen .
and the light bulb go through the rest of the book .
another idea that i was fascinated by a child is that a whole galaxy can put in a single frame of murmel .
and so every book here will be here and every world is a little murmel that i &apos;m here to here , here , in the device .
and this is opening up a map .
they &apos;ve always had a cards , but these cards were static .
this map grows and then leuchtet and actually , and it &apos;s basically to be the orientation in the rest of the book .
she &apos;s also looking at the other places of the book .
i &apos;m going to go in .
it &apos;s important to me , is to create something that &apos;s also very zeitgemäß , but also very zeitgemäß .
these are the apsaras .
we &apos;ve all heard of feen and nymphen , but how many people outside india are familiar with indian colleagues that are apsaras ?
the poor apsaras were thousands of years in indras row , in a old muffigen book .
and we bring them back , in a contemporary story for children .
a story that &apos;s related to new issues , like the umweltkrise .
for the subject , a big problem is that children are in their rooms in their homes , in their computers , in their computers , without dancing .
but now , with mobile technology , we can take our kids into the natural world with their technology .
in a interaktion of the book , you &apos;re going to go to a search for you , and you have to go and get the camera , the kamera of the universe .
as a child , i had collections of stöckern , stones , kieseln , muscheln .
somehow that kids don &apos;t do that .
this is zurückgebracht , and you have to go to a chapter a picture of a flower and to tag .
in another chapter , you have to have a piece of baumrinde and tag .
so , you can actually create a digital collection of photographs that you can then ask online .
a child in london shows the picture of a fuchses , and says , &quot; oh , i &apos;ve seen a wonderful . &quot;
a child in india says , &quot; today i &apos;ve seen a monkey . &quot;
it creates a kind of social network around a digital collection of photographs that you actually &apos;ve taken .
there are a wide variety of possibilities that are magic to connect to the world and technology .
in the next book we intend to use a interaction where you use the video of the ipads and through augmented reality , a animation of the elfen , which seems to be a pflanze .
on a place of the screen that the screen is blättern .
you have to do the sound of the winds , and they &apos;re going to read and read the rest of the book .
we all move to a world where the use of technology comes closer and in the magic and technology .
we use energy of the sun .
we bring our kids and closer to the natural world , and we &apos;re going to see the magic , fun and the love of our childhood with simple medium .
thank you very much .
this is a really extraordinary honor for me .
i spend most of my time with people in untersuchungshaft , prison , prison or todeszellen .
i spend most of my time with the socially weakest in the sozialbausiedlungen and places that there &apos;s very much common .
here at ted , to see and listen to how accurate is this , i gave me a lot of power .
in the short time , i was here to tell you a identity .
you can tell things that are affecting the world .
and sometimes when something comes over ted , it gets a meaning and force that it didn &apos;t have otherwise .
i say that because i think identity is very important .
we &apos;ve seen some fantastic presentations .
i think we learned that the words of a flu is important , but the words of a engagierten lehrers may have besonders meaningful .
as a doctor , you can do a good thing , but as a doctor doctor , you can do more .
and so i want to talk about the power of identity .
i didn &apos;t have the way to do that in my work as a lawyer .
i learned that from my grandmother .
i was big in a family , a traditional afroamerikanischen household , which was dominated by a matriarchin dominated , and this matriarchin was my grandmother .
she was a taffe , powerful woman , she had effects .
she had the last word in every single word .
she was also the origin of many of our family in our family .
she was the daughter of a sklavenfamilie .
their parents were born in the 1840ern in virginia , in virginia .
it was born in 1880 and the experience of slavery shaped their appearance very strong .
my grandmother was strong , but she was also loving .
when i met them as a young boy , she came up to me and umarmte me .
they were interested in so that i could barely breathe , and then she got me .
one or two hours later , when i came to her , she came up to me and said , &quot; bryan , you &apos;re still my source ? &quot;
and if i said , &quot; no , i said , &quot; umarmte me back . &quot; if i said , &quot; she said , &quot; she said me .
you &apos;d been something that made me that you would always be close to her .
the only problem was that they had 10 children .
my mother was the youngest of their ten kids .
sometimes when i wanted time to spend time , it was hard to get their attention .
my cousins around all over .
i remember , i have to have eight or nine or nine , that i went to a morning and went to the living room . everyone would go around .
my grandmother sat down at the end of the beach and i started staring at me .
first i thought that this was a game .
i looked at her and smiled , but she looked very severe .
this went to the last 15 minutes , and she stood up and came to me , and she took me at hand and said , &quot; come on , &quot; come on , &quot; and i need to talk . &quot;
i remember it &apos;s a yesterday yesterday .
i &apos;ll never forget it .
she took me out to sleep and said , &quot; bryan , i &apos;m going to tell you something , but you &apos;ve got to promise you &apos;re not going to be weitersagst . &quot;
i said , &quot; promised , grandmother . &quot;
she said , &quot; ehrenwort ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
she sat down and looked at me . she said , &quot; i want you to know that i &apos;ve seen you . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you &apos;re a little special . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you can do everything you want to do . &quot;
i &apos;m never going to forget that .
she said , &quot; you just have to promise three things , &quot; which is . &quot;
i said , &quot; ok , grandma . &quot;
she said , &quot; first , i &apos;m always versprich to love your mommy . &quot;
she said , &quot; your mama is my baby , and you need to promise you &apos;re going to care about you . &quot;
i &apos;m saying my mother , so i said , &quot; yes , granny , i &apos;m going to do that . &quot;
and then she said , &quot; as i &apos;m going to tell you that you &apos;re always going to do the right thing , &quot; even if it &apos;s hard to do that right . &quot;
i thought , and i said , &quot; yes , grandmother , i promise . &quot;
she said , &quot; the last thing you have to promise me is that you never will be drinking alcohol . &quot;
now , i was nine years old , and i said , &quot; yes , grandmother , i promise . &quot;
i grew up on the land in the old , rural south , and i have a brother who &apos;s older and a year older , and a year younger sister .
when i was about 14 or 15 , one day , one day , my brother home home and brought this sixpack beer with grabbed my sister and me and went with us in the forest .
we just alberten around there as well as well .
then he took a drink of beer and offered my sister &apos;s sister , and she took me and then offered me one .
i said , &quot; no , no , no . it &apos;s ok . it &apos;s just a beer . &quot;
my brother said , &quot; well , i &apos;m going to do . now we &apos;re doing this , but you &apos;re doing all of what we do .
i had the sister , your sister had . go , trink , a beer . &quot;
i said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to do . it &apos;s only doing . it only makes her . &quot;
my brother sat down .
he said , &quot; what &apos;s going on with you ? well , what &apos;s going on . &quot;
and he looked at me and said , &quot; oh , no , you &apos;re not doing you still crazy for the conversation with grandmother ? &quot;
i said , &quot; what are you talking about ? &quot;
he said , &quot; grandma tells all the grandchildren that they are special . &quot;
i was devastated .
i &apos;m going to tell you something .
i should not do that .
this may be able to transmit public health .
i &apos;m 52 years old , and i &apos;m gestehe that i &apos;ve never been a drop of alcohol .
i &apos;m not saying that because i think it &apos;s tugendhaft . i say that , because identity power means .
if we can create the right kind of identity , we can say the people around us , they don &apos;t believe the first .
we can get them to do things , to do things you might think they couldn &apos;t .
of course , my grandmother would tell you all of their grandchildren , they &apos;re special special .
my grandfather was during the prison in prison .
my uncle died of alkoholinduzierten diseases .
and she believed that this is the topics to take care of us .
i tried to say something about our justizsystem .
this country is different than 40 years ago .
in 1972 , 300,000 people were 300,000 in haftanstalten and in prison .
today , it &apos;s 2.3 million .
the united states today have the highest world bank today .
seven million people are on the ship or mit strafaussetzung .
i think , in my opinion , has changed our world .
in socially weak and black parts of the population , despair and hopelessness , because of that changes .
one of three male between 18 and 30 is in prison , in prison , in prison , on the prison , on the prison , or mit .
in urban communities over the country -- from los angeles to philadelphia , baltimore in washington -- are 50 percent of all the black men in prison , in prison , in prison , in prison , or mit .
our system is not just trying to do just by asking questions that are going to be entstellt by the rassenzugehörigkeit , it will also be entstellt .
we have a justizsystem system that you can do much better than they &apos;re rich and guilty as poor and innocent .
wealth , not verschulden , is the result .
but still , we seem to be satisfied with it .
a politics of fear and anger has convinced us that these problems are not our problems .
we have lost touch .
i think the interesting thing .
there &apos;s a few hochinteressante developments .
my home alabama might be dauerhaft the wahlrecht , if they &apos;re killing them .
here and today , 34 percent of the male people are lost their wahlrecht .
we prognostizieren that in 10 years , the quote of the aberkennung is the quote of the local bürgerlichen , is going to be as high as the verabschiedung of the wahlrechtsgesetzes .
this is the silence .
i vertrete children .
many of my mandanten are very young .
the united states of america are the only country in the world , the dreizehnjährige children in prison in prison .
in this country , there are children for children who lebenslängliche for children without bedingte .
we &apos;ve got a lot of a deal .
the only country in the world .
i vertrete people in todeszellen .
the question of death is an interesting question .
we believe it &apos;s so taught that the real question is , has a human being , has a human being , to die for a von crimes ?
that &apos;s a very sensible question .
but you can think differently , depending on how we see our identity .
the other view is not : somebody deserves a crime of death , but we did it , we deserves it ?
i find that fascinating .
the death penalty in america is defined by error .
in nine people who we &apos;ve executed , is one that we &apos;ve been told to have been proven to the innocent , who was entlastet and from death row .
an amazing fehlerquote . one of the nine innocent .
i find that fascinating .
we would never fly with a plane when you fly for nine planes that came up with one .
but somehow we can do it , we can &apos;t get us from this problem .
it &apos;s not our problem .
it &apos;s not our burden .
it &apos;s not our fight .
i &apos;m talking about this question .
i &apos;m talking about race and the question that we &apos;re right , whether we &apos;re right , kill it .
and it &apos;s exciting because i &apos;m talking to my students in my students . i &apos;m talking about slavery .
i talk about terrorism , the time for the end of the rekonstruktion , until the beginning of the war .
we don &apos;t really know very much about it .
but for the crash crash , it was a time of terror .
in many areas , people had to be afraid of anxiety .
or a bombs .
it was the fear of terror , who shaped their life .
and these people are now to me and say , &quot; mr , stevenson , they &apos;re holding the talks , they say , they &apos;re going to stop , they say that we &apos;re going to stop saying that we &apos;re going to have to do it for the first time in our nation , after 9 / 11 . &quot;
they say , &quot; no -- say , you say to people that we grew up with it . &quot;
and after the terrorism , of course , the rassentrennung and decades of rassistisch motivierten unterwerfung and apartheid .
and yet , there is a dynamic -- we don &apos;t like to talk about our problems .
we don &apos;t like to talk about our story .
and that &apos;s why we don &apos;t really understand what makes sense of our actions in the historical context .
we &apos;re all stoßen on each other .
we &apos;re always creating new tensions and conflict .
it &apos;s hard to talk about race , and i think that &apos;s because we &apos;re not willing to approach ourselves of the truth and reconciliation .
in south africa , the people have understood that the rassentrennung are not going to overcome without the willingness to the willingness to truth and reconciliation .
even after the genocide in rwanda , this willingness to us this willingness , but not in this country .
i &apos;ve been talking about the talks in germany .
it was fascinating because one of the scientists stood up to my talk , and said , &quot; you know , it &apos;s profoundly very much worse , you know , you &apos;re talking about it . &quot;
he said , &quot; in germany , there is no death penalty .
and of course , it can never give you more . &quot;
it was very silent . then one woman said , &quot; well , it &apos;s impossible to be a little bit impossible that we ever have to do that we &apos;ve ever known to aussprechen the systematic individual .
it would be gewissenlos of us , consciously and gezielt people . &quot;
i thought about it .
as it feels like , in a world where german people were ließ , especially if there were many jews .
it would be a unerträglich .
it would be gewissenlos .
and yet , here in this country , in the states of the old südens , we &apos;re going to be convicted of the risk of tode , even though the victim is , when the victim is white , even when the victim is black , and the victim is white , in the same states , in their own states , in their own states , in their
and yet there is this mental abkopplung .
i think our identity is threatened .
if we don &apos;t deal with this hard topics , then the positive and wonderful things are affected .
we love innovation .
we love technology and creativity .
we love entertainment .
but then , eventually , this realities of suffering , of suffering , abuse , herabsetzung , ausgrenzung .
i think it &apos;s important to unite both sides .
because we talk about that we need more hope , more engagement , more dedication to get in a complex world .
for me , it means time to start to think about , and talk about the poor , the benachteiligten , who will be never going to be at ted .
but think about a kind of a way that &apos;s embedded in our own life .
we all have to believe in the last day of things we can &apos;t see .
we do . so we &apos;re rational to be the same way we estimate .
innovation , creativity , and development is not just not just our heads .
they come from ideas that are driven by the belief in our hearts .
it &apos;s this kopf-herz-verbindung , which i believe they &apos;re not just going to be open for all the bright and things , but also to the dark and problematischen .
vaclav havel , the great tschechische politicians , once said , once again , once again .
when we fought it against the oppression , we wanted to do all kinds of things , but what we needed was , we had to be hope , a spiritual orientation , the willingness to be , sometimes to hoffnungslosen places and witness . &quot;
this is the emergence of orientierung , the core of what i believe is that the ted-gemeinschaften has to be engaged .
there is no commercial to technology and design that allows us to be very human , unless we don &apos;t have eyes and ears , and injustice .
i want to warn you . this kind of identity material , much more of us than we don &apos;t worry about .
it &apos;s going to touch them .
as a young lawyer i &apos;m hatt the great privilege , the great parks , rosa parks , to meet the rosa .
and woman came back to montgomery , where they were two of their oldest women who had two women who had organized montgomery-busboykott , johnnie carr , who had the montgomery-busboykott -- an incredible afroamerikanerin -- a white , whose husband , clifford durr , dr. king vertrat .
so these women are met , and then they got a fire .
and then called frau , and he said , &quot; bryan , &quot; bryan , woman &apos;s going to go into the city . we want to talk .
do you want to dazukommen and listen ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; yes , i love to be like . &quot;
she said , &quot; and what are you going to do when you &apos;re here ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m going to listen . &quot;
and i went over and just heard it .
it was always inspiring , so inspiring .
one day i was sitting there and i heard that women , and after a few hours turned to me , i said , &quot; well , say , &quot; well , you say , &quot; what the initiative is for the next bit .
what are you trying to achieve ? &quot;
i started with my usual talk .
i said , &quot; we &apos;re trying to get injustice .
wr want people to help people were convicted .
we want to be voreingenommenheit and discrimination in the strafvollzugssystem .
we want to abschaffen lebenslängliche haftstrafen without bedingte strafaussetzung for children .
we want to do something against death .
we want to lower the number of women .
we want to eradicate masseninhaftierungen . &quot;
i gave my usual talk , and afterwards she looked at me and said , &quot; mhmm . mhmm . &quot;
she said , &quot; that &apos;s going to make it very , very tired .
then the woman was lehnte , put a finger on my face and said , &quot; and therefore , they have to be very , very tapfer . &quot;
and so i think the ted community should be .
we need to start to ask ways to put this challenges : this particular problem , this particular thing .
because ultimately , our humanity depends on our humanity , from all of our humanity .
in my work , i learned very simple things .
i &apos;ve learned a couple of simple things .
we all are more than the worst thing we &apos;ve ever done .
i think that &apos;s true for every human on the planet .
if somebody &apos;s lying , he &apos;s not just a liar .
if somebody takes something that doesn &apos;t hear it , it &apos;s not just a burglar .
even who kills someone , is not just a killer .
and because that &apos;s like , there &apos;s a fundamental human dignity that has to respect the law .
i also believe that in many parts of this country , and certainly in many parts of the earth , the opposite of poverty is not wealth .
i don &apos;t think it &apos;s not .
i think that in many places that are the opposite of poverty .
and finally , i think , although it &apos;s so dramatic , and so on , we &apos;re not going to be gemessen , we &apos;re not measured at the end of our technology , not to the things we develop , not to our intellect and understood .
ultimately , a society will not measured how they treat their rich and powerful and the privilegierten and the privileged to deal with the poor , the convicted , the inhaftierten .
because in this context , we start to start the truly amazing things that make us feel .
sometimes i &apos;m going to find the balance . a story to the end .
sometimes i &apos;m going to do to very much .
i &apos;m going to tired of how we all .
sometimes these ideas are ahead of our thinking ahead , in a very important way .
i &apos;m going to have those kids who were convicted of very hard access to very hard .
i go to the untersuchungsgefängnis and visit a client that &apos;s 13 or 14 years old , and that &apos;s when the adult is to be trial .
then i ask myself , how could this happen ?
how can a judge somebody in something that he isn &apos;t ?
judge increases a erwachsenen , but i see a child .
one night i stayed up too long and thought , my goodness , if a judge can turn into something else , then he must have zauberkräfte .
right , bryan , the judge has zauberkräfte .
you should also do that .
and because it was late , and i couldn &apos;t think more right , i started working on a shop .
i had a 14jährigen , poor black boys as a mandanten .
and i started with this kind of thing : &quot; well , the headline was , my poor , my poor , 14jährigen black , 14jährigen mandanten , white , white topmanager topmanager .
in my antrag , i explained to the fehlverhalten of the staatsanwaltschaft and the police and the police and the police .
there was a crazy line of about that , in this country , there &apos;s nothing more rechtens that there &apos;s only one of the country .
the next morning i woke up and i couldn &apos;t know whether i was geträumt this crazy offer or actually .
and i had no one of the horror , i couldn &apos;t just read it , but they were sent to court .
a few months before , and i just forget everything .
but eventually i decided , but i decided to do my god , i have to put it in the dish and that crazy case .
i went to the car and really cool .
so i went to the court .
and i thought that &apos;s going to be so hard to get so painful .
i got out of my car , and i went to the gericht to the court .
when i was the staircase to the court , there was an elderly man , black man who was the hausmeister in the court .
when he saw me , he came over and said , &quot; who are you ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m a lawyer . &quot; he said , &quot; you &apos;re a lawyer ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
he came to me and i was umarmte me .
then he whispered to me .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m so proud . &quot;
and i have to say , there was a force .
it touched a very deep in me , identity , the ability to each individual , something to a community to a community , to one perspective of hope .
well , i went to the gerichtssaal .
once the judge me saw me , saw the judge , saw the judge .
he said , &quot; mr. stevenson , they asked this crazy antrag ? &quot;
i said , &quot; yes . &quot; and then we started to discuss .
more people would come in , just because they were angry , they were angry .
that i wrote these crazy things .
polizeibeamte came in and büroangestellte staatsanwälte and office .
in the handumdrehen , the gerichtssaal of people who were angry , that we were talking about skin languages , talking about poverty , about inequality .
and i looked at my augenwinkel , and i looked at the janitors and go down .
he looked over again and could hear the window and could hear all the tohuwabohu .
he went on and down .
eventually , this older black man was a very careful gesichtsausruck in the gerichtssaal and sat down right behind me , almost immediately .
ten minutes later , the judge was a pause .
while recess came a polizeibeamter , that it was a störte that the janitors in the gerichtssaal was the hausmeister .
this deputy ran across the older black black .
he said , &quot; jimmy , what do you do ? &quot;
the older man stood up . he looked at the deputy , he looked at me , and he looked at me , and he said , &quot; i &apos;m here to tell this young man , you don &apos;t lose the goal .
i came to ted , because i think many of you understood that the moral level of the universe is far away , but that it was justice .
that we &apos;re not completely evolved as humans , unless we &apos;re not um to human rights and grundwerte .
that our survival of all survival is connected to survive .
that we have our visions of technology and design , from entertainment and creativity to humanity , humanity , pity and justice .
and most of you , i want to see that you see that similarly , just say , lose the goal , don &apos;t give them up .
you &apos;ve seen this audience in this audience , and the community saw a obvious wish and you can help to help them and do something .
what can we do ?
bryan stevenson : well , there are all kinds of possibilities .
if you live in california , there &apos;s a volksentscheid , where it &apos;s about to do a effort to companies , something of the geldstrom umzuleiten that &apos;s going to flows in politics .
here , california , for example , you &apos;ll have a billion dollars for the death penalty cost for the death sentence .
and yet , 46 percent of all of the tötungsdelikte don &apos;t do a verhaftung .
and 56 percent of all the vergewaltigungsfälle don &apos;t get to court .
there is the chance to do something .
this is a referendum that will suggest that money in more sicherheitskräfte and security .
i think there are ways of possibilities .
over the last three decades , the energy industry is in america .
that is a fact that &apos;s often used to have a relationship with the elevated security rate .
what would you say somebody who believes ?
now , in fact , the number of hasn &apos;t changed very dramatically .
most of the masseninhaftierungen in this country was not really in the class of gewaltverbrechen .
it was the fehlgeleitete kreuzzug against drugs .
so the dramatic numbers are numbers in the prison .
we &apos;ve got hinreißen of the rhetoric of punishment .
now we have drei-verstöße « , which is -gesetze , people who are always going to take people behind the grid , for a fahrraddiebstahl , for the theft of the theft of the theft , instead of having them to make things the sacrifices .
i think we need to do more to help people who become victims of a straftat , not less .
and i think our current bestrafungsphilosophie helps help .
i think that &apos;s what we need to change .
bryan , they really have a string of schwingen .
they &apos;re a inspirational personality .
thank you for ted . thank you .
now , it &apos;s a erhöhtes death cycle to be a increased gefahrenrisiko .
two of them in somalia , in somalia , where the police is the police .
the 4 : sinister kartelle . the five 5 : dangerous kreuzfahrtschiffe .
six : social structure . they have a 65 7 : 65 dead deaths .
8 : tsunamiwarnung : sprecher .
different speaker : drogenkrieg . massenvernichtungswaffen .
recession . stillstand . doomsday . syria . syria .
crisis . death .
oh my god .
so , this is just a couple of clips that i &apos;ve collected over the last six months -- it would have been the last six days , or the last six years .
the fact is that the media is prefer to show ourselves negative topics because our minds are actually getting exactly the same attention .
and there &apos;s also a very good reason for this .
every second every day , we can actually process more information as our brain ever process .
and because of us , nothing more important than our survival is the first one to all the information that &apos;s part of our temporallappens , the amygdala .
so the amygdala is our frühwarnsystem , our gefahrendetektor .
it &apos;s sortiert and durchkämmt the information on the quest for the jeglicher of our environment .
so if we see the news , we prefer to think about it for negative news .
and the old adage , &quot; if it &apos;s blutet , the demand is very true .
now , with all our digital devices that have seven days that week seven days a week , 24 news , the negativen news , is not an miracle that we are pessimistic .
it &apos;s not a miracle that everybody thinks that it &apos;s always about worse .
but possibly , that &apos;s not the case .
maybe that &apos;s the reality .
maybe the enormous progress that we &apos;ve done in the last century , we &apos;ve done a series of forces , so strong that it will be possible to build a world of the procedure .
now , i &apos;m not saying that we don &apos;t have big problems -- climate crisis , artensterben , water and energieprobleme -- we &apos;ve already got .
and as humans , we &apos;re much better at the very long term in very long , problems , but they eventually keep going to overcome .
let &apos;s see what we &apos;ve reached in the last century , so we can foresee the evolution .
the average life expectancy has more than doubled more than doubled that the inflation has tripled the angepasste of the world .
child mortality has been a tenth of a tenth of a body .
and it &apos;s coming to come up , the ernährungs- , elektrizitäts- transport- and the code for a lack of war .
steve pinker has shown us that we live in a very peaceful time of life .
and according to charles kenny , the alphabetisierungsquote is in the past 130 years , 25 percent .
we live in a really extraordinary time .
and a lot of people forget this .
and we increase our expectations on our expectations .
in fact , we &apos;ve redefined poverty .
now consider that a great percentage of americans who live under the poverty , access to electricity , water , toilets , kühlschränken , mobiltelefonen , mobiltelefonen , klimaanlagen and cars .
the richest capitalists of the last century , the imperatoren of the earth , would never have found such a luxusgüter .
the basis of a lot of it form , and these grow , and these growing grow .
my good friend ray kurzweil , that every tool that is going to be information technology , on moore &apos;s law , is the trajectory of moore &apos;s law , and the preis-performance-quotient is doubling all 12 to 24 months .
so the mobile phone is about the mobile phone in your pocket , and it &apos;s a million times less and more than a supercomputer from the &apos; 70s .
now look at this curve .
that &apos;s moore &apos;s law for the last hundred years .
notice two things about this curve .
first of all , how did they occur -- in good like the good times , war or peace , recession , depression , depression and hochkonjunktur .
this is the result of the faster computers that build us .
they slowed down for none of our big problems .
also , despite your logarithmic verlaufs on the left side , they &apos;re going to upwards .
so the rate itself is accelerating .
and on this curve , on the back of moore &apos;s law , we find a series of technologies that are available to all .
&quot; cloud-computing , &quot; something that my friends in autodesk , &quot; sensoren , sensoren , the roboter , the personal production of the personal production , synthetic biology , to synthetische , treibstoffe , vaccination , digital medicine and artificial intelligence .
how many of you have the victory of ibms watson in &quot; risk &quot; ?
that was a big impact .
i &apos;ve got the papers to go and have the best headlines that i could find .
i love this : &quot; watson bezwingt human opponents . &quot;
&quot; risk &quot; is not a simple game .
it &apos;s about understanding the nuances of language .
imagine that these artificial intelligence is intelligenz every single one of a mobiltelefones .
four years ago , ray kurzweil and i &apos;m here at ted new university called singularity university .
we bring to all these technologies at all , with special focus on how these use to be used to solve the major challenges of humanity .
and every year we &apos;re asking the students , companies , products and services that can be within a decade of people &apos;s lives of people .
think about that a group of students today , can affect the lives of people .
30 years ago , this would have been ridiculous .
today we can actually have dozens of companies that have done this .
if i think of it , i don &apos;t mean a life full of luxury on the planet ; it &apos;s about to create a life of possibilities .
it &apos;s about creating a knappen abundance .
so , the scarcity is kontextbezogen , and technology is a resource force .
here &apos;s an example .
this is the story of napoleon iii. in the middle of the 18th century .
he &apos;s the guy on the left .
he got the king of siam to dinner .
napoleons soldiers got bekamen , bekamen silber-besteck , even bekam .
the king of siam , however , was bekam .
aluminum aluminum was the most valuable metal on the planet , valuable as gold and platin .
this is why the dome is made of aluminum made of aluminum .
even though aluminum 8,3 percent of the erdmasse is , it doesn &apos;t come as a reines metal .
it &apos;s going to be connected by oxygen and silikate .
but then the technology of the elektrolyse developed and made aluminiumherstellung so that we use it to our wegwerf-mentalität .
then , let &apos;s take this analogy for the future .
we think today .
ladies and gentlemen , we live on a planet with 5.000-mal energy in a planet than we can use .
16 terawatt energy all of the time on the ground of the earth .
it &apos;s not about scarcity , the problem is .
and there &apos;s good news .
this year , it &apos;s been able to do it for the first time in india to reduce the cost of a cost of the cost of the diesel-stroms -- 8.8 rupees in the vergleich .
the cost for solar energy in the last year &apos;s last year .
last month , this is published a study that shows that until the decade in the sunny decade in the sunny areas of solar energy per kwh , compared to 15 cents a year .
and if we have a energieüberschuss , we will also have water .
let &apos;s talk about wasser-kriege .
remember , as carl sagan , the voyager-raumfahrzeug sagan was the voyager-raumfahrzeug 1990 than it was at saturn , back in the earth ?
he took a famous picture . how did it ?
&quot; a pale blue system . &quot;
because we live on a wasserplaneten life .
we live on a planet that &apos;s covered in 70 percent with water .
yes , there are 97,5 percent of those salzwasser , two percent of the world &apos;s , two percent of the water on the planet , but there &apos;s also hope .
and there are new technologies , not in 10 or 20 years , but now .
it &apos;s new nanotechnologien on the way , nano-materialien .
and from a conversation with dean ornish , one of the innovators that i do with you -- he &apos;d like to share with you -- he gave me permission -- and the many of you may have heard of you . it &apos;s the size of a kühlschranks in the studentenheim .
it can generate a thousand water clean water every day -- whether it &apos;s called a tag , if you were salzwasser , polluted water -- and all of that for less than two cents per gallon .
the president of coca-cola just has just been eingewilligt , a large test-projekt of the world &apos;s einheiten units .
and if everything is fine , and i &apos;m very confident , then the technology of these technologies will apply global countries in the planet .
this is technologieunterstützte innovation that there are today .
and we &apos;ve seen this in mobile phones .
oh my goodness , we &apos;re going to get the 70 percent of mobile abdeckungsrate in developing countries until the end of 2013 .
just think that a massai-krieger with a mobile phone in the middle of kenya has a better mobil-kommunikation than president reagan 25 years ago .
and if you look at your smartphone on google , you have more access to knowledge and information as president clinton , as president years ago .
they live in a world that information and communication in terms of the surplus , as nobody ever had ever predict .
and it &apos;s better , the things that you have and i spent several thousand dollars -- gps , libraries , libraries , and the music to medical care -- will literally have literally entmaterialisiert and cheaper in your cell phone .
and the best part is , what is going to do with the domain of health .
last month , i had the pleasure , with the qualcomm-stiftung , &quot; $ $ , &quot; $ 10 million qualcomm qualcomm tricorder anzukündigen .
we &apos;re looking at the teams around the world , all these technologies in a mobile way , to connect with the device that you can talk to the device , because it &apos;s ki , you can test it or test it out , you can test it or testen your blutwerte .
and to win , it has to be a better diagnosis of a better diagnosis than a team of doctors .
imagine this device . in the middle of a developing world , where there is no doctors , but 25 percent of the krankheitslast and 1.3 percent of the employees of the healthcare workers .
if this device is sequenziert , or dna-virus , who &apos;s not known , it &apos;s ruft , it &apos;s ruft and prevents a pandemic in front of her outbreak .
but the biggest force that we &apos;re going to lead to a world of the world .
i call them &quot; the next billion . &quot;
the white lines are in the population .
we just have the 7-milliarden-marke zone .
and by the way , the biggest absicherung against a population has a better education and nutrition in the world .
in 2010 , we had just gotten under two billion people online .
by 2020 , we climb up from two billion dollars on five billion .
three billion of them , we never heard before , will be the global communication is going to join us .
what need these people ?
what will you consume ? what will you want ? what will you want ?
and instead of doing some of the things that i see is a great economic economic anschübe of history .
these people represent multiple trillion dollars that are going to be created into the global economy .
and they &apos;re going to be gesünder by the use of the tricoders , and they &apos;re getting better trained by the khan-akademie , and that they &apos;re going to be the opportunity to be 3d-drucker , and the infinite of the brain , and so much more productive than ever .
so what can be three billion growing , healthy , healthy , productive members of the menschengemeinde of the menschengemeinde of the menschengemeinde ?
how about a set of new new , never before gehörter voices .
how about the oppressed , the oppressed , wherever they are , they &apos;re in a voice to make you , to make yourself more and to produce change , for the first time ?
what are these three billion people ?
how would it be with beiträgen that we can &apos;t even predict ?
one of the things i &apos;ve learned from x prize is that small teams that are driven by passion and focus , extraordinary things , things can create extraordinary things , and we could only create the big companies and government in the past .
i want to finish with a story that really excites me .
there &apos;s a program that might know some of you .
it &apos;s a game that means foldit .
it was developed at the university of washington in seattle .
and it &apos;s a game , in which people can take a sequence of amino acids , to explore how the protein will evolve .
the after the way we can , we can predict the structure and function .
and this is very important in the medizinforschung movement .
so far , this was a problem for supercomputers .
and this game was played by universitätsprofessoren , and so on .
and it &apos;s now hundreds of thousands of people who played the game online .
and it showed that today , the human pattern is better than the protein of the best life .
and when these people came and looked at who &apos;s the best protein-ordner of the world was not an mit-professor , it was no caltech-student , and a woman , a woman who was in a reha-klinik , and night the best part of the world was .
ladies and gentlemen , what i think is about our future in our future , is the fact that we have more power than individuals , to ask us the grand challenges of our planet .
we have access to tools with exponential technology .
we have the passion of a diy-innovatoren .
we have the capital of the techno-philanthropen .
and we have three billion heads that we can work online to master the new challenges , and to do what it is .
we &apos;re going to expect a few extraordinary decades .
thank you .
i think we need to do something about a verändernswertes piece of medical culture .
and i think it starts with a medical leader and i &apos;m .
and i &apos;m sure enough i &apos;ve been in a long enough time than i can allow me to give me a piece of my own falschen prestiges to allow this .
but before i get to the subject of my presentation , let &apos;s start with a little baseball .
hey , why not ?
we &apos;re the saisonende near the saisonende and we move to the world .
we all love baseball , right ?
baseball is full of great statistics .
and there are hundreds of them .
&quot; moneyball , &quot; appears &quot; by the statistics and turns around statistics and to use this to use a great team .
i &apos;m going to just refer to a statistics from which i hope most of you have heard of .
it &apos;s the durchschnittsleistung of the schlägers .
we &apos;re talking about 300 , if a bat &apos;s schläger .
that means that the player is going to be safely three .
that is the ball to außenfeld , he &apos;s coming up , he &apos;s going to be , he &apos;s not going to be caught , and who &apos;s going to take the ball to the first base of the first , it didn &apos;t even get any time to sicherheit , and it was in safety .
three out of 10 .
you know how to call a 300ter in major league ?
well , really good , maybe a all-star .
you know how to call a 400ter ?
that &apos;s somebody in the exact same way , safely in the way .
legendär -- like ted williams -- the last major player player spieler during a regulären season on a regulären season .
let &apos;s go back to my world of medicine , where i feel about a few more comfortable , or maybe a little less probably after i spoke to you about it .
imagine you have a blinddarmentzündung , and they &apos;re going to use a operateur , whose durchschnittsleistung is in terms of the durchschnittsleistung .
somehow it doesn &apos;t work , right ?
imagine they &apos;re living in a certain remote area , and they have a beloved people with verstopften herzkranzgefäßen , and her hausarzt überweist that hausarzt to a kardiologen , whose durchschnittsleistung is at the gefäßdarstellung of 200 .
but , you know , what ?
it &apos;s a lot better . it &apos;s on the end of the branch .
and she &apos;s got a 257 .
somehow it doesn &apos;t work .
but i &apos;m going to ask you a question .
what do you think the durchschnittsleistung for a kardiologen or a nurse or a orthopäden , a geburtshelfer , a rettungsassistenten , should be a rettungsassistenten ?
so 1,000 , very good .
the truth is that nobody knows what a good surgeon or doctor should be or doctor or rettungsassistent .
what we do is we all do any of you , including me , including the world to the lake .
never a mistake , no one is going to do about the details of how this should be going to be done .
and that &apos;s the message that i &apos;m in medical school .
i was a curious student student .
in high school , a company would say that brian goldmann would learn a bluttest .
and so it was .
and i learned in my little dachstube in the sisters of the schwestern residenz , am hospital , unweit of here .
i learned everything .
in my anatomievorlesung , i learned the origins and the chairs every single one of every one of the messages that von every single principle of any arterie , which is the aorta of aorta , obskure and common differentialdiagnosen .
i even knew the differentialdiagnose to klassifizieren the differentialdiagnose tubuläre .
and the most time i &apos;ve been collecting more and more .
and i was good , i was hanging with cum .
and i left the idea of the impression that i knew everything , and i knew everything , or anything like that , as much as much as possible , as close as possible , i was immune to learn from mistakes .
and it was working for a while for a while , until i met a woman .
i &apos;m going to residierte in a lehrkrankenhaus in toronto as a woman who was brought to me in the notfallabteilung of hospital .
at that time i was the kardiologischen inventor in the kardiologischen service .
and it was my assignment when the notfallpersonal advice was looking for notfallpatienten .
and feedback on my oberarzt .
i studied woman &apos;s printer and she was in atemnot .
and when i &apos;m her , i made it keuchende sounds .
and when i was ihre her breast with the stethoskope , i could hear a knackendes sound on both sides that said they had suffered kongestiver .
this is a state in the heart , instead of pumpen the whole blood , and it turns out to be part of the blood in the lung , and filling them , and it came out of the gradually , therefore the kurzatmigkeit .
and that was not a hard to communicate .
i posed her and made me on the treatment .
i gave her aspirin . i gave her her medicine to take the pressure off the heart .
i gave her her medicine that we call diuretics , water , so they were ausschied the fluid .
and over a period of a time , a one of a minute , and they started feeling better .
i felt really good .
and i made my first mistake ; i sent them home .
i actually did two errors .
i sent them home without talking about my oberarzt .
i didn &apos;t have to do it , and i did what i &apos;d have been to my oberarzt in my oberarzt , so that he would have to be a chance to have a chance to make a whole .
and he knew it would be able to get extra information to her .
maybe i did it with good reason .
maybe i didn &apos;t want to be the hilfsbedürftige doctor .
maybe i wanted to take so successful and so much to take that i was so abused , and so i would be able to get to my patients without having to get him to him .
my second mistake was worse .
so i sent them home home , i missachtete a little voice in me who tried to say , &quot; goldman , no good idea . &quot;
in fact , i was particularly fehlte to selbstsicherheit that the nurse was going to be in the nurse , and i think , was a drucker , &quot; believe it &apos;s okay , if you go home ? &quot;
and the nurse thought about it , and he said in faktischer , &quot; yeah , i think it will go . &quot;
i remember it &apos;s been the yesterday .
so i went to the entlassungspapiere and a ambulance and rettungsassistenten and they took them home .
and i went back to work .
the rest of the day , the night , i had this nagende feeling in my stomach .
but i continued to work .
and at the end of the day i would stop doing the hospital and went to the car park to go home to the car , when i did something that i didn &apos;t do .
i went through the notfallabteilung of my way home .
and there was another nurse , not the sister who had seen the schwester after woman who had seen the drucker drucker , but one of those three words that i fear most of the most notfallärzte that i know .
other medical professionals are also going to be , but the notfallmedizin is very special , because we just see the patient &apos;s patient .
the three words : remember it ?
&quot; remember the patient that she &apos;s going to work home ? &quot;
and the nurse was going to be the nurse .
&quot; so she &apos;s back , &quot; she said in this particular tonlage .
so she was back .
she was back and die .
about an hour after she arrived at home , after i &apos;d been home home , and they &apos;d come up with her , and the family called them up , and the rettungsassistenten took them back to the notfallstation with a blood pressure of 50 , that &apos;s a dangerous schockzustand .
she barely barely barely angelaufen and blau .
that notfallpersonal , all the strands were flashing .
they gave her their blutdruckerhöher .
they closed them on the beatmungsmaschine .
i was shocked and to the inner zerrüttet .
and i &apos;m making these rollercoaster because they came to the stabilisation and i hoped that she was going to recover .
and after two , three days ago , they never would have left to .
she had suffered a behandelbaren gehirnschaden .
your family had moved .
and in the course of the next eight or nine days , they &apos;re ergaben the geschehenen .
on the day day , they go to the day -- woman &apos;s , lady , a woman , a mother and grandmother .
you say that you never forget the names of the versterben .
and that was the first time i learned this .
and the next weeks i did , i went to vorwürfe , and i learned the unhealthy shame that exists in our medical culture -- i felt alone , isolated , not the kind of healthy shame that you &apos;re talking about , because you can &apos;t talk about the colleagues on it .
you know the healthy shame , if you &apos;re a secret of the best friend , though , even though this one is erwischt , and then you get a geheimnis , and then you get a little bit of a discussion that comes to a terrible discussion , but the bad thing is , you know , you can never do that , you know , that you never
if you can &apos;t do a wiedergutmachung , and never the mistake never .
this is the kind of lehrreicher shame .
the unhealthy of the i &apos;m talking about is that the einen is doing a krank .
it &apos;s the one that tells you that doesn &apos;t mean what you did , but you &apos;re bad .
and that was what i felt .
and it wasn &apos;t the reason of my oberarztes , he was very .
he talked about the family and i &apos;m sure he made the wogen glättete and sure i was not going to get sued .
but i asked me to ask these questions .
why did i ask the oberarzt ? why did i get her home ?
and then in my worst moments : how could i make a stupid mistake ?
why am i went to the medicine ?
but it turns out , but certainly it put it down .
i started feeling better .
and then a bewölkten day , there was a hole in the clouds and the sun came out , and i told myself , i can feel better .
and i was told that if i was my effort to perfection , and never a mistake that could verstummen the voice .
and she did .
and i kept working on .
and then it happened again .
two years later , i was service in a kommunalen hospital in a kommunalen hospital , north of toronto , and i begutachtete a 25 year-old man with gereiztem .
it was much , and i was in a hurry .
he always showed up there .
i looked into the rachen , and it was a little bit of pink .
and i gave him a prescription for penicillin and sent him .
and when he went out of the door , he showed him his rachen .
two days later , i came to my next notfalldienst and my chefärztin asked me to a conversation in her office .
and she said the three words : remember you ?
&quot; remember you to the patient with the gereizten ? &quot;
it turns out that he &apos;s a streptokokken-infektion .
he had an potentially lebensgefährliche disease called epiglottitis .
you can google the google , but it &apos;s not an infection of the rachens , but the top atemwege and causes the patient &apos;s .
and luckily , he didn &apos;t die .
he got intravenöse antibotica and erholte himself a few days later .
and i went through the same tortur of satellite and self-doubt , and it was stripped me and went to work back to the work and again .
in a notfallschicht , i have a blinddarmentzündung .
there &apos;s a few times , especially if you think you &apos;re working in a hospital , that &apos;s only just 14 patients per night .
in both cases , i didn &apos;t sit home and there was no mängel in your treatment .
and i thought he had nierensteine .
i ordnete the x-ray of the kidneys , as it was without befund , my colleague , my colleague , was in the coastal wiedervorstellung of the patient &apos;s wiedervorstellung in the lower right , and called the operateure .
the other one had a strong diarrhea .
i ordnete fluide to him and asked him to rehydrieren him and asked my colleagues to survive .
and he did , and when he was a verhärtung in the right unteren , he called the operateure .
in both cases , they were operierte and it was good .
both cases nagten me , fraßen me .
and i &apos;m happy to tell you that my worst mistake only had only the first five years of what many of my colleagues claim , but total nonsense .
some of my klöpse happened over the past five years .
alone , and that , without support .
here &apos;s the problem : if i can &apos;t finish with my mistakes and you can talk about it , if i &apos;m going to be the silent voice i can &apos;t find , which really does not find me , how can i share it with my colleagues ?
how can i teach you my fault , so they don &apos;t have the same people ?
if i &apos;m in a room -- like now , i have no idea what you &apos;re thinking about .
when did you hear the last time from someone talking about fehlschlag fehlschlag ?
oh yeah , you go to a cocktail party , and there you are about to be about any other doctor , but you &apos;re not going to hear someone about the own mistakes .
if i were to ask a room with colleagues and to tell you about what i just told you about , i would not just be able to tell you the end of the second story before it would really be really uncomfortable , and someone would really be really comfortable , anyone would have a joke to change the topic and forget the rest .
and in fact , if i could have my colleagues , that a orthopäde in my hospital would have been someone to have the wrong leg , then i would have to tell me the problems in the eyes .
that &apos;s the system that we live in .
it &apos;s totally completely overwhelmed by mistakes .
it &apos;s a system in which it gives two fundamental positions -- those who make mistakes and those who don &apos;t do , the ones that are einschränkt and the schlafmangel and the einschränkung that have to share with bad results and the good results .
it &apos;s almost a ideologische response to the way that the antibodies that are dying .
and there &apos;s the idea that when we make the ones that make mistakes out of medicine , that we have a secure system .
but there are two problems .
in my about 20 years of medical records and journalism , i have a personal medical study on the medical journal of medical and falsche procedures , and i made the first thing that i wrote for the toronto star of the white star , &quot; black , black , &quot; black , black .
and what i learned is that errors are absolutely unumgänglich .
we &apos;re working in a system where every day is going to be a falsche or wrong dosiert , where the krankenhausinfektionen is a false or wrong , and always , and the devastation of verwüstung or dead .
in this state , about 24,000 canadians are at umgänglichen .
in the united states , the institute of medicine is the number of 100,000 .
both of them are strong because we don &apos;t think of the problem as we should .
and it &apos;s the crux .
in a krankenhaussystem , medical knowledge pays all two or three years , we can &apos;t keep up with it .
schlafmangel is ubiquitous .
we can &apos;t get rid of it .
we have a cognitive mistake , so that we can take a perfect krankheitsverlauf for a patient to a patient .
then i take the same patient with brustschmerz , making him verschwitzt and geschwätzig and give a slightly more breath , and suddenly the story is verachtung durchsetzt .
i don &apos;t take the same second .
i &apos;m not a robot ; i don &apos;t always do things .
and my patients are not cars ; they tell me their symptoms in the same way that they don &apos;t always have the same way in the same way .
all these are the zusammengefasst that are inevitable .
so if you take the system as if i &apos;ve been taught , and they &apos;re all gelehrt , and all the fehlerbehafteten gesundheitsexperten , then there &apos;s no more left to the end .
and you know the leier of people who don &apos;t want to talk about their worst cases ?
in my show , white coat , black , &quot; black , &quot; i would say my worst mistake , &quot; this is my worst mistake , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , &quot; what is with her ? &quot; and then i &apos;m going to give it to the microphone .
and then they expand , they &apos;re like the pupils , they &apos;re pushed back in front of your head , then you look down and really schlucken and start to tell their stories .
they want to tell their stories . they want to share their stories .
they want to be able to say , &quot; look , do not make the same mistakes that i &apos;m going to . &quot;
what they need is an environment that you can get in the situation .
what you need is a new medical culture .
and it starts with a doctor .
the new doctor is a human , white to his humanity , accepted , but it &apos;s not going to be proud of that , but it &apos;s putting it from them to learn it so that it can be passed .
they share their experience with others .
they supported if others talking about their mistakes .
and they showed others in their mistakes , not to bloßzustellen , but in a liebevollen , supportive way of doing that .
and she works in a medical culture that recognizes that people are living with life , and if that &apos;s what you do , then you &apos;re also making mistakes at time .
so that system is so eager to build on backups , which make it easier to do with the people who are going to do , and the liebevolle , to actually , can actually be able to build the gesundheitswesen , and even more , it &apos;s actually rewarded , and it &apos;s even belohnt to the potential mistakes , and that &apos;s what makes the mistakes and the
my name is brian goldman .
i &apos;m the new doctor .
i &apos;m a man . i make mistakes .
i &apos;m a bedaure , but i &apos;m trying to try to learn to learn it to it .
i don &apos;t know what you think of me , but i can live .
let me close with three of my own words : i remember myself .
i &apos;m going to talk about a tiny , little idea .
it &apos;s about veränderbare normwerte .
and because you can explain this idea in a minute , i &apos;m going to tell you three stories about the time .
the first story is about charles darwin , one of my heroes .
you know , you know , he was 1835 .
you may think that he &apos;s jagte , but that &apos;s not true .
actually , he was collected fish .
he described a lot of them as a common . &quot;
it was a zackenbarsch .
until the &apos; 80s , he was gefischt in a great style .
now he &apos;s looking at the red list .
this is a lot of times we &apos;ve heard of the galapagos or other places , it &apos;s not very particularly particularly .
yet , we still come up with the galapagos .
we still think they &apos;re originally .
the broschüren is still describe that as a pristine .
what happened here ?
the second story is to have another concept of concept , the veränderbare taillenweite .
because i experienced it when i was a lagoon in west-afrika .
i went there because i grew up in europe , and i wanted to work in africa .
i thought i could integrate myself .
and i got a terrible sonnenbrand and convinced that i really wasn &apos;t that there .
it was my first sonnenbrand .
as you can see , the lagoon was von and a few mangroves umsäumt .
there were buntbarsche of about 20 centimeters , schwarzkinnmaulbrüter , a unterart of the buntbarsche .
the fischgründe of these buntbarsche were very ertragreich , and the fishermen lived in a way of doing a überdurchschnittlich journey .
when i got a 27 years later , the fish was geschrumpft on half of its size .
and i was waiting for a five centimeter .
they were genetically modified .
there were still fish .
people were still happy .
and the fish had been lucky enough to be there .
so it has changed nothing , and yet changed everything .
my third story tells my story about my mittäterschaft in southeast asia .
in the &apos; 70s -- more at the beginning of the 1960s -- förderte europe .
fischförderung countries that were fingen in 100 ways that were fingen the industrial fishing , the industrial fishing , the industrial part , is called mutiara 4. , it &apos;s called mutiara 4. .
i went on with it , and we did all throughout the southern südchinesischen ocean and particularly in the javasee .
we didn &apos;t have words for what we started there .
now i know that it was the cause of the ocean .
90 percent of our fangs were sponges , other animals that are connected to the cause .
the biggest part of the fish , the little dots there on the rubble , the trümmerhaufen , were korallenriff-fische .
basically , the reason the bottom line is on , and then became a zurückgeworfen .
these images are extraordinary , because the transition is very quickly very quickly .
within a year , you &apos;re going to take a survey and starts with the commercial fishing .
the reason is changing . it &apos;s -- in this case -- a hard reason or a soft corals will be crap .
that &apos;s a dead turtle .
they were not eaten , you threw them away because they were dead .
once , we started a alive .
it wasn &apos;t ertrunken .
then they wanted to kill them , because you could eat them .
in fact , this mountain of the rubble of the fischern are angesammelt by fischern , if you &apos;re in areas in which they hadn &apos;t been photographed .
it &apos;s not going to document .
we change the world , but we don &apos;t remember .
we adjust our normwerte to the new level and we don &apos;t call us in memory , which was there .
if you look at it , what happens .
on the y-axis , some good things are a few good things : biodiversity , the number of orca , the green country , the green country .
it changes time . it changes , because , for people , they &apos;re all actions .
every generation look at the images that you &apos;re at the beginning of their lives , as standard , and becomes everything from it .
the difference is going to be a loss .
but they don &apos;t take the previous loss of the previous loss .
it can give a sequence of changes .
and at the end , they just want to get the erbärmlichen remains .
that &apos;s exactly what we &apos;re going to have .
we want things that are gone , or things that are not more like they were .
you might think that the problem of people , certainly , certainly as they lived in räuberischen societies , töteten , and then , after all , after a few generations realized what they did .
because obviously , a animal is very often , first before it was ausstirbt .
so you don &apos;t have to have a lot of animals .
you &apos;re always losing rare animals .
and that &apos;s why it &apos;s not going to be considered a great loss .
and over time , we focus on the big animals and the ocean , the big fish are .
they &apos;re going to get rare because we &apos;re catching them .
over time , there is a little fish left , and we think that &apos;s the normwert .
the question is , why people accept the accept .
now because they don &apos;t know that it was different .
of course , a lot of people will say , scientists , who was it really different .
you &apos;ll be able to confirm it because it &apos;s in a previous form , and they &apos;re not like that the evidence likes to describe .
there is the one that the report of a kapitäns ship that beobachtete in this area of this area , which is not used in this area , not being used , or by fischereiwissenschaftlern , it &apos;s not gewertet because it &apos;s not &quot; scientific . &quot;
so we have the situation that people don &apos;t know the past , although we live in a live societies , because they don &apos;t trust the sources of the past .
this is the enormously big role that can play a marine brain .
because in meeresschutzgebiete , we &apos;re basically going back to the past .
we &apos;re asking the past again , which people can &apos;t understand because the normwerte has changed and very low .
so , in order to see people who see a marine protected area and the einblick can do it , their normwerte assessment .
what is the people that doesn &apos;t mean that is not possible because they don &apos;t have access to -- the people in the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the city ?
here , i think , the art and the film maybe the gap , and the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the movie , the
this is the simulation of chesapeake bay .
a long time ago there was a grauwale over there , 500 years ago .
and the farbtöne and -schattierungen may remind you of &quot; avatar . &quot;
if you think of &quot; avatar &quot; if you think about why people were touched by the way that people were touched by the pocahontas-geschichte , why were they so touched by the bilderwelt ?
because it &apos;s something that has been lost in some sense .
so my excitement , the only thing i &apos;m going to give you , is focused on cameron , so he &apos;s dreht &quot; avatar . &quot;
thank you very much .
in the &apos; 80s , in communist ostdeutschland , had to have to get a typewriter , they had to register the government .
they also had to also have a sheet of beispieltext from this typewriter .
the reason for this : the government could start where a text came from .
they found a paper with falschem gedankengut , they could detect the u.s. idea .
and we couldn &apos;t understand how anybody could do something like this , and how much that would be the free one .
in our own countries , we would never do that .
but if you &apos;re going to buy a new farblaserdrucker of the leading laserdruckerfabrikanten and a page , and it has a page of the führenden , and then this side has gelbe light on every page , in a pattern that the page is clearly clearly clearly and lässt their printer .
that &apos;s what happens today .
and that seems to be a little bit of aufzuregen .
and this was an example of what our own governments are going to use technology to us , citizens .
and that &apos;s one of the three main elements of the existing online-problemen today .
let &apos;s look at what really happens in the world : we can divide the attacks in categories .
we have three hauptgruppen .
there are online-kriminelle .
for example , this is mr. dimitry golubow from kiew in ukraine .
and the motive of online-kriminellen are very easy to understand .
these people deserve money .
they use online-angriffe to earn a lot of money , a huge amount of money .
there are several known cases of online-millionären , multimillionären , who have made money through attacks .
this is wladimir tsastsin from tartu in estonia .
that &apos;s alfred gonzalez .
stephen watts .
björn sundin .
these are matthew anderson , tariq al-daour and so on and so forth .
these people have come to wealth , but they have illegal to klauen their bankkonten , and we &apos;re using money from our bankkonten , while we &apos;re doing our online-banking , or keylogger , who are using our kredikarteninformationen about the eingabe while we &apos;re shopping over a infected computers online .
the u.s. intelligence agency has two months ago , two months ago , a herrn of mr. sam jain here , and on this one , 14,9 million dollars , when it was frozen .
mr. jain itself is on the ground on the sand , the aufenthaltsort is unknown .
and i &apos;m saying that it &apos;s more likely to be more likely to be a victim of a online-verbrechens , as a whole one in the real world .
and it &apos;s very obvious that this is going to be worse .
in the future , most crime will play online .
the second angreifergruppe we can observe today is not motivated by money .
they &apos;re driven by something else -- a bit of a opinion , or through your audience , or through your audience .
groups like anonymous are over the last 12 months and are the hauptspieler on the field of online-angriffe .
so , these are the three hauptangriffsgruppen : criminals who are doing the money on how anonymous , how anonymous , the resistance , but the last group of nations are nations , governments that are guiding the attacks .
there are us cases like diginotar .
it &apos;s beispielhaft , what happens when governments get to attack their own citizens .
diginotar is a vollmachtszertifikat from the netherlands -- or it was .
in the last fall , it had to be insolvenz , because diginotar was hacked .
somebody was been learning , and it was a system in hacked .
and last week in a meeting , i hired a niederländischen of the senior group of these group , whether he had been able to do it for possible , because of the people who had died .
and his answer was yes . &quot;
now , how about people in this kind of hacks ?
diginotar is a zertifizierungsstelle .
they sell a zertifikate .
what do you do with zertifikaten ?
now , a certificate , when you take a website with https , with ssl-verschlüsselten service , for example , in example .
now we &apos;re all using a lot of us , or a lot of us , or a iran , in the iran states , as a iran , as a iran , as a iran , as you can see , they can be more trust than local anbietern , and that they &apos;re encoded over ssl-verbindungen , so that local government cannot be herumschnüffeln in their conversations .
but can you , if you look at a foreign language .
zertifizierungsbehörde hacking hacking and fake zertifikate .
and that &apos;s exactly what happens in the event of diginotar .
how do it behaves the arab spring and the things that are happening in egypt ?
now , in egypt , the aufständischen of the ägyptischen ägyptischen the hauptquartier of egyptian geheimpolizei , and they found a lot of records .
in these files , a folder was called &quot; finfisher . &quot;
and in this folder , notes in germany , the notizen of a company called the egyptian government , the egyptian government had sold a few programs that they could -- in very large -- any communications in the egyptian citizens .
they had this program for 280.000 euro for the egyptian government .
the firmenhauptquartier is right here .
so western governments have totalitäre governments with hilfsmitteln , so that can be vorgehen against their own citizens .
but western governments also help themselves .
for example , in germany , in germany , just a couple of weeks ago , a couple of weeks ago , is found a trojaner , who was used by german regierungsvertretern to bespitzeln their own citizens .
if you &apos;re going to be verdächtigt in a kriminalfall , then you will have to angezapft your phone .
but today , we &apos;re far beyond the ground .
they tap out their homes .
they use resources like the staatstrojaner to bespielen their computers with a trojaner , which allows them to police their entire communication , their online-diskussionen abzuhören .
so if we think about these things , then the obvious answer to the people is , &quot; ok , that sounds bad , but it &apos;s not because i &apos;m a braver citizen .
i don &apos;t have to worry about it !
i don &apos;t hide . &quot;
and that argument makes sense to make sense .
privacy has to be a privacy .
it &apos;s not going to be the debate .
it &apos;s not a decision between privacy and safety .
it &apos;s a decision between liberty and control .
and as we today , in 2011 , our governments have trust , but every law we &apos;re going to recover , we &apos;re always abgeben .
and we trust , we trust , we trust a future of future government , a government that we might have in fifty years ?
these are the questions that we have to spend next 50 years .
it may seem weird , but i &apos;m a big fan of betonblocksteinen .
the first betonblocksteine were made 1868 and entstammten a simple idea : modules made of cement , that fit .
betonbausteine were very rapidly the most meistgenutzte baueinheit in the world .
they brought us to build things that were larger than we , building buildings , bridges , a rock after the other .
essentially , the betonbaustein was the betonbaustein for our time .
almost a hundred years later , in 1947 , came out of lego .
it was called &quot; automatically rock &quot; . &quot;
and within a few years , lego in every household .
it &apos;s estimated that 400 billion miles were produced -- or 75 stones for any person on the planet .
they don &apos;t have to be an engineer to make beautiful homes , beautiful bridges or beautiful building .
lego , it made all possible .
lego has basically lego the betonbaustein , the building of the world , and it took a building block for our imagination .
in the same year , the bell labs was announced the next revolution in the next revolution , the next building .
the transistor was a small plastikeinheit that we were from a world of static , aufeinandergestapelten building blocks to a world in which everything was going to be .
like the betonblock , allows us to build much larger , much larger , more complex , a brick after the other .
but there is a hauptunterschied : the transistor was only for experts .
i don &apos;t personally believe that the building of our time for experts is for experts , and so i decided to change that .
i was at the media lab and i was starting to explore this idea how to do the power of engineers in the individual and designers .
a few years ago , i started developing littlebits .
let me show you how they work .
littlebits is electronic modules that have a specific function .
they &apos;re vorgefertigt , light , sound , engine , engine and sensor .
and the best part is that they connect with magnets .
so you can &apos;t put them wrong with them .
the stones are farbcodiert .
green is the issue , blue is current , pink &apos;s input and orange .
so all you need to do is a blue blue and a green one , and you can build a very quickly move .
you add a blue blue on a green , and you can make light .
you can put a switch in between them and they created a little dimmer .
take the switch out to a pulsmodul , which is , and you can do a little blinker .
so you put this buzzer for a extra effect , and they made a lärmmaschine .
i &apos;m going to stop that .
that &apos;s beyond the simple play , is actually quite powerful .
instead of having to program , you have to program , verdrahten or löten , allows you to code with simple , intuitive gestures .
so to slow down the soil or down , it just turn off on this button and it makes the momentum faster or slower .
the idea behind the littlebits is that it &apos;s a growing library .
we want to get every single interaction on this world in a gebrauchsfertigen stone .
lights , sound , solarelemente , motors , whatever .
we have littlebits kids in children and see them playing .
and it was an incredible experience .
the most beautiful thing is , how they start to understand the electronics that they do in the day-to-day world and they don &apos;t learn in school .
like a nachtlicht , or why the doors of the aufzugs offenbleiben , or like a ipod on the touch .
we also have littlebits littlebits .
so we had a designer of the designers in the electronic experience that started to play with littlebits as material as well .
here , we see filz , paper and water , like geordie ...
a few weeks ago , we brought littlebits to risd , and they gave them some designers who had no technical experience -- just very karton , wood and paper -- and they said , &quot; does what . &quot;
here &apos;s an example of a project that they made , a bewegungsgesteuerte konfetti-kanone .
but wait , this is really my favorite .
it &apos;s a hummer of play-doh , which is fear in darkness .
for this nicht-ingenieure , another material was a material , the electronics , just a different material .
and we want to make this material for all available .
so is littlebits open source .
you can go on the website , all the designvorlagen and they make themselves .
we want to be the world of the creators , the inventor , the inventor , because this world , in which we live , this interactive world , we heard .
so , pull them out and start to invent them .
thank you very much .
