you know one of the big vernügen in the world and one of the joys of the joys is in the research research , with people who can remember the old days , they can remember the alten , they can remember the old days , they berühren , they were able to take the bitteren blättern of plants .
just knowing that the jaguar-schamanen , still the milky way of the world &apos;s feelings still , or the importance of myths &apos;s belief , or that the importance of the public sense of the world &apos;s feelings is still hopeful , or that in the himalayas , as a consequence of the world &apos;s feelings , but as a result of reality , we &apos;re not going to make
and of course , we share all the same .
we &apos;re all born . we &apos;re bringing children to the world .
we &apos;re starting to start initiationsrituale .
we have to confront with the unaufhaltsamen satellite , by death , and so we don &apos;t surprise us all the singing , dance and art .
but what &apos;s interesting is the unique inflection of the liedes , the rhythm of the age in every culture .
it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s about the penan of the tree , or even the warrior in haiti , or even a karawanserei in the hängen of nordkenia , or even a karawanserei in the hängen of nordkenia , who &apos;s the kollege von of nordkenia , or even a karawanserei in the hängen of nordkenia , who &apos;s the hängen of qomolangma , everest , the gottmutter
all of these people are teaching us that there &apos;s other other ways of being other ways of finding the earth .
and that &apos;s a notion that if you think about it , you can only deal with hope .
together , the external cultures of the world is a net and kulturellem of life that the earth &apos;s umhüllt and the earth as important as important as the biological lebensnetz , which you know as a biosphere .
you can think of this cultural lebensnetz as a ethnosphäre way of all of all of the people and dreams , myths , myths and intuitions that &apos;s been inspired by the human imagination for the beginnings of consciousness , defined by the conscious imagination .
the ethnosphäre is the great legacy of humanity .
it &apos;s the symbol of what we are and what we are as a wondrous species species .
and as the biosphere were strong eroding , this is the mit -- just with greater speed .
no biologist would dare for example , that 50 percent or more of all species before , but more than any of the biological diversity -- hardly , as a optimistischstes szenarium szenarium szenarium szenarium szenarium szenarium on the cultural diversity .
and the key thing about the languages that we &apos;ve been able to do .
when any of you in this room was born on the earth languages .
now , a language is not just the economics of the vokabulars or a series of grammatikregeln .
a language is expression of human mind .
it &apos;s a means with the soul of a particular culture in the material world .
every language is like a altbestehender forest forest , a turning , a turning spiritueller , a human heritage .
and from those 6,000 languages , today , while we &apos;re in monterey here in monterey , that half of the children are not going to be ohren .
they won &apos;t be the more thing . that &apos;s what it does when nothing is , you &apos;re already dead dead .
what could be a lonely if being inverted by the ultimate umhüllt , one of the last people who have to speak to have a way to have the wisdom of the ancestors or to expect the hope of children ?
and yet , this horrible fate of it actually , in fact , there are someone somewhere on earth , about two weeks , because of all two weeks , dies , a elderly , and the last nugget of the old language of a language .
and i know some of you say , &quot; isn &apos;t it better than the better place if we all had a language ? &quot; and i say , &quot; well , &quot; well , let &apos;s get this language , &quot; well , let &apos;s get this language . &quot;
let &apos;s be kogi . &quot;
and then they would see what if they could not speak their own language .
so i want to take a trip to a journey through the ethnosphäre , a short journey of a short journey by the ethnosphäre , to try to make them understand what &apos;s actually lost .
now , there are some of us that we forgot to do when i say , &quot; miscellaneous different ways of the brain , &quot; really different ways of my mind .
take this kid on the northwest of the amazon , the people who are the people who believe that they were mythologisch from the east coast of osten from heiligen schlangen .
this is a people that &apos;s not fair between the colors and green , because the himmelszelt that people are , gleichgestellt .
they have a half a number of language and a heiratsvorschrift die die die die die , you have to marry somebody else who talks about .
and all of this is in the mythologischen past . the five of these big houses in which due to the mischehen of the mischehen , and that &apos;s where they &apos;re never going to be able to hear somebody who &apos;s learning .
they &apos;re just listening to speak .
or , one of the most fascinating tribes that i ever lived in the northeast of ecuador , a remarkably people who was in the nordosten of the 1958 before .
in 1957 , five missionare contact and made a schwerwiegenden mistake .
they threw the pictures of the air , we would be able to evaluate what we were going to evaluate as a weapon of geste , which is , they have that these people who had been able to see that these people live in their lives before .
they were lifted up this photographs from the forest , trying to see the face of the face , nothing found , and the five missionare with the speer are the visitenkarten and the five missionare with the speer .
but the waorani don &apos;t just do the one with the spear .
they sat each other .
54 percent of the deaths in the trash .
we formed the geneaologie generations , and they found two cases of natural death and when we were people with a little bit of a natural death and gaben , they commissioned that he was working on his work , and we &apos;re gonna ihn him .
but at the same time , they had a clear of the forests , which was amazing .
their predators were able to come back from seeing a planet and bestimmen , which is what was going on .
in the early age of the early age , i got a really amazing task when my professor was interested in haiti , and i was interested in haiti , the fundament of the strengths of duvalier and tonton macoutes and tonton macoutes and tonton macoutes and the poison that had been used for making zombies .
and to give this sensation , i had to give a sense of course about this remarkable faith , and voodoo is not terribly terribly magic magic .
the opposite , it &apos;s a complex worldview of worldview .
it &apos;s interesting .
if i ask you to do you , the great world , what would you say ?
christianity , islam , tweet , judaismus , or whatever .
a continent is always a ausgelassen , because the guess was that it doesn &apos;t believe in africa &apos;s religious thought , and of course there was a very low religious thought that &apos;s during the tragic diaspora herüberkamen .
but what makes the voodoo does interesting is that this is a vibrant relationship between the living and the dead .
the living one of the spirits .
the one of the major water of the large water will be werden under the large water , answers to the rhythm of the living , so that the akolyth for a brief moment .
deshab sagen , the voodooisten like , &quot; you know , white &apos;s walking around the church and the sprecht .
we dance in the temple and becoming god . &quot;
and because you &apos;re obsessed with , you &apos;re going to get away from the spirit . how can you get to the mind .
look at this amazing demonstrations : voodoo-akolythen in a trancezustand , , who die coal anfassend , a remarkable property of the brain that are in a trancezustand , which is that this is when he &apos;s going to make a state of extreme citizenship .
now , from all people who i met , the kogi from sierra nevada de santa in the nordkolumbien , the außergewöhnlichsten .
the old tyrannischen civilization , the karibische küstenebene of columbia and in of the conquest of the conquest of the conquest , in a isoliertes vulkanisches , massiv massiv , which is about the karibischen küstenebene .
in a blutbefleckten continent , these people who were never been nie by the spaniern .
until the day , they &apos;re driven by a ritual priesthood , they &apos;re regiert by a ritual priesthood , but education is very , very außergewöhnlich .
the young akolythen are going to be im by three and four years of their families , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , in steinhütten , who was going to be able to spend nine months of their mother &apos;s lap , i
and during this time , they will be culturally culturally into the values of their society , values that their prayers and their prayers , the cosmic and your prayers , the cosmic and the prayers , or we could say the ecological ecological ecological .
at the end of this amazing initiation , they &apos;ll come back to the so-called eines and the first time , in their life , at age 18 years , you see a nice , and in this kristallklaren moment , the preacher tritt , and says , &quot; look at the so-called of the first light , and say , &quot; you see , you see , &quot; look
it &apos;s so wonderful . &quot; you have to protect it . &quot;
they call the elderly brothers and say that we are the younger brothers , for the destruction of the world .
now , this level of intuition will be very important .
whenever we tried to the time and landscape , we &apos;re entweder , entweder and the old potential of the economic framework , which is a rassistischer thought or a lawyer , and say , these people are more with nature , than we .
so , not , are neither sentimental , you &apos;ll be able to get from the nostalgie .
it doesn &apos;t have a lot of place in the malariaverseuchten sümpfen , or the cold winds of tibet , but they have yet , but on a far more subtileren , which is not based on the idea of a geheimnisvollen intuition , which is that the earth can be close to the earth , because they &apos;re in the human mind .
well , what does that mean ?
it means that a little kid from the andean that the mountain is a apu-geist , which is that the mountain is a apu-geist , which is a little kid in a time that &apos;s a little kid in the belief that a whole body is a lot of rocks that can be safe .
whether he &apos;s a aufenthaltsort of a mind , or a bunch of erz , it &apos;s irrelevant .
the interesting thing is the metaphor , which is the relationship between the individual and nature .
i grew up in the forests of britisch phrases and believed that this forest are being used to be gerodet .
so , this was a different people to another friends under the kwakiutl , which believe that this forest of aufenthaltsort and gebogenen himmelsschnabel and gebogenen geister , and the kannibalischen , the kannibalischen , the kannibalischen , the nordende of the world , they would have to help them .
now , if you start looking at the idea that these cultures are different realities , you can understand some of their extraordinary discoveries .
it &apos;s a picture that i only had the april in the northwest of the amazon .
this is ayahuasca , from many of you heard about many of you , the most powerful präparat präparat from the repertoire of the schamanen .
what &apos;s fascinating so intriguing is not just the pharmakologische potential of this präparats , but it &apos;s really about two different sources , but it &apos;s really about two different sources , but it &apos;s really about two different sources . it &apos;s actually about a blauer rauch of your minds , but it &apos;s really about two different sources . it &apos;s actually about a blauer rauch from
but these plant contains some very strong tryptamine of the serotonin , dimethyltryptamin-5 and methoxydimethyltryptamin .
if you &apos;ve seen the yanomami , as you saw this stuff , which is , these substance which they contains various species of spiders .
this powder is about as like a gewehrlauf beschossen , gesäumt gemälden and landing landing on a sea .
it &apos;s not going to be able to make a reality , but the resolution of reality .
i even with my professor , richard shultes , who &apos;s the man who mann the man who die the psychedelische ärea with the discovery of magical mushrooms in the moment that you could not have a lot more of them as a halluzinogen , because the moment you &apos;re in there to experience a halluzination .
but the thing that is , though , the fact that they can &apos;t get oral , because they &apos;re going through a long time , of course , vorkommendes enzyme enzyme with names , denaturiert .
you can only do with some other chemicals oral that the mao denaturieren .
now the amazing thing is that the betakarboline that are in the liane are in the liane , mao-inhibitoren of the way to go from the species that are necessary to potenzieren the tryptamine . so they ask yourself .
how can these people from a 80.000 species plants that these two morphologisch plants that don &apos;t have neural plants that when they create the plants , a kind of biochemischer version , so that the whole greater than the sum of his own parts ?
we use these great and error , which proved to be a meaningless .
but you ask the one who says , &quot; the one talks about us . &quot;
so what does that mean ?
this tribe , the cofan , 17 varianten , which they &apos;ve all been at large varianten in the forest that are the forest that are operating for our eyes as a species .
and then you ask them , how they go and say , &quot; i thought , i thought , i thought you &apos;re doing something about plants .
i mean , you know nothing ? &quot; and i said , &quot; no . &quot;
so , it turns out that you can take each of the 17 varieties of vollmond and you &apos;re singing in a different tonlage .
now , that doesn &apos;t make any sense of doktortitel , but it &apos;s a lot more interesting than stamina .
now , the problem of the problem is that even the people who are familiar with the hard position of the difficult community , they kind of irgendwie , but they kind of ansehen , but they kind of beschränken the past , as the real world , that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing is that the real world .
so , the fact is that you can &apos;t remember the 20th century , in 300 years , not a wars of his wars , but rather than a era where we &apos;ve been working and the massive destruction of biological and cultural diversity of biological diversity , or they have just been twice , so the problem is not the change .
all cultures have been formed over and over again , with new lebenmöglichkeiten .
and the problem is not the technology .
the sioux-indianer , not less confined to be less than they were exposed to the americans as they were americans to be americans , when they were horse and pferdewagen tasks .
not change and technology , the technology is the integrity of the herrschaft face of the world .
and wherever you &apos;re always looking at the world , you &apos;ll find that these cultures are not the right of the demise of the forest , and the japanischen is the yanomami , which is ready to fill out the fast halb with raw verschmutzt , which is willing to fill out the forest of the forest , or how they were being exploited by the horizont , or
or if we go into the mountains of tibet , where i &apos;m neuerlich a lot of purpose , you &apos;ll see the ugly face of the political network .
you know , the genocide , the phyische extinction of humans will be generally by humans , but the ethnozid , the destruction of the human being human being , not just verurteilt , but generally and vielerorts as part of a entwicklungsstrategie .
and you can &apos;t understand the suffering don &apos;t understand it if they didn &apos;t have the unterster .
i was able to see a young colleague from chengdu überland and just as i walked out to the statistics behind the statistics behind the statistics behind the statistics behind the statistics that are in front of those who you hear in front of those who were in front of those who you hear in front of those who were going to ermordet during the kulturrevolution .
the father of this young manns was identifiziert as a anhänger of panchen .
that meant he was assassinated in the chinese invasion of the chinese invasion .
his holiness , with their holiness in the diaspora , people named nepal .
his mother was taken to be used as punishment for -- for the crime .
he was in the age of two years to prison in prison to hide under their rockzipfel , because they didn &apos;t live without him .
the sister who did this brave did , was a erziehungslager affair .
one day they got out of a armband maos and for this übertretung for this übertretung , they had to be arbeitslager for seven years .
the suffering can be unerträglich , but the most important mind of people is something more important .
and ultimately we are really faced with a choice . we want to do in a monochromatischen world of the world &apos;s monotonie in a world health world of biodiversity ?
margaret mead , the great anthropologist before she died , that it &apos;s their greatest fear that we see it is their greatest fear that while we &apos;re going to see , that it &apos;s their greatest fear that while we &apos;re going to see , but that we have a day from a dream and forgetting that there were ever given to the possibilities .
and it &apos;s a humbling of thinking that our species may exists for 600,000 years .
the neolithische revolution that we brought the agriculture , and we &apos;ve approached the kult unterwarf unterwarf , the poetry of the schamanen of the schamanen of the schamanen of the schamanen durch and hierarchy , specialization and überschuss and überschuss and überschuss and überschuss and überschuss and überschuss and überschuss and überschuss and überschuss , and found 10,000 years ago .
modern industrial world as we know it , hardly and almost 300 years old .
now , this tells me , this is that we all answers to the challenges we &apos;re having in the ensuing millennia .
if we look at this level of the work of the work of working on the other , answers them with 10,000 different voices .
and in this song , we will be able to be able to be able to think that we are : people with conscious consciousness that are aware of the importance of the importance of the importance of optimism , and there are great moments of optimism .
here &apos;s a picture that i was at least on the northern sea of the baffin-inseln &apos;s mind when i went to the narwhal-jagd , and this man , olaya , told me a wonderful story of his grandfather .
the canadian government is not always very good at the inuit , and during the 50iger years of our sovereignty , they were forced to move into settlements .
the grandfather of this old man &apos;s refused .
the family scared of his life , he all had his name and all the tools .
now , you have to know that the inuit don &apos;t fear before the cold is , they were able to go to your advantage .
the gleitschienen of their sled were originally made of fish , who was in karibu-haut .
and the grandfather of the man was not before the arctic night or the wehenden .
he pulled out after outside , his pants came from seehundsfell herunter and defäkierte in his hand , and when the feces came to the feces , he &apos;ll find them into the shape of a messers .
he sprühte the sides of the fäkalien-messers and when it was completely frozen , he was a dog .
he enthäutete the dog , and he &apos;s got a schlitten , he took the skeleton , and i got a sled , spannte einen and entschwand on the eisschollen with the fäkalien-messer of the gürtel .
so you can do something .
and this is a symbol of vielerlei , a symbol of the resistance , and all the native people around the world .
the canadian government had the inuit in april 1999 in april 1999 , the complete control of a field that has bigger than california and texas together .
it &apos;s our new heimatland and heißt nunavut .
it &apos;s a very careful area . they control all the mineralvorkommen .
a amazing example of how a nation , a nation that can be using his value and can reach .
and finally , i think it &apos;s quite obvious , at least for those of us who are the ones that are the erde of the earth are the gereist , to realize that they &apos;re not taken at all .
they are the heimatländer of someone .
they represent parts of the human imagination that &apos;s in the past times , and for all of us , the dreams of us will have dreams of the kids like dreams of our own children , like the dreams of hope .
what we &apos;re trying to do with national geographic is that we think that politicians never achieve anything ever .
we believe that we can &apos;t be happy , but we believe that the best institution can change the world and so we &apos;re probably the best institution in the world today , our website is a website that &apos;s a website that &apos;s 35 million hits every month .
156 nations are broadcasting our fernsehkanal .
our conversation will be gelesen by millions .
and we &apos;re going to add a series of trips to the ethnosphäre , where we &apos;re using our audience to low-income with such innate , that we can see a lebensmöglichkeit in a really multicultural world , where the wisdom of all humans can find the wisdom of all human beings , to our common well-being .
thank you .
and what i first like you is , as quickly as quickly as possible , a new technology that we have , is a new technology that we &apos;re microsoft than a year , it &apos;s a new technology that we have , and it &apos;s a environment in which you either either have to deal with huge amounts of visual data .
we see a lot of gigabytes in digital photos that you can seamlessly and fortwährend heranholen , we can make them in a way .
and it doesn &apos;t matter how many information we look at the way that these are the collections are or how big the images are .
most of you are digital charges of a camera , but this one is a scan from the kongressbibliothek and it &apos;s in a field of 300 megapixeln .
it doesn &apos;t make any difference , because the only thing that can see the number of the system is the number of control of the system that is the number of control of your screen in every moment . it also has a very flexible architecture .
this is a whole book for nichtbild-daten .
this is bleak &apos;s house . every column is a chapter .
to prove that it &apos;s really about a text and not a picture , we can do something like this , to show something like this one real representation of the texts and not a picture .
perhaps it &apos;s a artificial way to read a e-buch .
i wouldn &apos;t recommend it .
this is a realistischerer case . this is a braille of the guardian .
every big picture is the beginning of a abschnitts .
and that gives you really pleasure , and the good experience a real experience of a magazine or a newspaper , which is a kind of medium with a private größenordnungen .
we also have something about the corner of the world &apos;s climate .
we have a false display with very high resolution that we have much higher than a normal display , and we added the inhalt .
if you want to see the functions of this car , you can see here .
or other models , or even more efficient .
and this is what really , this ideas , these limitations for the other hand , for the other spot on the screen .
we hope that no more pop-ups and other words , it should be necessary .
of course , the issue is actually creating applications for a technology like this .
and i want to spend a lot of time , except to say that we will be able to be able to get to this area .
but these are all the streets in the waters of the u.s.a. , but these are all streets in the waters , but these are all streets in the waters , but these are all streets in the waters , but these are all streets in the waters , but these are all streets in the waters , but these are all streets in the waters , but these are
übereinandergelagert up on the side of the picture of the nasa picture .
let &apos;s do something else that happened .
now , even live in the internet . you can browse it .
this is a project with the title of the title of photosynth that actually has two different technologies .
is a seadragon and the other one is a very good research on computervision , a universitätsstudenten of university washington , under the advice of steve seitz calls on steve seitz of steve seitz calls on the beratung of steve seitz on the beratung of the uw of the uw of the uw .
rick szeliski of microsoft research was done . a very good collaboration .
so this is live in the internet . it &apos;s going to be driven by seadragon .
you can see that if we create this kind of views , where we can take through images and subtracting them to make this experience of the most amazing things .
but the spatial orientation in the picture is actually being in the act of meaning .
the computervision-algorithmen haben these pictures combined , and they get the real space that would wipe the alle in the canadian rockies , and you see elements of stabilisierten slides , or panoramischer bildverarbeitung and all of those things have been able to put all the räumlich in the relationship .
i don &apos;t know exactly if i can take you to you .
there are the much more livable .
i &apos;d like to go to a geradewegs datensätze of noah &apos;s brain region and this is from a early prototype of photosynth that we &apos;ve been working on the summer behind this technology , which is , i think it &apos;s really the punchline behind this technology , which is , when you look at environments that we &apos;ve been working on the website .
we had to worry about the lawyers and worry about .
this is a rekonstruktion of the cathedral of the kathedrale , the ausschließlich of flickr , they just give up notre dame in the flickr and they &apos;re just going to get images of men and männern and on the universitätsgelände course , each of these orange cone , a picture that came out of that model .
so , all of these , and they all have a whole way in the relationship with the relationship .
and we can navigate this very simple way .
you know , i never believed that i &apos;m going to work with microsoft .
i &apos;m very thankful for the reception here .
i guess you can see that this is a lot of different types of cameras : everything is , from the handy-kamera to professional slrs , a pretty large number of you that are all in those environment .
and if possible , i &apos;ll find some of the things .
many of you are from the japanese and usw. , and we &apos;ve been doing it for us to be on the side of faces , and so many of you are on .
somewhere there somewhere of photographs -- here &apos;s what they are .
this is actually a poster lady that was going to be a clue .
we can change from the poster to a physical view of this environment .
the point is that we can do things with the social environment , and it &apos;s now data from all the collective memory of how , visual mass extinctions -- and everything else is linked to the earth .
all of these pictures are connected to each other and it &apos;s something that &apos;s bigger than the sum of the parts .
they get a model that &apos;s coming from all over the world .
consider this as the sequel of the work of stephen lawlers in the u.k. .
and that &apos;s something that &apos;s through the complexity that people use and regulate the users of the users of the users of the future .
their own photos you &apos;re called metadaten , which is a different person .
if anybody did the effort and all of those and all this imagery and i can all agree to you who are all about who they are all , then my photo from other people to use and so much of the other people in the notre sozialer social social people in the notre social social experience with using the use of other anbietern .
and of course , the immense things are the most vulnerable range of any kind of interesting part of the earth that not only have been exploited by überflüge or satellitenbilder and so on , but through collective memory .
thank you .
i understand right ? your software enables that a particular time , in the next decade , all of the images that are in common in the world in the principle .
yes . she &apos;s not going to discover anything else .
if you want to get away from the images .
and they do this because of the content in the images .
and that &apos;s really exciting when you think about the abundance of the semantischen information that many of these images .
how if you take a websuche for pictures where you can take a websuche for the images , where you can do a lot of information about what &apos;s called the picture .
but what if you were doing with all of your images ?
then the sea of the semantischen querverbindung and the system that evolved to itself , really . it &apos;s a classic netzwerkeffekt .
blaise , this is incredible . congratulations .
they have a lot of them .
i &apos;m going to tell you some things from my book , as i hope , in the way that you &apos;ve already heard with other things you &apos;ve already heard , and i &apos;m going to make myself a few connections , if you don &apos;t have these .
i want to start with what i call &quot; offizielles . &quot;
the official dogma of what ?
the official glaubenssatz of all western societies .
the official dogma works , if our goal changes the maximize of our citizens , in the maximierung of the freiheit of the brain .
the reason that freedom is good , is good , valuable , meaningful , meaningful , sinnvoll , a unverzichtbare voraussetzung .
when people freedom , then each of us are allowing us to do things that we could have the good maximize that we could choose to choose .
the way to maximize freedom is to maximize .
the more choices people have , the more freedom of freedom , and the more freedom they have , the more people have done .
this is , i think , so deep in our way that it may be no longer ever .
and it &apos;s also deep deep in our lives .
i &apos;m going to give you some examples of what makes modern progress .
this is my supermarket . no big deal .
i want to say about a salatdressing of salatdressing .
there &apos;s 175 dressings in my supermarket when you take the 10 different extra olivenöle and 12 balsamico-essig that they can buy a large number of vast salat herzustellen that they can buy a large amount of their own network , in which means that no one is in the store for them .
so that &apos;s what the supermarket is .
and then they go to the verbraucher-elektronik of the verbraucher-elektronik of a stereo -- speaker , cd-player , ein , radio , radio , radio , radio , and in this one electronics , there &apos;s so many stereo facilities .
we can make a zillion different stereo plants that make plants stereo plants that have offered that one .
they have to admit that the big selection selection .
in other realms -- the world of communication .
there was a time i was a boy , because i was a boy , because i was a boy , because he was a boy , he was going to go from the age bell .
they have a phone . they didn &apos;t get it .
a consequence of that was that the phone never had .
these days are gone .
we now have a infinite selection in the world , especially in the world of the mobile phones .
this is the mobile phones of the future .
my favorite one is in the middle -- mp3-player- , nasen-haar-trimmer and crème fackel .
and you should have this until now they haven &apos;t seen in their business , you can make sure that they will soon .
and what &apos;s doing it to be a lot of people to go into the businesses and ask them .
you know what the answer to this question ?
&quot; no answer . &quot;
it &apos;s not possible to buy a cell that doesn &apos;t do too much .
in other aspects of life that are much more bedeutsamer than the kaufen of the reasons , which is the same explosion of choice .
health -- it &apos;s not the case that they go to the doctor and the doctor &apos;s telling you what to do .
instead , they go to the doctor and the doctor says you , we could make a better thing or we could do b .
a whole lot of the time and risks .
b has this same and risks . what do you want to do ?
and they say , &quot; doctor , what should i do ? &quot;
the doctor says , a while has this quantum benefits and risks and b has released the same and risks .
what do you want to do ?
and if you say , &quot; if you were , doctor , what would you do ? &quot;
doctor says , &quot; but i &apos;m not it . &quot;
the result is -- we call it &quot; patient &quot; -- it sounds like a good thing , but in reality is a good thing , but in reality is a good thing , but in reality is a good thing , and that &apos;s why not in the best constitution , and that &apos;s why not in the best constitution is a decision to make a decision -- namentlich
there &apos;s a staggering marketing for verschreibungspflichtige medicine for people like them and me , that when you think about it , don &apos;t make sense because we don &apos;t buy them .
why do you buy us if we can &apos;t buy ?
and the answer is , you &apos;ll expect the doctor to the next morning , and to ask a change in the prescription .
something is so powerful as our identity is now a question of choice , as this slide .
we don &apos;t really have identity , we invent them .
and we &apos;re inventing inventing we &apos;re going to reinvent as we are just to rethink as we want .
that means that every day , when you &apos;re going to wake up to the morning , you have to decide what kind of person you want to be .
in terms of marriage and family , there was a time that was almost everybody and they could quickly as quickly as they could , and then they were so quickly how they could .
the only true choice was &quot; who was not when you do , not when they did .
today , all of us is simply too simple .
and i teach teaching a teaching undergraduate students , and i &apos;m going to give you 20 percent less than i used to .
and that &apos;s not because they &apos;re less smart , and not because they are less carefully .
it &apos;s because they &apos;re busy yourself , &quot; should i marry , &quot; should i marry , &quot; should i marry now ?
should i marry later ? should i do children , or just a career ? &quot;
they are all einnehmende .
and they &apos;ll answer this question , that means all the tasks i &apos;m going to give you and not allowed to get a good grade .
and in fact , in fact , these are important to beantwortende questions .
so , we &apos;re blessed to be blessed with the technology that we can make every every day of every day of every room on the planet -- to work on the randolph hotel .
there &apos;s a corner of the ich of the earth i &apos;m going to tell you about the wirelesslan .
i &apos;m not going to tell you because i want to use it .
so what it means is that we have incredible freedom we can do in terms of work and again and again , whether we should work or not work .
we can play our kids in the football , and we have our phone at the hip , and our blackberry to the other hip , and our laptop , our laptop .
and even if you all have the literature , every minute in the world , we should be able to think of the child &apos;s life , &quot; should i think this call .
should i answer this email ? should i write this letter ? &quot;
and even though the answer to the question , &quot; it &apos;s not certainly the best experience of their child in their child &apos;s very different than it .
all of us where we look at large things and little things , material things and lifestyle , life is a question of choice .
and the world we lived in the world we lived .
so i want to say , there was some of the choices , but not all was a question of choice .
and the world is looking at this .
and the question is , the good news or bad news ?
&quot; yes . &quot;
we know all of that is well , so i &apos;m going to talk about what &apos;s bad about it .
all these choices have two effects , two negative effects .
a effect , paradoxer , it &apos;s that he &apos;s going to give you a lot of survival .
so many options can choose to choose , it &apos;s not a hard to decide at all .
i &apos;m going to give you another example of an investitionen , a survey about investment in volunteers .
a colleague of mine had access to investitions-akten von , who &apos;s the giant fondgesellschaft of about a million and about 2,000 different .
and what they found was 10 investmentfonds the arbeitgeber , , took the two percent .
they offer 50 percent of the 50 percent employees are just as if they &apos;re just five five percent . why ?
because it &apos;s 50 investmentfonds , the choices is so hard to choose what you want it to be in the morning .
and then tomorrow , and then tomorrow , and then tomorrow , and tomorrow , of course , never come from .
now , you know , that &apos;s not just what it means to be human food when they don &apos;t eat into the retirement because they don &apos;t have enough money to the world , it means that decisions makes decisions so hard to do that they are large investitionsangebote .
by not least them to 5,000 them until 5,000 dollars per year on the arbeitsgeber , who &apos;d been happy to have their contributions .
now , a consequence of a lot of choices .
and i think it &apos;s what the world looks like this .
they want to be really really excited when it &apos;s the eternity , right ?
they don &apos;t want to choose the wrong of the nation , or gar the wrong salatdressing .
so this is a effect . the other effect is that even when we get the paralysis of the paralysis of the choices that even when we get a entscheidung basis and a decision , we end up with the result of the choices as if we could have the possibility to decide between less possibilities .
and there &apos;s several reasons for this .
one of them is actually a really auswahl of the great selection of salatdressings , if you &apos;re buying a person , and it &apos;s already perfectly important ? it &apos;s just imagine that they could have the decision and this little bit of wirkt negative , and that little bit of works negative , and that little bit of works negative , and that little bit of works negative
the more opportunities there is , the more simple thing is , the easier thing is disappointing to the choices they meet .
secondly , what economists call economists .
dan ariely , dan hat a big point of view , he was a big point of how much the way we evaluate things about what we compare it .
well , if there is a lot of alternatives , it &apos;s just a attraktive properties that you &apos;re looking at , you &apos;re less effective properties that you do they voted .
here &apos;s a example . for the one of you who don &apos;t have a new yorker , i apologize me .
but here &apos;s what they should have .
here &apos;s a couple of the hamptons .
very expensive .
beautiful beach . great day . they &apos;ve got it all for themselves .
what could be better ? &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; it thinks &quot; it &apos;s about .
everybody in my manhattener neighborhood is gone .
i could go straight off my house . &quot;
and he &apos;s just the other weeks of thought that he &apos;s able to have the opportunity to have a great parking lot .
oppertunitätskosten senken the satisfaction that we can preserve through our choice , even though we &apos;re fantastic .
and the more opportunities that we have more attractive to the choices that we are going to take into the oppertunitätskosten .
here &apos;s another example .
now , this cartoon does some statements .
he &apos;s doing a saying about how to live and perhaps slow to the things .
but a big point of what he does is always who makes them to a thing , they make things not to do other things .
and these other things like many of these devices have characteristics , and it &apos;s going to be what they &apos;re doing less .
third , eskalation of the expectations .
this has me when i wanted to exchange my jeans .
i &apos;m wearing jeans , almost all the time .
and there was a time in the middle of a species , and they were having , they were bad gepasst , they were incredibly unkomfortabel and if they were schlecht , they were incredibly unkomfortabel and often had enough , they had plenty of enough , they were called &quot; anzufühlen . &quot;
so , in fact , in new york , i was going to buy new jeans to the old days of the old and i said , &quot; i &apos;d like to have a couple of jeans here , here &apos;s my height . &quot;
and the sales said , &quot; do you want to get schlanke , slightly anliegende or weite ?
do you want to do buttons or reißverschluss ? stone or acid ?
do you want to use their holes ?
like they want to get down to the bottom , kegelig , blah , blah , blah , &quot; and so on .
my pine was , and i spent myself , &quot; i &apos;d like to have the way that the only way was the only way . &quot;
he had no idea what that was , so i spent all of these innovations jeans , and we spent all of these innovations jeans , and i say , the truth -- with the best , jeans that i had ever .
i had better . all these choices would make it better .
but i felt bad .
why ? i wrote a whole book to try to explain to me .
the reason i felt was bad , with all these similar ways , my expectations for a good couple of their expectations , went up .
i had very low expectations . i didn &apos;t have a concrete expectations that it was only in a way .
when they were in 100 species , so you should have perfect , a gentleman should be perfect , and they should be perfect , and they should be perfect , and they should be perfect , and they should be perfect .
but what i got was good , but it was not perfect .
and so i &apos;ve got to do what i do , and what i had was seeing the what i expected .
the most recent opportunities in the lives of people are the expectations of the expectations that we &apos;re going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able
and this brings up to less happiness with the results , even though the results are good .
nobody in the world of the world &apos;s knowing , because if you were , you know , you all know it .
the truth is more like this .
the reason is that we used to do anything better than anything was worse than anything was worse , it was possible to make it possible for people who were a very surprising way of surprise that was a very surprising way of surprise that was a very surprising way .
today , in the world we live in the world -- we &apos;re wealthy , we were wealthy , with perfection , the best thing you can do is that things as well as you &apos;re expecting .
they won &apos;t be pleasant as pleasant as their expectations because my expectations , my expectations .
the secret to the glücklichkeit -- that &apos;s what they all came -- that &apos;s what they all came -- the secret to the glücklichkeit are low expectations .
i want to say -- a short autobiographischer moment -- i &apos;m with a woman and she &apos;s really quite wonderful .
i couldn &apos;t do better . i didn &apos;t niedergelassen myself .
but niederlassen is not always what a bad thing .
finally , a consequence of the world &apos;s kaufens , at the same time , at the time of a bad age , at the time of a bad age , at the time of a bad age , at the time of a bad age , and you can wonder why , the answer is clear , and they &apos;re asking , the world is responsible . the world
if hundreds of different species of jeans are available , and they buy the way , and you &apos;re going to buy you wonder , why is responsible ?
it &apos;s also clear that the answer is : it &apos;s the question .
they could have better .
with 100 different species of jeans , there is no excuse for error .
and so when people make decisions and even though the results of the decisions are good , you feel disappointed about it , they &apos;re missing themselves .
clinical trials were in the industrial world in the past generation .
i think a signifikanter -- not the only one , but a signifikanter beiträger beiträger zu beiträger zu , and also the selbstmord , beiträger beiträger , and also the selbstmord , that people have experienced the people so high . and then , if you have to explain those experiences , you think it &apos;s your fault .
and so the bilanzergebnis thing that we &apos;re going to do better about the world , and we feel bad .
so let me remind you .
this is the official dogma that &apos;s a lesson that we all have to hold it completely wrong . it &apos;s not true .
there is no question that &apos;s better than not , but it doesn &apos;t follow , but it doesn &apos;t follow , but it doesn &apos;t make more choices than anything .
there &apos;s a magical amount of . i don &apos;t know what it is .
i &apos;m pretty sure that we &apos;ve developed this point of the selection in the selection than we &apos;ve been improving .
now , as a grundsatz question -- i &apos;m almost ready -- as a rule of the thinking , which is that the thing about the thinking , what all of these choices is from the interior in the industrialized societies , the materials .
there are many places in the world , and we &apos;ve heard about many of you , but the problem don &apos;t have the big selection .
your problem is that they have too little .
so i have a strange problem of the modern , rich , rich , western societies .
and what is so frustrating and annoying is : steve levitt has told you about how this expensive and hard to installierenden , they don &apos;t help them . it &apos;s a waste of money .
what i &apos;m telling you is that these expensive , complicated decisions -- it &apos;s not easy to help them .
they even hurting .
you &apos;re concerned about that .
when something that &apos;s what the people of our society enables to meet our society to meet people in the societies in the societies of the human dignity , not just the lives of human beings , but our dignity will be enhanced .
economists call this a pareto-verbesserungs application .
einkommensumverteilung is going to worry about all of the things -- not just the poor -- because all these big selection choices .
finally , you read this cartoon , and you &apos;re asking this , and you know , a hochentwickelte says , &quot; ah ! what does that fish ?
you know , you know , none of that goldfischglas . &quot;
verarmten phantasie , a kurzsichtige view of the world -- and that &apos;s the kind of wie of the first time .
but the more i thought about this , the more i got to the view of fish that knows .
because the truth is that if you put the goldfischglas , so that all of you can &apos;t have freedom . they have paralysis .
if you put the goldfischglas , so that all bets are possible , they &apos;ll be able to get the happiness .
they will increase the happiness .
everybody needs a goldfischglas .
this is almost linked to limited safety -- also for the fish , definitely for us .
but the abhanden of a dish is a prescription for misery , and i guess i &apos;m interested in disaster .
thank you very much .
you know , i &apos;ve talked about some of these projects before , about the human genome and what the mean , and about the discovery of the discovery of the genes of genes groups .
in fact , we &apos;re starting to start with a new point : we &apos;re going to have the biology , and now we try to create the digital code of biology to get new life in a new way of biology .
we &apos;ve tried to ask them significant questions .
what is life ? it &apos;s something i think many biologists tried to understand and that &apos;s on different levels .
we &apos;ve got different ways to give it to the minimum components .
we &apos;ve been digitized nearly 20 years . as we &apos;ve been das the world 20 years .
now let &apos;s try to ask whether we can make a living , or whether we can make new life , from this digital universe ?
this is the map of a small organism , mycoplasma geitalium , who &apos;s the smallest genome of a species that can replicate itself , and we tried to do that with a greater genome .
we &apos;ve done it on about a hundred genes of the 500 or so that there are .
but if we look at this very relevant map , which is very simple , in comparison , in comparison , but if we all agree that genes that we can think of these genes that we can see one of the other people that we can see one of the other people that we can see one more than a living cell .
so we decided that it &apos;s so determined that it &apos;s the only way to take forward to actually do this chromosome to actually make the individual components and ask some of those kinds of questions .
and so we started using the question , we can make a chromosome of chromosome ?
it allows the chemistry of these molecules , which hasn &apos;t been done before ?
and , if we can do that , we can start doing it .
a chromosome is so the way to be a piece of inertes material .
our steps were going to kill exponentially .
genetic genetic code is very slowly , but our last point would sit on a exponential curve .
we started 15 years ago .
it took some years to be a few years of starting to a bioethischen of the first experiments before we did the first experiments .
how do it turns out of a very difficult thing .
there are tens of thousands of thousands of around the world , 30 , 30 , 30 , but it &apos;s a degenerativer process , so the longer you have a piece of doing more mistakes .
so we had to create a new way to create this little pieces and the mistakes of the mistakes of the time .
that was our first attempt to try and start with digital information , the genome is x 174 .
it &apos;s a little virus of bacteria .
we made little bits , made a fehlerkorrektur and had a dna molecule of about 5,000 letters .
the original phase came along , as we came up with this piece of inerte and a bacterium , and the bacteria started to read the genetic code and made a viral code .
viral got taken from the cells and came back and forth , and töteten e. coli .
recently , i &apos;ve talked about the oil and they told that model that we didn &apos;t .
they laughed more than you .
so we think that the situation is actually able to actually build your own system in a biological system .
but we wanted to go to a lot more . we wanted to build a whole building chromosome , it has more than 580.000 letters of the virus that we could build the size of the virus that we could create the size of the virus , could understand what the individual components of a living cell .
design is the key to key , and if you want to use digital information in computer games , and if you want to be a lot of information in the computer , these digital information is really going to be a constant information .
when we first saw the genome , we &apos;ve got the fehlerrate of a mistake .
we found in the resequenzieren of 30 error . if we were the originals , we &apos;ve never been able to have a hochzufahren .
one part of design is it , i &apos;m going to make the 50 letters , and the 50 letters to the other 50-buchstaben , and they have to have to build smaller sub-einheiten , so that they &apos;re building the risk .
we have unique elements here .
you may have heard that we have waterzeichen .
think about it , we have a 4-buchstaben code , a c , g and t. , and i &apos;m going to think about it , and i &apos;m wearing sweatpants and ts .
triplets of this letters -- these letters are about 20 amino acids ; and there &apos;s a single purpose of every one of those amino amino acids .
so we can use the genetic code for our words , sentences , thoughts .
initially , we just signed up .
some people were not going to have a rock .
we have the pieces so we could just take enzymes and we could just have this paper and again and again .
and we &apos;ve made a new way , starting starting to create starting starting with the fünf- to siebentausend , they put this together to make these aneinander to make these wieder to 72.000 .
in every step , we have this pieces of the surplus in the surplus , we could make them because we tried to create a very robust process of what you &apos;re going to see in a minute .
we tried to get to the point of automation .
so , this looks like a basketball-playoff .
if we &apos;re seeing this really cool stuff -- with a 100,000 -- they &apos;re just going to be able to grow in e. coli , it just exceeds the modern biology , and so we &apos;re all other ways to other people .
we know from a mechanism called homologe rekombination , called biology , the biology uses dna to fix these pieces .
here &apos;s a example of it . there &apos;s a organism called deinococcus radiodurans of the three million rads of rad .
you can see that his chromosome just starts to fällt .
12 hours later , it has been returned to the same way .
we have thousands of organisms that can do .
these organisms can be completely ausgetrocknet , they can even live in the world .
i &apos;m absolutely secure life in space and can move to aquatischen conditions .
in fact , nasa has shown that there &apos;s a lot of them out there .
here &apos;s a gefügeaufnahme from the molecule we &apos;ve created this technique -- actually , we just have hefe-mechanismen using this processes , we just have the richtigen , we have this kind of fügt , and they &apos;re putting these dann together .
this is not a elektronenmikroskopaufnahme mikroskopaufnahme mikroskopaufnahme .
it &apos;s so a big molecule that we can see it with the lichtmikroskop .
this is a great deal of six seconds .
that &apos;s the state we only had to have recently .
this is about 580.000 letters of genetischem &apos;s code , it &apos;s the greatest molecule with definierter structure of human structure .
it has a molekulargewicht of over 300 million .
if we were building it with a schriftgröße of 10 and without expecting to print it 142 pages , just to be able to address this genetic code .
well , how do we make a chromosome chromosome ? how do we activate it ?
clearly , it &apos;s a virus , it &apos;s a lot more complicated with bacteria .
it &apos;s also easier to do it if you do it in the process of how we do it , you take the one , you take the best out , and that &apos;s exactly what they all heard about the fetus .
in archaebakterien , it &apos;s the chromosome in the cell , but only recently we showed that you can build a complete area of a different area of a cell to the other , and that activate of this activate .
we reinigten the chromosome of a mikrobenspezies . we &apos;re developing , these two places are both of their minds and mice . we gave some extra-gene of the time , and it was very amazing than we could choose that chromosome , and it was very amazing than we could choose that chromosome to destroy all the proteins and mice . we gave them a lot of appreciation of
the new chromosome was doing in the cell .
in fact , we thought that this is the end , but we tried to give the process of doing something more .
this is the hauptmechanismus of evolution here .
we &apos;re all kinds of species here , which is a second chromosome , or a third of irgendwoher , every time thousands of events in a second , in a second , a spezies hinzufügend .
so , people who think of evolution as a gene that &apos;s a stage of a stage is a lot of biology .
there are enzymes called restriktionsenzyme , actually , dna origami is actually going to digest dna .
that chromosome that in the cell was made of it ; we &apos;ve been seeing the way we &apos;ve been around .
it was taken in the cell , and the other chromosome was similar as a theoretical material , and so we had a cell with a new chromosome .
it verfärbte the blue , because of the genes we &apos;ve been doing .
and after a very short time , it had all been lost all the species and konvertierte completely in a new species based on the new software that we have given in the cell .
all the proteins changed the membranes -- when we didn &apos;t read the genetic code , it was exactly what we &apos;ve been doing .
it may like genomic alchimie , but we can transform to change the software-dna , things quite dramatically change .
now i &apos;m sure that this is not the genesis -- that &apos;s based on the level of billions of years , and that &apos;s true for 3.5 billion years , and that &apos;s true for 3.5 billion years .
and i have very , very , we &apos;re able to have a new form of the cambrian explosion in creating a new form of the cambrian explosion , in this digital design .
why should we do that ?
i think it &apos;s pretty obvious in terms of what we need .
we &apos;re about six billion people in the next 40 years .
to put it in my context , i was born in the year .
today three people on this planet in the year has been working on , within 40 , it will be four years .
we have problems with food , with the water and clean water , medicine , treibstoff , treibstoff .
it &apos;s going to offer a challenge of all the things .
we need to have a über period of coal tons , 30-plus billion barrels oil , which is 100 million people a day .
when we think about biological processes , or to replace it , it &apos;s going to replace a huge challenge .
then , of course , there &apos;s all the co2 of this material that goes into the atmosphere .
we &apos;ve now got , from our discoveries from our discoveries from all over the world , a database of about 20 million genes , and i want to believe that those are the most advanced future .
the elektronikindustrie had a military and look at the diversity of the tree .
we &apos;re feeding this in the first limits of biological reality and one of our imagination .
we have technologies on the fast challenges of this fast system , to do that we call kombinatorische genetics .
so we have the opportunity to build a big robots to build the millions of chromosomes .
if you think of these 20 million different genes or drugs to optimize these processes to optimize oktan , or drugs , new ways we can only have a little more than more than the last 20 years .
and it &apos;s just nurmale selection . we can go to lebensfähigkeit selektieren , production of chemicals and treibstoffproduktion and so on .
this is a recording of a wirklicher of the time we work with the fact that you can actually do a hinsetzen and new species of the computer , are kenn in the computer .
you know , we don &apos;t necessarily know how it &apos;s going to look like , we know exactly how much genetic genetic code .
we focus on the number of the fourth generation .
they recently corn , recently , what &apos;s doing is a bad experiment .
we have a potential of zweiten- and third generation the more effective herauskommen , the more powerful species of butanol , like oktan or different kinds of butanol .
but , how we think the only way is that we &apos;re doing with biology , you &apos;re going to see co2 , and so we work as we see co2 , and so we work in the cells , we &apos;re working on the cells of their cells , and so we work in the cells , and so we work in the cells , and so we work
and we think we &apos;re going to be the first ones with the treibstoffen of the fourth generation , and that &apos;s about 18 months .
sunlight and co2 are a way to do -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
but in our discovery , the world we all have all kinds of different ways .
this is a organism we described .
he lives in the deep sea , about ein-einhalb miles , where almost nahezu wassertemperaturen .
it &apos;s the same co2 in methane in methane is from hydrogen as complex .
we study whether we can use a gespeichertes carbon footprint which could easily use co2 in fuel , konvertieren the co2 in fuel , um the co2 .
within a brief amount of time , we could be able to solve a fundamental issues of life .
you know , we really have -- moderate goals like the ersatz of the entire petrochemischen industry , right . so if you can &apos;t do that ?
but we &apos;re working on doing this the same coin for development of vaccines .
you &apos;ve seen this year , we &apos;ve seen this year , we &apos;re always a year and a dollar when it comes to the right vaccine .
i think that &apos;s what changed the fact can be used by using rekombinante vaccines in the vorhinein .
that &apos;s how the future might be , could perhaps , with changes , can be beschleunigt with synthetic bacteria , archaen , and maybe eukaryonten , and maybe eukaryonten .
we &apos;re only to improve human beings . our goal is simply that we have a chance to do that to do that , thank you very long enough to do that , thank you very much , much more than a chance long enough to do that .
at the last ted conference , i gave a primer for the lhc .
and i promised to come back to them how the machine works .
so it &apos;s a bit of it . and for all the time , the time , the time , the lhc is the greatest scientific experiment that was ever addressed -- 27 miles in diameter .
and his job is to create the conditions that are less than a milliardstel second after the universe -- and that &apos;s all the way to 600 million times a second .
it &apos;s just breathtaking .
this is the machine that &apos;s unterhalb from geneva .
we take pictures of these mini-urknalle in detectors .
so , i work on this work at this work , he calls himself -- 44 feet in the width of the diameter .
here &apos;s a spectacular picture of the atlas in the apparatus that you see the difference .
at 10 years , the machine ran for the first time .
and this picture was taken from atlas .
it was called jubel jubel .
it &apos;s a picture of the first strahlenpartikels that the whole distance to the lhc , then we &apos;re purposely with a part of the lhc , , to make a part of subatomic subatomic particles on the detector .
in other words , when we saw this image on the 10th , we knew we knew that the machine works , what a big triumph is .
i don &apos;t know if this is the greatest jubel process , or this is when someone who was the google side and the startseite .
it means we have a cultural impact in the scientific .
about a week later , there was a problem with these kids here -- this golden drähte of this -- this golden drähte over here -- this golden drähte over here -- this golden drähte over here -- this golden drähte over here -- this golden drähte over here -- this golden drähte over here -- this golden drähte here , here -- this golden drähte here , here --
these wires , leiten ampere when the machine on the hochleistung .
well , the engineers can be engineers , they &apos;ll look at and say , &quot; no , no , you don &apos;t . that &apos;s little wires . &quot;
you can do that because if you go very far , they &apos;ll be able to read .
at minus minus minus 271 degrees , colder , as the space between the stars , can be able to withstand this wires .
in one of the connections between neuntausend magnets in the lhc , there was a manufakturdefekt .
so the wires were geringfügig begegneten begegneten begegneten .
this was the result .
now , that &apos;s all right , if you think that the magnets will go over 20 tons and spread around about 30 inches .
so we do about 50 of the magnets , we were about 50 of the magnets .
and they had to remove them what we did .
we konditionierten them , they reparierten them .
they &apos;re all right back to your way back .
by the end of march , the lhc will be funktionsfähig .
we &apos;re going to turn it , and to be able to collect the data in june or a small sammeln , and we put our journey to find out what the building blocks of the universe .
now , of course , there &apos;s a kind of coined of the debate to value of science and ingenieurskunst and ingenieurskunst in the limits of that borders , it &apos;s easy to be easy .
i think the fact that it &apos;s so difficult to be so hard to do that we &apos;re looking at our limitations , we &apos;re really able to reach the value like the lhc .
i &apos;m going to put my abschließenden words , a english scientist , and humphrey davy , who &apos;s the , , the founder of human spirit , who &apos;s been michael , who &apos;s been michael , and that our scientific imagination was , as if he was michael , the nutzlosen of human spirit , that there is no evidence in nature that our triumphe are vollzählig ,
thank you .
i &apos;m a writer writer .
books , in writing , my profession is , of course , but more than that .
it &apos;s also my big , selfish and fascination .
and i don &apos;t expect that the worst will change .
but it &apos;s a recent thing in my life and my career , which led me to do my knowledge about this work .
this was a book that i wrote a book written -- a book written -- a biografie eat eat , pray eat , pray , love eat , pray , love , -- which , all of my previous books from over the world , and a big mega-ereignis , international bestseller-ding .
the result is that i &apos;m going to come to you where i come from , i &apos;ll be treated as if i &apos;m interested in the middle of the middle .
and what &apos;s going to be serious ! &quot;
for example , for example , they come to me and say , &quot; don &apos;t you feel that they will never be going to be successful ?
do you have no fear that they &apos;re having their whole life , and never again a book that &apos;s interested in the world ? never again ?
okay , that &apos;s what makes it happen .
it would be , worse , if i was not remember that i was going to be a teenager , when i first told me that i wanted to be a writer to the same kind of angstbesetzter response .
people said , &quot; „ , you don &apos;t have a fear , never succeed ?
did you have a fear that you can &apos;t do the humiliation of a absage ?
did you have no fear that you can get this out your life and never come out and that you &apos;re going to die on a schrotthaufen geplatzter -- your mouth with the bitter ash of the failure ? “ of the failure ?
so roughly you know .
the answer -- the short answer to all of these questions is : „ , “ .
yes , i &apos;m afraid of all these things .
and i had it .
and i still have a lot more things that nobody would take anybody .
like algae -- and other things that are .
but when i write it to write about a time , i think about it , and ask me , why ?
is that the same ?
is it logically that it should be a reminder of someone who &apos;s afraid of somebody who feel afraid of the work that he feels ?
and what &apos;s the creative thing to the creative thing you do is that they &apos;re going to do not allow us about the same way -- in a way that it doesn &apos;t do that .
my father , for example , was chemist and i can &apos;t talk to his situation in his 40 years , as a chemist he was asked to be afraid of whether he &apos;d had fear .
with your chemiker-blockade , john -- how do you do it ?
not just before you know ?
but to be fair to be fair -- the group of chemists have been nicht over the north centuries of alkoholsüchtigen people .
but we writer , but this kind of reputation we seem to have this kind of reputation , but not only the writers , but the creative of all genres , seem to have this reputation , mentally unstable .
all you need to do is what they need to do is to look at the bitter of the 20th century , the young and often get from others .
and even the ones who don &apos;t actually feel like seemed to be really neglected .
mailer mailer told me a little bit about his death sentence : „ every of my books got me a little more . “ of books .
a conscious way that you can do about their own .
but we didn &apos;t even do not even do not even say somebody like somebody like somebody , because we &apos;ve been using this kind of statements for so long time , somehow we have the notion of so powerful and collective , of course , and that art -- always , the same -- always , always , always .
the question that i &apos;m going to do is : is this idea of what i &apos;m going to do is , is completely irrelevant in order ?
you know , if you feel that with just a centimeter , because with just a centimeter , i feel not comfortable with this notion of all .
i think they &apos;re going to do .
and i &apos;ll find dangerous , and i don &apos;t want to watch how it &apos;s going to be a century .
i think it &apos;s better when we &apos;re going to live our lofty creative creative .
and i definitely know it definitely for me -- in my situation -- very dangerous , that dark lung can be in the dark path of the difference -- especially in the fact that i &apos;m going to be in my career .
that &apos;s what you see , i &apos;m a young boy . i &apos;m just about 40 years old .
i may have another 40 to me .
and it &apos;s very , very well that all i &apos;m going to write about the world than the work is , the nach success of my last book , right ?
i say , &quot; i &apos;m all kind of now all the kind of thing here now is now all kind of -- it &apos;s very likely to be my mind behind me .
oh jesus , what a thought is ! &quot;
that &apos;s the kind of idea that can enable someone to be 9 in the morning , gin , gin . and that &apos;s not what i want to do .
i &apos;d like to keep doing this work that i love .
so the question is , how ?
after some of the reflektierens , i realized that i could write about to write a kind of schützendem psychological .
i have to find a way to find a safe distance between me and my very natural appreciation of how the response to be the rise of the brain .
while i was looking for the last year of doing the models that i &apos;ve been doing , i was also in the past , and i tried to find other societies that they might be able to help whether they might be able to help , whether they might be creative , using the emotional risks , which is associated with creativity .
this quest to me , in my old greece and the old rome .
please follow me , because the circle will come back to .
but in the old greece and rome didn &apos;t believe that creativity of people are coming from people , ok ?
they thought , creativity is a kind of göttlicher diener-geist , which from a distant , unknown source of quelle source to the people -- from unerklärlichen , unknown , unknown .
the greeks nannten this divine diener-geister of creativity , dämonen dämonen .
and from socrates , he would have believed that he had a dämon , who would be weisheiten to keep distant .
the romans had the same idea , called this kind of körperlosem kreativem of a „ kreativem operation .
that &apos;s great . the romans didn &apos;t really feel that a genius was a genius .
they thought that a genius of my friend &apos;s göttliches creature , from the believed that the sprichwörtlich of a künstlerateliers lives in the walls of a künstlerateliers -- about as dobby , the hauself -- about how dobby , the künstler and artists in the performers and the result of work , and the result of work would work .
that &apos;s brilliant -- there &apos;s a distance , there &apos;s the distance to protect you from the consequences .
everybody knew that it was so interesting , right ?
the artist of the altertums was a certain extent of a certain way , like , like , for example , right ?
if your work was , you don &apos;t look at all the time for you . everybody knew you had this körperlose genius , which you have .
if your work is floppte -- not your error or what ?
everybody knew your genius was something wonderful .
so the people in the west really long time .
and then the renaissance came up and all changed . we had this big idea : let &apos;s look at the same time in the center of the universe -- about all the gods and the mysteries , and there &apos;s no idea : let &apos;s get the human individual to mystische , the orders &apos;s orders from the divine .
it &apos;s the beginning of the rational revolution and the people started to think about creativity completely from the individual individual .
for the first time , you hear people with people who hears them to people , you know , a genius , instead of a genius , instead of it , he &apos;s a genius .
i have to tell you , i think that was a big mistake .
you know ? i think , one of the one person thinks he thinks or she &apos;s like the source of all the divine of all the divine , creative , unbekanntem , unbekanntem , unendlichen , unendlichen , mysteriums is a small little bit of responsibility to get a lot of responsibility to a fragilen , human psyche .
it &apos;s like somebody who &apos;s sun .
and all the weird and all these unerreichbaren expectations and it creates all these unerreichbaren expectations in the success .
i think that erfolgs-druck our artists have been vernichtet in the last 500 years .
and , if that &apos;s true , and i think it &apos;s true -- is the question : the question is , is , is , is , is , ok .
can we change it ?
perhaps a long understanding of the relationship between humans and the mystery of the creative cancer .
perhaps not .
perhaps we can &apos;t just take the gedankengut of 500 years from 500 years , not just in a 18-minütigen lecture .
and there are certainly people in this audience who really berechtigte scientific knowledge about the idea of -- feen , people nachfolgen and feenzauber on their projects .
i &apos;m probably not going to take all of you to this journey .
but the question i want to do is , why not ?
why not so much about that ?
because it makes it as much as i think about anything that i heard about , when it was about that , the most wacky was verrückt launenhaftigkeit launenhaftigkeit launenhaftigkeit launenhaftigkeit .
a process that &apos;s trying to be tried to make it the case , so everyone knows it , so everyone here -- not always the same thing .
in fact , he can feel sometimes , sometimes it &apos;s actually anfühlen .
i had recently been a very recently last american dichterin stone , who finally , which is now about 90 of the fields , but her whole life was long , but her whole life was long , but her whole life was long , but she told me she was going to feel like you feel like you feel and hear a poem about the landscape .
she said it would be like a donnernder tape from air , and she would be like a donnernder tape from air , and they would like to air it , like a donnernder tape from air , and it would be a donnernder tape from air , and it would be a donnernder tape from air .
the over the country on them .
she felt when it came out , because it would be the earth under their feet .
she knew that they could only have one thing in a moment , and that was -- „ like the devil “ .
she ran like the devil , as the devil was tracked by the house as you diesem from this poem . it was very much about it , it was a lot of paper , and a pen had to work on them , so they could get through them , and on the sheet .
in other , they didn &apos;t stand up , she ran down and ran the house , but she did not take the house through them , but she did it on the country , and they &apos;d be able to talk about the country -- -- -- how she said -- „ after a different poet .
and then there was this moments -- the part i never forget about -- she said , &quot; there were plenty of people almost .
so , you can take the house and the poem on them and the poem , and they just got a pen , she said , &quot; she grabs a pen , and they just said -- she said , &quot; she was so as if it would take and it into that .
she made the poem on his tail and then put it back into her body and her foot to paper .
and at that one , the poem came down on the paper -- but backwards from the last word for the first word .
and when i heard that i was listening to the ist -- that &apos;s exactly the way my creative process , and “ process , the same process .
isn &apos;t like my creative process -- i &apos;m not the channel of the channel !
i &apos;m a maultier . i have to work every day for every day , and they really durchquälen me and really uncomfortable .
but even i even in my maultierart , sometimes this thing .
and i guess that many of you have done that .
i had to work or ideas that came from a source of a source of me that i can &apos;t identify .
what is a thing ? &quot;
and how do we do that we do , without having our minds , but we &apos;re in the opposite health of the opposite health ?
for me , the best things i can do this is what you can do this , i made a durfte for a magazine interview for a magazine .
we talked about this topic . and you know what ? most of his life was the embodiment of the modern modern modernen , who tried to come and with them , and with them .
but then he got older and quiet , he told me that he was one day in los angeles . and then it changed all the time for him .
he was driving with a high speed of the speed of a melody , which is how it came to the best , you know , as it &apos;s a little fragment , which is difficult to be difficult for him , and he &apos;s looking for , but he can &apos;t make them .
he didn &apos;t have a piece of paper , he doesn &apos;t have a pen , he didn &apos;t have a kassettenrekorder .
so he begins , these old beklemmung in him , like i &apos;m going to lose this thing and i &apos;m going to get from this song on forever .
i &apos;m not good enough , i don &apos;t do it .
but instead of panicked , he was just lying .
he &apos;d come all over the whole gedankengang and doing something new .
he just looked at the sky and said , „ , you can &apos;t see that i &apos;m going to go car ? “ ?
„ &apos;s actually seeing a song ? &quot;
if you really exist , come to a more serious moment when i &apos;m going to take care of you .
if not , quäle , somebody else &apos;s going to others .
go and quäle leonard . “ “ , “ “ .
his whole arbeitsprozess changed .
not the work itself . that was still as dark as the way and the one .
but the process and heavy metals who was he was he was walking out of the genius , he was able to get the genius and it was verursachte where he was doing nothing where he came to a ärger and he was able to see that it wasn &apos;t a verinnerlichtes , quälendes thing .
it was able to get a eigentümliche , somewhere , bizarre , bizarre , a kind of conversation between tom and fremdartigen , that &apos;s not tom .
when i heard this story , it has a little bit of the way i worked and i &apos;ve rescued it all over .
this idea of zweifels eat , when i was in a photograph of „ eat , pray , love , love , and i fell in one of those sort of gruben in one of those photograph in one of those photograph in one of those photograph in the photograph of the curriculum that we all fall in something , and that &apos;s what it &apos;s written , i fell
not just bad , but the worst of all times .
i started thinking , i should just give it .
but then i reminded up how tom i was talking about in the camps , and i tried it .
so i was going to be my focus on the manuscript and i &apos;m going to be in the direction of the space .
i was loud : „ , you know , you and i both you both , if this book isn &apos;t really , it &apos;s not completely fault ?
because you see that i &apos;m all i have , i &apos;m all right . i didn &apos;t have more than that .
so if you want to do better , you &apos;ve got to put back and your own the proportion of the foot .
ok , but if you don &apos;t do that , you know , you know , then the heck .
i &apos;m going to write writing , because that &apos;s my job .
and i want to give you that i &apos;m going to do for my living today , and “ “ , “ “ .
because ... at the end ... it &apos;s the end of it . it &apos;s like follows . in the u.s. nordafrikas people , zu people with saints and music , who were stundenlang for the morgendämmerung .
these are the world &apos;s been great , because the dancers were , and they were fantastic .
but again , very rarely , very rarely was actually a bit special . one of the most dramatic was actually formed .
and i know you know what i mean , because i know you all have a living performance .
it was when the dignity was stillstehen and tänzer through a kind of pforte , which he did not know anything else -- 1,000 nights , 1,000 nights . but all of you feel together .
and so he suddenly can &apos;t get more longer in human hands .
he was inspired by the inside and from the bottom and down the bottom and everything durch through a göttliches fire .
when you saw something like this , knew the people that was what that was , they called it .
they put hands together and singing , „ allah , allah , allah , allah , god , god , god , god , god .
this is god , you know ?
interesting historische : when the mohren südspanien eroberten , they brought this brauch with that , the aussprache changed zu , , allah “ , allah “ , allah “ , olé “ , olé “ , olé “ , olé “ , which you still hear about stierkämpfen and flamenco-tänzen .
if a actors in spain , something magical , „ allah , olé , olé , allah , großartig , großartig , großartig , great , great , bravo , bravo , bravo , bravo , bravo , bravo , &quot; there &apos;s a flüchtiger view .
that &apos;s great , because we need it .
but , the tricky part of the next morning , when the dancers itself wakes and recognizes that it 11 clock at a tuesday is -- and he doesn &apos;t have a fünkchen of god in a sich .
he &apos;s simply a alternder sterblicher with schmerzenden knien , and maybe he &apos;s going to never get back to this heights .
and maybe never , if somebody will call the name , when he goes , but what do he want to start with the rest of his life ?
that &apos;s hard to do .
this is one of the most popular surgery in a creative life .
but perhaps it doesn &apos;t have to have to be so much of pein when they hadn &apos;t believe that the most effective aspects of their existence .
if you may only do believe that they &apos;re a similar source of their source for a erlesene resource for a erlesene period that &apos;s in their lives that are at somebody else &apos;s going to others , if you &apos;re done with that .
if we start thinking about this , changes all of that .
so i think i started thinking with safety in the last year , while i was working on the book that &apos;s going to be -- than the dangerous , beängstigende , beängstigende , very , very expected to my abgefahrenen .
what i have to say to myself , if i &apos;m crazy about it , it &apos;s not afraid .
not a lot .
do they do .
and so , for your contribution , whatever he was going to be .
if your job is dance , dance .
and if the stupid &apos;s going to take the same genius that you &apos;re going to do you to a brief moment of wonder through your effort , then „ olé ! “ ! “ ! “ !
and if not , dance , but not the dance .
and „ olé ! “ for you , for you .
i believe in this , and i feel like we should teach .
„ olé ! “ für for you to take for you to be able to do the mere human love and the eigensinn .
thank you .
thank you .
hoo !
last year , i showed these two slides to illustrate that the arctic eiskappe , who were spending over three million years to the size of the lower 48 , 40 percent .
but this doesn &apos;t happen enough to the seriousness of this particular problem because it doesn &apos;t zeigt the thickness of the ice .
in a certain sense , the primary heart of our global herz heart of our global economy .
it grows in the winter and a typical in summer .
the next slide i &apos;m showing you is a zeitrafferaufnahme thing in the past 25 years .
the dauereis is with the founder of the paper .
as you see it &apos;s on the dunkelblau plane . this is the annual ice in the winter ; it &apos;s the summertime .
the so-called dauereis , five years old , five years old , almost almost like blood , which is from the body .
in 25 years , it will be here .
this is a problem because the warming warming is the ultimate world around the arctic ocean in the arctic ocean , where there are major quantities of carbon carbon carbon , which is when he auftaut , from microbes to methane .
compared to the entire amount of klimaverändernden at the atmosphere , could be the amount of betrag in the atmosphere , if we can see this critical spot .
already already have a flat lakes in alaska , in alaska methane from water .
professor katey walter walter in alaska , with one another flachen see in alaska , in alaska , the professor of the same winter .
wow !
you go . the question is , how will it be uns .
and a reason is that enormous wärmespeicher looks at the north of the north .
this is a jährlicher polymer .
but the volume of the people are more much more than ever before .
this is the most important stream in southwest .
if you want to know how the sea level rise through sea , they &apos;re fliesst into the sea .
this rivers goes up to the front page .
at the other end of the planet , antarctica , the largest oil spill on the planet .
last month , researchers , that the whole continent has a negative eisbilanz .
and the westantarktis , which is a few unterwasserinseln of aufgetaucht , is particularly powerful in the gulf .
this is 20 foot to be like greenland .
in the himalayas , the drittgrössten eismasse , you see the top new lakes that were glaciers before a few years ago .
40 percent of all people on the world will get the hälfte of their trinkwassers from this schmelzwasser .
in the andes , this glacier is the trinkwasserquelle for this city .
the wassermengen have themselves .
but when they versiegen , it &apos;s also the most creative drinking water .
in california , a 40 percent reduction of sierra leone of sierra leone .
this is the speicherbecken .
and the predictions of how they read them , are serious .
this austrocknung in the world leads to a dramatic increase in the fire .
and the catastrophes all over the world have been in a really ausserordentlichen and previously never ever encountered the case .
so many years of the last 30 years , like the vorhergegangenen 75. 75. 75. 75. 75. 75. .
this is a perfectly valid entwicklungsmuster entwicklungsmuster .
if you look at this in the historical context , you can see what it &apos;s going to .
over the last five years we have 70 million tons of carbon dioxide every carbon million tons of carbon every day -- 25 million tons of every day in the oceans .
look at the area of eastern östlichen in the eastern world wars , and beiderseits of the indian subkontinents , where there &apos;s a drastischen decline of the world in the ocean .
the biggest government for the global warming , next to deforestation , which is burning from fossil fuels .
oil is a problem , and coal is the same biggest problem .
the united states is one of the two largest verschmutzer , with china .
and the suggestion was to build a lot of other people .
but we start to see a change .
here , the last few years , the last few years , with some green alternative , the research .
trotzdessen is there &apos;s a political argument in our country .
and the kohleindustrien and ölindustrien have a $ viertelmilliarde dollars last kalendarjahr , and to promote clean coal , which is a contradiction .
this picture reminded me about something .
in fact , in a way , in my tennessee home , a billion tons of kohleschlamm .
they saw it in the news .
this is all our entire country of the most important community of america .
this happened to happen christmas .
one of the most kohleindustrie care system was that .
frosty &apos;s der is a vergnügter , local .
it &apos;s in the envelope of building and abundance in america , and he &apos;s helping our economy .
frosty , who &apos;s going to drink every day .
he &apos;s affordable and liebenswert and workers stay in the other and bread .
this is the source of coal in west virginia .
the most powerful bergarbeiter is the head of massey coal .
let me tell you a very clear . al gore , nancy pelosi , harry reid , harry reid , they don &apos;t know what they talk .
so the alliance has been gerufen in the world .
this is a , , a part of you .
and the coalergy of the world &apos;s climate change is danger for our business plan .
so we &apos;ve been able to have a obersten gesetzt , a sizable geldsumme of a beträchtliche attempt to bring a werbeaktion to the way to get the truth .
the fact is , coal is not .
we think it &apos;s clean -- and smells still good at the same time , even though , right now , ok , it &apos;s also good at good at all right .
so , don &apos;t worry about climate change .
and they &apos;re quiet us .
saueber coal , they &apos;ve heard a lot of them .
so let &apos;s do a tour of these modern , a sauberen kohlefabrik .
fantastic ! this machine is quite loud .
but it &apos;s the sound of the potential kohletechnologie .
and yet , the burning of coal , coal , coal , of the global warming , the remarkable clean kohletechnologie that you see here , changes all .
look at it , this is the most beautiful , clean kohletechnologie .
finally , the positive alternative with our economic challenge and our challenge of homeland .
america is in a crisis , the economy , the climate crisis .
the red issue , which is our dependence &apos;s von of kohlenstoff-basierenden &apos;s innate kraftstoffen and ausländisches oil .
but now there &apos;s a brave , new solutions to keep us from that misslichen situation .
america is at 100 percent of electricity , within the next decade , within the next decade , in the next decade , in the next decade , for the next decade .
a plan to stop the work to stop the global warming warming .
finally , a solution that big enough is to solve our problems .
versorge america : finding more .
this is the last .
it &apos;s about a neuversorgung of america .
one of the fastest-growing ways of old , filthy , filthy , filthy , the world is ersticken .
the future is here . wind , sun and a new process .
new investment to create good at creating jobs .
versorge america : it &apos;s time to be able to seize .
there &apos;s a old african saying : &quot; if you want to get bored , go .
if you want to get together , go together . &quot;
we have to come to the way , and it &apos;s too fast .
thank you .
i want to start to ask you to the time of their childhood when they spielten with bauklötzen .
as you were , how to put your hands and zugreift the klötze , and they &apos;re actually going through and problems through understanding and problems through understanding and changing .
the spatial thinking is intimately tightly coupled to the way we understand a lot of our surroundings .
as a scientist -- inspired by the way of our interaction with real objekten patti and my colleague jeevan kalanithi , i began to wonder , what if we could use them with both hands and data on a flat arbeitsfläche und , and they began to be able to do with my colleague jeevan , i began to wonder , what if we could go and put data on
this question was so much that we decided to the rest of the answer and siftables .
in short , a siftable is a very sensitive to the size of a kekses .
you can move with hand , you can see each other , you can see their movements and they have a bildschirm .
very important : are physically , you &apos;re physically like bauklötze &apos;s disease , and access to the circle of hands .
and the siftables are a new generation of hilfsmitteln to the manipulation generation .
and if these tools were going to develop and a awareness of their movements , and we develop , each other , and the subtleties of our umgangs with them , we can see the new new and entertaining interaktionsarten .
i start with some simple examples .
and this siftable is für konfiguriert and when i put it into a direction , the video would be -- if i kippe it into the other direction , it &apos;s been backwards .
and this interactive portraits is upset true .
so if i &apos;m happy to you , you can see interest .
if you &apos;re surrounded by the voneinader , you &apos;ll notice that and can be a nervous .
and they feel the movements and neigung your movements .
a interesting consequence of interactions that we started to realize that we could take a lot of gestures on data , like you could use a schütten on data , how to use the fluids .
in this case , we have three siftables as a farbtöpfe konfiguriert and i can use them to be color in the middle where they are going to be blended .
if we zoom in the middle , we can make a little bit .
there &apos;s also also some of the ways to be a few of the ways in education , mathematics or logikspiele , where we can give people to give the results .
here &apos;s me -- this is a fibonacci which i &apos;m doing with a simple gleichungsprogramm .
this is a game with words that &apos;s a kind of mixture of scrabble and boggle .
basically , you get any round of every siftable randomly randomly randomly randomly randomly randomly randomly have to be trying to form words , that &apos;s about a dictionary .
then , after about 30 seconds , again , and you have a new buchstabenkombination and new possibilities .
thank you .
these are some kids who have been on a trip to the media lab , i could get them to try and have a video of it .
they really loved it .
a interesting thing about this kind of applications is that you can &apos;t have many instructions .
all you have to say , &quot; the &quot; emergence &quot; is words , &quot; and you know exactly what to do .
here &apos;s a couple people who are testing .
this is our youngest beta-tester there on the right there .
it turned out that he wanted to get the siftables nur .
so for him , they were just bauklötze .
this is a interactive trickfilmanwendung .
we wanted to develop a lernmittel for sprachlerner .
that &apos;s what happens .
he can bring new characters in the scene by turning the siftable from the table of the table that shows that character .
this is he puts the sun .
the sun goes on the sun .
now he &apos;s a tractor in the scene .
the orange news .
good ! yes ! yes !
by the siftables shake , and they can see the characters in the characters .
... his own story .
hi !
it &apos;s a story with obvious , and he can decide how they evolved .
flying cat .
the last example i spent now , it &apos;s a musik-sequencer for live-auftritte that we developed recently and in the siftables as a sound , like führungsstimme , bass and drums .
each other &apos;s variationen , you can select the way you want to use .
and you can see this sound into the sequence of the sequence that you can go in beliebigen .
and you put a , by just a ton-siftable of a sequenz-siftable .
there are effects effects that you can change live in the live as well as orkut and filter .
you hook it with a particular note , and then it brings him to the city .
and then the übergeordnete effects like speed and the volume that you &apos;re looking at all the sequence of the sequence .
so let &apos;s look at .
we start in the führungsstimme of two sequenz-siftable einspeisen and this in a row , they extend and a little more than the voice .
now i &apos;m going to add a bass .
now i &apos;m going to do something about it .
and now i &apos;m going to filter the filter with the drums that i can control the effect of live .
i can make the whole sequence of the sequence by putting the speed into the one or another direction .
and now i &apos;m going to filter the filter ; something more .
i can go down as it .
so , i have to put them in the case , but it can improvise ; they have plenty of equipment .
and finally , i can go through the whole sequence by looking at the lautstärke-siftable .
thank you .
so , as you can see , my desire , new mensch-computer-schnittstellen , new mensch-computer-schnittstellen , the better fit , the better way our brains and bodies .
and i had time to give you a part of these new design-welt and some of the ways to show that we work in our lab .
the thought i want to give you with the way you want to give you to this new generation of werzeugen with digital media , the information that information is information to our world , the world &apos;s information .
thanks to thank you , thanks to a lot of them .
i &apos;m very excited about the conversation with them all of them , and all of you who are with them , all of them !
yes , good afternoon .
i &apos;m very pleased to me .
yes , what should be biohacking ?
i have to do some simple things , and that &apos;s a bit of biohacking with the modern biology .
i &apos;m learning for some of the things , and i &apos;m just starting to have a few years now with the biohacking , and i started that , because i just wanted to know how to do some knowledge and i wanted to do it before i learned that in the way .
so , that was my primary motivation .
so it was a curiosity and i wanted to sort of closer to the matter , the matter , so .
i think that the molecular thing is in general now , so generally , everything that you &apos;re going to do , synthetic biology and so on , synthetic biology and so on , synthetic biology and so on , synthetic biology and so on .
extremely important , now is extremely important , and more important will be more important .
there &apos;s so surprising things like this whole gentechnisch plants on the äckern .
there are craig venter in the u.s.a that &apos;s trying to try to biofuel , so the gasoline of algae .
there &apos;s also things that are already in the daily basis , which is what most people are not aware of , for example , waschmittelenzyme , for example , who allow us to wash sensitive to 40 degrees of wäsche .
and the list can be a fortsetzen .
and so from the interest in this technology , i &apos;m going to go on here .
so why is now supposed to be ?
most people know most people know that from the softwarebereich .
and then , in the media , it &apos;s going to be the hacker , and then it &apos;s going to be the hacker somewhere in a turn of the speed and claws and the way that we move .
that &apos;s a way for the hackerszene very sad because it doesn &apos;t really what it actually does , which is actually what it actually started doing , and what &apos;s actually going on .
and that &apos;s where the software-hacker , in the &apos; 70s , achtzigerjahren with computerbasteln and that &apos;s also the internet .
and it &apos;s about to solve with a playful , creative , the way , the problem of a problem .
and the problem that is not just a technical problem , it can be a horrible problem , which is just a question , and how things are possible , so you can put a frage , and how things are possible , so you can do better than you can do .
and it was used to fly with software , but there is also a whole bastlerszene , which is called elektronikschaltkreisen all kinds of things that are doing all kinds of things .
and now , in the biology , and i want to focus this metaphor that will merge out of synthetic biology , because it &apos;s not just the same as the computer that &apos;s a abstrakter code , because it matter , it &apos;s not just the same way , because it &apos;s not just the same way , so it &apos;s not just cyber , so it &apos;s a
but it &apos;s also a code , and it can also be able to do it , and you can also get it , so , and that &apos;s what i find incredibly intriguing , and i just wanted to get a lot deeper with .
that actually has actually been done with a really angenommen , these networks .
there &apos;s hackteria dot , which is originally from switzerland , that &apos;s been with europe and with a cooperating in india , in india , but it &apos;s actually a lot of members of members of the world .
that &apos;s a more artistic , so , a lot of artists are a lot of artists and philosophers and ask and ask questions with scientists with scientists with scientists with scientists with scientists with scientists with scientists with scientists with scientists , there &apos;s a lot of artists and questions and ask , all kinds of things .
but it &apos;s really about making a so access to find the way that we have done so much .
and then there &apos;s do-it-yourself-bio , d.i.y.bio .
this is from the u.s.a , a network that is actually quite a way where you can get to look at it , and you &apos;re going to be able to get them .
they &apos;re a little bit of technical , and also a little businessmäßiger , and there are so , you know , yes , ja questions .
and from those networks that had the whole popular thing that has been made up so a scene that i want to get a little bit about .
here in the picture on the left , you see biocurious , which is a hackerspace , so basically a kind of school , so a private school , a private school where everybody can be able to get .
kids , old , all kinds of people go to see themselves a lab and look at what can you do when that laborprotokolle .
on the left is a group in indonesia , house-of-natural-fibers , which is , there are quite a long time .
more than those other networks .
they also have a artistic aspect of the materialien and , , yes , well , also , and combine that in a pretty abgefahre way .
a group of ankara i &apos;ve been learning before a while , which is what they want to learn in college and they have so much more wiser to straßenfesten little actions and they have so much more honest so what they &apos;re learning in the college , and they tried to explain what &apos;s d.n.a .
and i have the top in the other picture a way in copenhagen museum in the medical museum in combination with a exhibition .
and that &apos;s , yes , this is most of the most dominant thing , but the only thing that actually all really have a whole thing that actually all , is that fascination that fascination on the technology .
and what you can do with it , and also the way to ask them to the society of questions , so you know , ok , what makes you want to do , you have interest in this , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know ?
so , o.k , to try to get biology , you need a way .
you need biological materials , and you also need the tools , and that &apos;s a laboratory .
what you normally understand , what you normally understand is , like , like , like , like , like , very expensive , extremely expensive , just for revision , and then academics with a ph.d. and so on .
and our approach was to say to say , o.k , that actually , you don &apos;t have to do that .
that &apos;s not necessarily because every every single person has actually been actually made up to the higher of the technology as most laborgeräte , that &apos;s really .
and it was with this premise with this premise with this premise , in england , a minimallabor zusammenzustellen , a heizplatte zusammenzustellen , a heizplatte zusammenzustellen , a heizplatte , and , yes , so suppenbrühe , and then , has evolved bacteria , and then bacteria have evolved .
so every one has a soup that has been a soup that he has been done for too long , even though time .
i was trying to look at my lab , a little bit of the auszuweiten , and i &apos;d put it so second-hand-equipment on ebay and a little d.n.a analysis , trying to get a vaterschaftstest , so that &apos;s so much of the , , so that &apos;s so much .
that should be a joke , but it &apos;s not a joke .
here in the picture here , you see the lab , in anführungsstrichen , so that &apos;s so much of the uni , which is so eine garage , which is so eine , which is pretty interesting things that i want to do with the uni , which is pretty interesting things that i want to do a project in a project .
and this is biocurious , who has mentioned , this is also a kind of volkshochschule in the principle of biology .
and yes , you see , it &apos;s relatively relatively heterogen , so that gives you the same thing , so that gives you the same amount of the larger , until the other organizations that have been more profitable in a institutionalisierter shape .
but always that the approach that it &apos;s easy to be easy and accessible .
the first project we &apos;ve done as a international group , when we were aware of ourselves , there &apos;s now known as a real scene , and we &apos;re online , and we &apos;re online , and we know that people who are always chatten and so on .
and then from the do-it-yourself-bio org website website , and it has said , &quot; we have to really have real veranstaltungen , and then two veranstaltungen organized , a in in london , zweitausend , and shortly after it , in san francisco , in san francisco , waiting for san francisco .
and , because it was about , yes , who are we , what do we want , what do we want to have ?
and what are our values and what are our dna , our grundlage ?
and so we &apos;ve got so much more advanced .
that was quite intuitive , so everybody has just got his desires , his and what it moves , &quot; then , then .
there came to me , a lot of good video .
and we then not really enjoy the big stuff , but that &apos;s a lesson , i think relatively well , pretty well , relatively well , people are quite convinced of that .
and we even tried to even try and also , in the academic world , but there &apos;s some kind of thing in the academic world .
so i think we are from the biohackerszene , in the middle of the way , you know , you know , you know , a step than the world &apos;s academic world .
yes , what do we do now ?
a project that i was working with the hackteria-netzwerk in switzerland , was that we could make a so-called optical visual behavior .
that &apos;s when you have a dead servant , you can put little particles in the air and then in that focus , so , like this , it &apos;s basically , as a traktorbeamstrahl in principle .
and that &apos;s really working , that &apos;s going to happen in the academic setting , and we have thought , we have , we have also , have a webcam that &apos;s lens , you have a microscope , the aufgeschraubt , you have a microscope , which is about vierhundertfach .
it &apos;s the bottom .
and then we have a d.v.d brenner auseinandergeschraubt and the brenner den and then try to focus on this camera .
and it didn &apos;t have the unfortunately , but we &apos;ve learned a lot of learned .
so another project that came from the french group of paris , that has been done , that &apos;s pretty cool .
and that &apos;s what he &apos;s like , he &apos;s so a na , so a hirnwellenmessgerät , so e.e.g , or so , he has evolved with neurobiologie , his nickname is sam .
he &apos;s got this helmet in this helmet and the museum with the museum is the whole thing .
so , there was a visitor in the room to get this chair , they were preparing this helmet .
then they were measured their brainwaves , and the after what they thought they were doing , is actually different lights in the room .
was quite a pretty schickes project .
another thing from the u.s. that has been associated with this vaterschaftstestgeschichte , that &apos;s the p.c.r , that &apos;s the polymerase-kettenreaktion , complicated .
so it &apos;s about to copy , genes , genes , to copy , d.n.a , d.n.a , fragments , you can make visible .
so , if i do this , if i do this , if i do this , if i do this , if i do this , if i do this , if i go to the scene , you &apos;re going to go to the scene , and then they can say , o.k , and then they can say , o.k , this hair belongs to that person
and the machines that make something like that , are pretty expensive that you buy the commercially , the cheapest euro .
and that &apos;s not a im thing , but it &apos;s a really cool technology that is also very much .
so this is just a research of many of the things that you can do with it .
and they have two two advanced advanced rangesetzt and said , o.k , we do that we were easier and cheaper and looked and looked and looked up , and they are now now the cheapest markets of these devices around the world .
i think , somehow , kind of a thousand dollars or something like that .
but anyway , it &apos;s still not cheap , but it &apos;s definitely not cheap , but it &apos;s definitely the most important thing where it &apos;s clearly .
so it &apos;s a very gelungener thing .
a project that i started to build a gene-gun .
gene-gun &apos;s , yes , like this kind of luftdruckpistole , the kind of luftdruckpistole that are equivalent to the equivalent of this , two centimeter or so .
you &apos;re lädt d.n.a on goldpartikel and goldpartikel and die into this luftdruckpistole , and then i &apos;ve taken the dann and then put it into the same speed .
so the device that you see is , not working .
but that &apos;s so my prototype , but it &apos;s pretty peculiar , a digital landscape has been a branch , and that was the pressure of the druck , and that was the pressure was too high , the thing was broken .
and then i got a sahnespender , and it &apos;s plugged out .
a sahnespender if you &apos;re doing the full power , the enough pressure , so i think , so the cost of sechtzig bar .
and so , you can get the particles and then go into the most vulnerable .
and the commercial device costs about 60,000 euros or something like this , sahnespender so about the building .
so the reason it did not the same efficiency , but it &apos;s basically basically the principle .
so that &apos;s what it does that is also the kernanliegen of the scene of the scene of technology , and also the information and the information that we can get into the brain .
because , the beginning , like , what about the beginning , it &apos;s a very complicated technology , most people have been quite a little bit of it and also , most people really feel quite a little chance to be able to form .
because if you read about it , from sekundärliteratur , that &apos;s not the same thing as if you saw it .
and i think , technology is increasingly more important in our modern societies .
and if you can make a informierter citizens , as a informierter citizens can be an sinnvolle decisions in society , you need the access to knowledge and technology .
and you have to do it and understand it and understand it .
and the firmiert of the schlagworten open and citizen science and citizen .
so you can see as a citizen in the position , you can see with these scientific technologies .
and that &apos;s the most kernanliegen of the biohackern .
these are the people who remember at least , they were at least on the website , d.i.y.bio-dot-org website .
that &apos;s a relatively substantial number of people around the world .
and interesting is also that you are in southeast .
that &apos;s what i think they are less people than actually .
so i know some of the ones that don &apos;t have ever been .
and that &apos;s just the biohacker , which is the individual people .
and also with these hackerspaces , so that places are going to be on there .
and that &apos;s what &apos;s in the beginning .
as i said , zweitausendacht , it was starting to do it .
and hackerspaces , the computerhackerspaces , because the c-base in berlin was the first , neunzehnhundertfünfundneunzig .
and this is a gigantic network of very good , yes , infrastrukturzentren , who are now starting to see all over the world .
and we hope of course we &apos;re also using our similar similar , and then also similar to the same thing as that as well as you can get involved more than people are involved .
and i would submit to see it with a few and also even guess what to try .
it &apos;s not so simple , but it &apos;s not possible that if you have enough curiosity and ample energy , you &apos;ll get too far .
thanks very much for listening .
that was it .
yes , hey .
how do we work ?
that &apos;s a question that i &apos;m very moved to be a very privileged , but also in the field of forschungsbereich usability and vor in all the field of all the things .
it &apos;s about how to create people in interactive media , so they can use this interactive media and so they can use a cruel befriedigendes experience .
i think that the interactive media is media in us , cognitive modelle , so , in our biological condition , very long time , and that we can see through interactive media .
and that &apos;s very amazing , because you believe that this hochtechnologie , which you &apos;re going to do that , but in fact , that &apos;s what &apos;s actually so much about us , at our archaischen root .
what are now archaische ?
i have four stichworte , and i want to explain to a little bit of the invitation .
zu cognitive and the models are the models that we &apos;ve looked at the age of time .
and that &apos;s where these archaischen models that we &apos;ve heard a principle of natural relationship with the conscious .
that &apos;s what the sounds is called .
i &apos;ll focus on that , and i &apos;m going to talk to you by giving that they also have a natural relationship with you .
the second part is that we &apos;ve been since because of this archaischen models of this community models of this community is very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very bildlich , we &apos;re using a more useful language .
third part , which is why it &apos;s actually about itself .
we all know that the interactive media is causing definition of nonlinear , which is what makes us feel like us , of course , we &apos;re going to be a normal feeling normal today .
the fourth point is that the story is for us to be a place of informationsweitergabe .
now , what is the right now with the virtuality that &apos;s actually the most amazing thing in the world .
i want to give you the case .
how many doors did the house where you live in ?
we won &apos;t be able to give me it immediately answer , but it &apos;s going to happen in the moment .
they go through this house , in demn , and look at how many doors are there .
and that &apos;s what they do .
they virtualisieren the reality and the reality of the computer .
fantastic , right ?
and so , there we give us a lot of ourselves in our v.r.-labor , we can actually do that all the time .
and this wealth of the virtual virtual virtual virtual reality reality , which have been the people in the other times , because they had nothing .
they had no books .
or not the one who didn &apos;t have any fotolitografie .
they didn &apos;t have a massenmedien .
the only thing that had was her head .
and in this mind , the memory .
in this head , knowledge , knowledge and excitement of this virtual images , the imagination , were known to know .
and so it &apos;s so much more in the way that we can deal with the virtualität .
the interesting thing about this is when i can make a little trip .
yes , that &apos;s what we &apos;re going .
the interesting thing about this time of human being at the same time and medium .
so if you think of a piece of time .
what are media media ?
then you &apos;ll notice that there &apos;s a change .
but i &apos;ll get to speak again .
the same tool that are almost more than the first time .
schamanen , preacher , so-called sogenannte , so-called wissenswächter , sogenannte , sogenannte , um , to preserve knowledge .
and , now , we &apos;re still very , very strong to stories .
author of the book , the storytelling animal , jonathan gottschall , jonathan verbingen , zufolge , we still verbingen with the rezeption of stories .
this means for a kid that &apos;s going to reach out to the most of his life with the rezeption of stories .
now , we &apos;re thinking , our love with stories depends on the lap that we have seen as a child .
no , no , far .
this goes far back in the cultures of the pre-industrial ages .
but for me , in the area of interactive media , in the area of interactive media , as a particularly powerful thing is that we were working in our biological memory , which is the capacity to think about .
i &apos;ve got to give you a example of the nordamerikanischen of the nordamerikanischen of the nootka-indianer .
and the lives lived in the küstenregion of british columbia .
and as you can see , that &apos;s a very inselreiches area and you had to get to be able to get a irgendwie from island to beschaffen foods .
and the ones that works with that genannten .
you may have may be , if you look at a little bit of the australian .
they &apos;re similar principles .
they don &apos;t have a lead-landkarten , but they have the so-called songlines or also traumpfade .
and what the interesting thing is that the navigation and the topography of regions about the lieder of the regions .
what they were made language was rang .
that means , you know , you know , navigierte over rhythm .
and this sounds and this rhythm , the geology that has been a region and that has been able to make this songs could be , and again , of course , that you could take on the left and the other way back to the back of the back of the back .
why don &apos;t we sing anymore to get from the top of a few of the road ?
anyway , to navigate .
what happened ?
it &apos;s what happens is that &apos;s what &apos;s going on .
we moved to the so-called genannten .
it &apos;s happened that &apos;s a thing that &apos;s book and happened is the fotolitografie .
and that &apos;s exactly what happened we &apos;re doing the responsibility for our memories and the implications of our individual memories is in the external media .
the book and the picture .
so we &apos;ve heard a piece of god , unfortunately , a piece of god .
so , for us , suddenly , all of us is to have been to have been to have been to have to do with the reality .
bruce brown , a famous designforscher of the brighton-university , is so far that this is so far , that this is what we &apos;re like today , that this is , that this is what we &apos;re like today , that this includes our memories have been having a memories and our capacity to virtualisieren erudiert .
let &apos;s do a little zwischenbilanz .
from the vogt-zeitalter to the machine .
what has transformed on our thinking and apply our erinnerungsvermögen ?
then the verblassenden bomber of the u.k. bomber .
and they are in the course of the centuries , and more überschrieben , by the einflüsse of the maschinenzeitalters .
that means that we &apos;re teaching ourselves , we &apos;re teaching , far , far , in the vast quantities of memories of memories , we can get our personal memories .
we can do not .
we have a abstract language .
we &apos;re not able to do more in images in images in images in images , but we &apos;re kodifizieren them to use our language .
we &apos;ve used to have used to happen to happen .
and we have the linearity as law and there are just exceptions , just like the non-linearität .
what &apos;s us is the storytelling .
still , we &apos;re still the more profitable as a informationsvermittlung , very strong .
the question is , what &apos;s going on right now ?
we had the vogt -zeitalter , we got it , and we got this so-called beschreiten , so that &apos;s called cyber-zeitalter .
and that sounds very spacig at the time , i know , and look at a partnership , i know .
but these ideas that we can explore this back back back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us back to us
there &apos;s about to be , it &apos;s about non-linearität , it &apos;s about storytelling .
i want to explain this a little bit .
there are real concepts like the augmented reality that is called the extended reality .
so if you look at google glasses , it &apos;s so a concept , which is a concept , which is our concept , which is our affinität to the virtualisierung , which is our affinität to the virtualisierung , which is the virtual thing to be virtual ordinary , it &apos;s going to be a little natural .
another example is that genannte reality .
so i &apos;m crazy , of course , in the context of my talk , there &apos;s a lot of us physically in the , , virtual virtual sense , the most important thing of the holodecks .
another example is the ambienten , intelligent systems .
these are spaces that can respond smart to a human people .
all the ability to accept our basic ability to accept a real habitat .
i got in the degree and i hope the video , a very , very beautiful project , that &apos;s the bachelorarbeit of michael burk , ann-kathrin krenz , ann-kathrin krenz , joris klause and jan-moritz müller .
and the two letzteren are also now here today .
you may only have to stand up with the two of the project , so you can do the same thing with the same thing about the project .
and this project i brought as an example of how the wieder was , , cognitive modelle .
all of the whole thing is , i have to say .
what the storytelling of course is extremely entgegenkommt and it &apos;s a computer .
and when i say , &quot; i say , you know , you know , you know very likely to say that people are irgendwelchen in charge of living herumhappeln or that they play with any konsole in hand .
anyway , they do that .
this is a game for that .
and that &apos;s what i &apos;m going to do the world , so i &apos;m going to come back to the real world .
and this game is connecting the virtual world , so the data that &apos;s the datenraum that data , we produce , with the real world .
i apologize that i have to have to have a lot .
you can do this as much better because more than much more than it .
and that &apos;s what it &apos;s about , i &apos;ve been able to see a city by looking at what places is positively or negatively negativ .
and so i &apos;m looking at the city of the city , a very different impression that i see seeing a lot of negative and positive zones so that way that way and the greater is so much other , virtual map of a very real city .
and we &apos;ve also like to look at the time .
ah , what you can see here is still a little explanation of what you see .
of course , this virtual world in the walls of our cities , is yes .
and with a kind of alternative , we can make these virtual worlds visible .
so , i &apos;d like to take this out my talk and that is in the sense that the properties and the abilities that we &apos;re doing so much about complex , technological , technological , technology , and that we &apos;re so much about complex , technological , technological , technology , new products can actually be able to actually get to the future , but actually we can
thank you .
yes , i &apos;m very short to you .
i &apos;ve been asked to be a little bit of a sprechender bag and my talk .
it &apos;s not going to do .
i &apos;m going to see what &apos;s in there .
but i do it just outside the end of it .
yes , kids are made of the curious or should be a good thing .
i &apos;m a fifth of home from home , so i &apos;m also talking about the topic of curiosity and how changes the curiosity also changes our thinking , and why we may have to do it , and why we may have to go and have to do so much more fun and so on .
this is a whole series of things that you can do next to the actual community of the same time .
when professors were to be the professors , they &apos;ll be treated in such &apos; n forschungssemester .
and that &apos;s what i &apos;ve been doing in half of the last year .
a forschungssemester squared issue is human-centered interface .
now , you &apos;ll be wondering why , the whole range of the lens is to create archaischen urformen , archaischen urformen , der urformen , and so on .
and there &apos;s a little bit of these little fluctuations in the small places , because the things are always going to be intuitive , and you have to look at natural resources , and you have to look at what &apos;s actually for us humans , of course , or empathy .
and before the background , i have a bereich interface , so the next generation in the relationship of human computer is to be preoccupied in the relationship of the human computer in the relationship of the human computer , how to transform our tools or how the computer vom from the brain sukzessive of the brain sukzessive of the brain sukzessive .
so i &apos;ve got to be able to see when it &apos;s a bit of thing .
maybe you may also have a look at this .
why does that ever happen ?
so if we look at the evolution of our society , here &apos;s a little bit here , we move from the third gesellschaftsgeneration or gesellschaftsform .
so the modern in in the computergesellschaft .
every society is geprägt through a primärmedium .
at the beginning , the stammesgesellschaft of the language .
that means you have found that you could have a shared language , you could communicate with each other , in the same cave , or in other areas , cities has cities or villages and has kreiert sozusagen .
the primärmedium was , but the language , something very natural , something very lebendiges .
so , you know , you know , so no kleinkind can be on the other , but we learn to get it and make sure of course .
that &apos;s then pumped by the ancient society and the first shape of abstraction .
this was a riesen-aufschrei , because you were to lose the lebendige language of writing , which is what &apos;s fluid and alive , i &apos;m going to go on and meißele it into stone and so i also put it .
the after the time i meißel and when i was meißel , of course , it &apos;s a very different coverage than if there is a living species of people .
but sukzessive , this is a typeface , erhielt , erhielt .
then the next generation we live in today is still living .
this is a durch geprägte typeface and print schrift and others .
back then , it was just a affront , where adel , klerus and other people , you &apos;re actually talking about the people to read when the people start to read when the people want to read , then they want to get off and that is totally total .
and now we &apos;re going to come into the next generation and the exciting thing is , so a generationswechsel is just all the hundreds of years , and we &apos;re actually in this phänomenalen period that we &apos;re doing that .
the confused is because we see the new media , socil social media , more social media , facebook and so on .
and the total transparency , which is the new thinking , which is a little bit of thinking , not saying that in the lasagne pferdefleisch and no more interesting , or other phenomena , which i want to do is just like this , i want to get out of vertuschen and want to do that .
and these two worlds are just starting to be able to be new and old .
the exciting thing is , if you get the one that &apos;s new society , these computergesellschaft , very many of the mechanisms , prinzipien and archaischer denkmuster from the aus of stammesgesellschaft .
now , not on the local level , but on global level .
we understood that weather is global .
that the issue is about the ecology of the global .
not , if i &apos;m seeing the local view of the local thinking of the neighbor , then it doesn &apos;t work anymore .
that means , from local village is a global village with the same principles , but also , but also the total transparency .
as you knew in the village , who has what was happening with whom and when that happens to this erweiterung of our self , and so this mobilen of our self is on global level .
and that we know , we need global and faster and more quickly and more quickly .
so , as it used to be on the village .
so , in the background , i have been busy busy busy busy , which is what does it does is what it does is , of course , what we may have is , of course , what we may have is , so what does it difference ?
because often , people are going to come , you can &apos;t make it benutzungsfreundlich , so that anybody can deal with it .
so you have to employ that , which is called the time , and not just change it , it &apos;s different , but it also can be done .
and when &apos;s something intuitive , and how can i take as a serious thing to take and so the things that make things like that , they &apos;re a benutzungsfreundlich , so that &apos;s what &apos;s going to be a great thing , because then they make fun and use fun .
you &apos;re busy , well as the studiums of the time , with the subject of perception and wahrnehmungspsychologie .
and that &apos;s what you &apos;re looking at and look at all right now , now i &apos;m just looking at the inside .
and what does it do is because there &apos;s a person in there ?
so how do we work , if we were there ?
and what does it mean , intuitive , intuitive , intuitive , how do our channels and how does the cognitive evolve ?
because steve jobs has said , you know , need deeper deeper it it .
so you have to look really in the details if i &apos;m going to do something more or a matter of what is called the core .
and that &apos;s what you see , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , we &apos;re just five , the only thing we think we &apos;re five , in the future of this , it &apos;s actually certainly five , it &apos;s actually certainly a future of the next year , and as an extension of our self .
and look how do we take information , how do we take information ?
to say , what is information ?
information is anybody who makes a difference .
many of the use of the word , but didn &apos;t even know what it was about .
but i have to understand in the heart of the nature , when will information information , when will information from data information and from information to know how i know how i could do things like that , or can make a difference .
and of course , how do you look at the perception .
we see that if i can do things like i do things like the right , where i don &apos;t know what i &apos;m looking at , or i can make intuitive , or i can make intuitive , by doing things .
so very natural natural , it &apos;s a gefäß , but i see a way of looking at where is salt and pepper .
and if i tell someone , give me salt or pepper , he &apos;ll be able to think he &apos;s going to be able to think about the right now , where is it in .
and the left simply are , and i hope that no sugar is in there , the salt is ethically .
but also our perception itself , how do you do it .
for example , this perception is the context .
the right circle looks larger than the small , although that &apos;s not the case , but they &apos;re equal to large , but it changes our perceptions , depending on the context of context .
anybody know what that is ?
come on .
pattern recognition should work .
there &apos;s a rather like brille .
so it &apos;s a wonderful circle .
a second circle begins to make certain kinds of korrelieren or too .
and if i get to a halboval dazusetze , we can see a lot more only one more sustainable , namely , circle , circle , circle , and yet we see a unit , we see three parts of a circle , a circle , a circle , another .
it &apos;s called gestaltgesetz or eben , which makes us feel again in the perception of perception .
so important for the lens that have the most fascinating thing in the first semester , the great gestaltgesetze .
gestaltgesetz of the kontinuität and the continuity and so on .
often , you know , in the third .
but that &apos;s a essenziell situation , if you want to do things like things .
the next phenomenon , which is very interesting to the brain .
sounds very much , but it &apos;s interesting to be interesting when you &apos;re busy .
so we looked at the eyes and now think we see from the front of the back .
it &apos;s wrong .
they see the back of the back .
because , you know , projiezieren a assumption that you see something you see , what they were doing .
that means we &apos;re just seeing the way , before we see it back to our seheapparat reinbringen , to say , okay , &quot; okay , back to our seheapparat reinbringen , to say , okay , okay , okay , ok .
i have been so happy , and i &apos;ve got what &apos;s called projieziert , which you want to see .
it &apos;s also there that &apos;s coming back .
then , in the front of the back , because the back behind the front , and i &apos;m sure you really want to get you whether to see if you want to see what you want .
and then , it goes back to the back and then it &apos;s been just going to be .
so , a whole way , the way things can be done and in what &apos;s going to happen to happen things happen .
i don &apos;t know who you know what you know .
there &apos;s been the same thing i &apos;ve described .
now , everybody &apos;s trying to see a pattern now .
i don &apos;t know who recognizes .
somebody &apos;s looking at some point ?
a dalmatiner , right .
if i saw that there &apos;s a dalmatiner in there , you know , you know .
you &apos;ll never forget that , because i &apos;m going to show you where the dalmatiner is .
now you see the dalmatiner .
and on the way you care .
that means , i actually feel what i &apos;m actually looking at you , they don &apos;t have a pattern of dadrin , but i have them konditioniert in this last time , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again
and this is this projection , rückkopplung , seeing rückkopplung .
now i know , i know , and i &apos;m going to go back to the front i see the dalmatiner .
i see the dalmatiner .
so , quite a lot of processes that happened in this , yes , gray , it &apos;s actually not actually , but here &apos;s where this rosanen crowd of eben .
somebody who are in three seconds ?
for , yes .
that &apos;s our present .
so , it &apos;s always interesting to know as designers .
if i know , something takes three seconds , until i get out of the present in the vergangenheitsschleife , then i can also be very good at the vergangenheitsschleife , i can take you with three seconds .
that &apos;s just as a present , &quot; he just got to do it as a present .
then it &apos;s going to the past and so i can also have a elegantly wartezeiten for example , in the computer , when i know that phenomenon .
what do fünfundzwanzig need ?
yes , we need to get .
it &apos;s a very interesting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the time that you &apos;re in love with .
that means , when you know what if you know , you &apos;re looking at the way , you can see how long , i &apos;m not going to be because i &apos;m not going to be a gewähr for what can happen to happen .
and sechzehn milliseconds , even a very interesting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the process of the equation that we have .
that means that first impression that &apos;s happened in a vast standard rate , as we make things like that .
and as we see things as well , and we also sort of achten us , against our environment , so we can take the able to think about this .
of course , the only thing is not only with the topic of the topic and neural verarbeitungen or kognitionsergonomie , but local , of course , with the subject of the mensch-objekt-beziehung .
so , how about a human being in with certain things .
there &apos;s a way to be practical functions , so formale aspekte , so formale aspekte .
there are anzeichen-funktionen , where i know exactly where i actually really cherish .
but there are also symbolische functions , why is somebody for such a little täschchen , where sowieso don &apos;t look like , where does not so much money , so horrende sums of money , although it hasn &apos;t so much lower ?
there are more on the symbolischen , on the bedeutungsebene , we &apos;re more like a quantitative thing of course .
back to my mind , the subject of course , the subject and the theme of course , is usability .
usability means always , how can i get a little goal or how can i achieve a nutzer goal or how can a difference a difference in a particular nutzungskontext , efficient and zufriedenstellend a goal .
so , it &apos;s like the norm .
how can i make something bad ?
i can do that directly , i need to go to the n of the earth , or need to take the most powerful training .
and less usable or benutzungsfreundlich .
i just did this differently , and beautiful , it doesn &apos;t mean that it &apos;s better .
it needs to be understood .
and if you look at the software that we &apos;ve seen , it &apos;s what you &apos;ll see , it &apos;s also going to understand why neunundneunzig percent of our software is not on anhieb percent of our software or i-phone , which is the i-pad in many areas , even though , we &apos;ve seen considerably intuitive than classical software .
but this is intuitive benutzbarkeit , not only since apple &apos;s apple &apos;s apple &apos;s going to make a matter of elementarer , nen elementarer , if i want to make a case of technology for the people .
why ?
because in the rule of the rule , we &apos;re looking through this new way of the nutzbarkeit , so the natural user ínterfaces , as a new age , five times higher than the goal .
so , you have to imagine that if you take something about classical softrware , five hours and with this new type of natural software , and with this new kind of software , just a half .
that doesn &apos;t mean , they &apos;ll probably have four hours to go home , but you can get a employers or your employers or your employers , or your employers or your arbeitgeber , how he deals with the four hours .
but i want to say that it &apos;s a corresponding leistungssteigerung , also , too , too much things .
if we then put it back to the area , here , the first command of the software , which was very abstract , very abstract , where you &apos;ve got months to deal with these systems .
then , the next one , now , in the next , the one thing we &apos;ve been talking about to do with the neuronalen model of what the software says , what you can see the software of a desktop to make the computer .
so not , you know , and they &apos;re not going to be able to use a metaphor .
it took all the whole thing already , but also , of course , much better .
the next generation of the graphischen planetarium are working very much more with behavior .
so i &apos;m going to be a lot of a lot of more than a serious , behavior as the appearance .
it &apos;s a paradigm .
i think that the appearance of the success is always a successful .
and if i go to a moment , if i go to this mountain , i have sorted to see what i &apos;m proposing , by definition , email gesture , and i &apos;m going to have to have the things that i have yet come and faster and even more .
but also , i &apos;m going to point out when the things are going to be intuitive ?
when you &apos;re going to get back to my little friend &apos;s friend and look at my little friend &apos;s friend and look at what does that is , when you &apos;re really good at the time , when it &apos;s really a bit of intuitive now ?
and that &apos;s what &apos;s for us , always , if i have to think about it .
so , not really like , he doesn &apos;t like to think , but it &apos;s just a simple thing .
i have been thinking about it , the more intuitive is it .
and what does that mean for designers ?
that means that we can look at existing communication from a different thing , for example , the metaphor , i can make this stuff as a serious thing .
that means i can , i can actually take a intuitive , human handlungsmodell software to software , and that software is going to make a wesentlich .
and of course , the question of what is actually so the intuitivste of us humans and now i &apos;m going to tell you .
that &apos;s called osit-modell .
it uses each of us and osit is a typical and steht for orientieren , selektieren , informieren , informieren .
it makes everybody with you all the time , but it does it &apos;s unconsciously and yes , or a teilweise polymer .
the model is already in the womb and it &apos;s interkulturell , so it works the world &apos;s young and old , so old , and it &apos;s been used by all of us all the time , without most of the media knew that this model is .
osit osit an an an times by us as activity , so you have the schlaf , you have noticed that there are less often more than a day .
i can now do this mental handlungsmodell manufacturer , selektieren , informieren , informieren übertragen , übertragen übertragen .
and by this kind of transmission , similar similar to the metaphor of the desktops , but it &apos;s not a metaphor a metaphor metaphor for a metaphor , but a metaphor metaphor a handlungsmusters , a handlungsprinzips .
and this is a higher position of the übertragung as the transmission of a classical metaphor , which is the desktops .
and if i übertrage the case that i &apos;m in the middle of the year as a prison as a choice , informieren , in the case , it comes big , i can see that somewhere or so , you can see that i can take a auch or so on the details , and yes , i can see that somewhere or so on in the details ,
i can take the whole thing .
i try to see this one .
has been done pies .
and i &apos;m sort of a way to start with the object , reinzoomen , reinzoomen .
i get the whole purpose , can now be a bit of the filter and say , just show me just to do all of chocolate .
and then on a moment , which is more intuitive and a lot of natural gas .
because i can &apos;t look like the things like the pieces of the screen , and they come to me , is more than much more than hierarchisch organized evil or other kinds of things that can make things accessible .
imagination of the hinweis than knowledge knowledge , and with this sentence , i want to conclude with closing , a little bit of solutions , and in that sense , also have to come to the new solutions , and in that sense , i &apos;m going to give you a bit for your attention and ask them .
i want to share with you a whole way of curiosity .
the first thing when you &apos;re a kid , as baby , is that they choose to what they have , and the time , whether their parents are going to play their parents , more or less in the töpfchen and the more , the more , the more , the more , and the more , the more , and the curiosity , will be able to get
and the curiosity is not learning .
so , all of those people are and curious , in fact , in fact , who have a characteristic that you can &apos;t learn .
now , i &apos;m going to talk about it all these entire umweltdiskussion , weltuntergang , vierzig , vierzig years of club-of-rome , in quality .
and there &apos;s a central point of that .
and the irony of phosphorus .
give pee &apos;s a chance .
every day you give you a hundred times about two grams about two grams about two grams about two grams , they have to phosphorus them .
you can &apos;t have teeth .
they cannot store energy .
you can &apos;t have bone .
we could only be durch by the weltmeere gleiten .
if we didn &apos;t have phosphorus and d .
and it &apos;s so that we &apos;re going to be here to be here , what actually was actually to be done , but not that is that .
because everyone else has been talking about energy , but no one speaks to the phosphor-problem .
the phosphor-problem is a lot of critical .
we depend on two countries .
we only have only for two years phosphorus and now is now drawn by the phosphor-bergbau world &apos;s much more interesting than all the atomanlagen .
last year , fünfzehntausend tons of uranium uranium uranium per million uran in germany .
and that &apos;s what we take all of it .
it &apos;s going to take leukemia with kids .
and we think we would protect the environment , if we &apos;re a little less harmful .
so , for example , schütz , the environment , the fahr car .
schütz areas of the environment , we need less trash .
schütz the environment , carbon-free less energy .
but no protection .
that &apos;s like i would say , schütz your child , only three times a half .
that &apos;s just a little less destruction .
if we think we &apos;re talking about from the wiege to the bahre , then our entire planet would be used or later .
so therefore , from the wiege of the wiege .
and the most important thing is , the world &apos;s going on , as a sound .
in the ground is about international percent of the kohlenstoffs .
and we &apos;re building corn and losing it , at least per year per acre per acre , or on the square meter tons per square meter per square meter .
that means we lose lose in the floor about five times more than new york .
we can do the müllproblem of the brain stem cells .
and everything is verpackung or content .
in offenbach , at the hausmüll 20 percent of the müllmenge of the müllmenge .
and because we &apos;re going to grow up , that will change the other .
that &apos;s what they &apos;re sort of all in the vorwindelphase .
yes ?
a baby needs about a prisoner .
we could not be 10 percent , but what does that do ?
this is going to be in china .
that &apos;s totally trivial .
so the question is , how do we deal with these marine issues ?
so , here &apos;s a proof of the way that men don &apos;t have pigs .
i want to tell you .
because the phosphorus will be brought up with the festen of the sea components of the sea .
in humans , people about urine .
yes .
so that can &apos;t be the men .
because that &apos;s a little bit , right ?
we think we &apos;re in the middle of the world , we &apos;re too many in the world .
and if you get people to exist when you get to the people if you say , you &apos;re going to be able to do not , you &apos;re going to be there , and they &apos;re going to be raffgierig and feindselig .
and so somebody like al gore , one of our big heroes , there is nothing more wichtigeres than human populations .
in israel , you &apos;re going to say if you &apos;re a dead rettest , you &apos;re going to give the earth .
here &apos;s what the more you are doing , the better .
yes .
the first question is , we really are too many ?
if you look at ants , the weight of ants on earth , then , the ants , the ants , the ants are about two than we humans .
i could also have a chance of being able to make it , but in the u.s. , nobody else is approved , where they are .
that means that ants can be much more than we .
and because they &apos;re physically working on harder than we and because they only do three to six months , they &apos;re in their weight , in the same time .
that means we &apos;re not too many , we &apos;re too stupid , yes ?
and where you see how far we are , what we really wanted to do , and how sad we are , for example , you can see that , you know , a program , until 20 , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , yes ?
can you be klimaneutral , if you don &apos;t exist , yes ?
the only chance .
have you seen a limb tree ?
yes ?
a single one ?
that means that we want to be able to be more productive than the trees , yes ?
yes ?
no tree is kohlenstoffneutral .
fortunately , yes ?
there &apos;s no überbevölkerungsproblem in trees .
there are alone in the amazonasgebiet of the amazonasgebiet of the city of the city .
have you ever heard about trees from trees ?
that means all the time , we want to be able to be able to be a trees .
and where you see , even at something like demeter , the strikteste bio- , ja , it doesn &apos;t make that our own stoffwechselprodukte .
every year we lose three million tons of phosphorus that are really going to go back to the clinic .
and we &apos;re going to too many .
it &apos;s alone .
so that means we feel so guilty on the earth that we say , there &apos;s no bio-landbau , no nature-et-progrès , no nature-et-progrès , no nature-et-progrès , and how they allow our own , , which allow us to go back .
isn &apos;t that sad ?
so we &apos;re going to too many .
it &apos;s definitely a sense of being harmful , less harmful , what ölverbrauch .
but where are we useful ?
we &apos;re trying to minimize our ecological footprint , but it &apos;s about a big footprint in the middle of the useful .
we want to be good for society , we want to be good for the economy , but when it comes to the environment , not there , right ?
nullemissionen , yes ?
you can only have nullemissionen , if they &apos;re not there .
even if you were going to shoot , they would have emissions .
so they can &apos;t solve the way .
we can think it differently .
we can look at our nutrients .
we &apos;re doing in brazil in brazil , in the middle of where we &apos;re looking at nutrients .
we can see right in the way that we can see in agriculture .
we do this in china for example , where we get directly from .
in china is a nachttopf tonight , so , you know , yes , yes ?
and in our western world , we were always to dumm our nutrients .
that means that the whole western zivilisationsgeschichte of the western people , that the city has never been , but that farmers never has done something .
so the cities that keeps more , because the farmers went into the cities and cities , and the cities will continue their nutrients .
so therefore , all the western people are always expanding , until they haven &apos;t done the infrastructure anymore , and then they are implodiert .
yes ?
in china .
you have bruchlos civilization for years , because you always been able to be nutrients .
even when they invited to the food , you &apos;re having to get to the food that they stay as long as they stay the toilet .
because it &apos;s the whole thing , go to the nutrients .
you &apos;ve got to have them to the food , not for the nährstoffdiebstahl .
that means you can see the nutrients , you can see the nutrients .
so the very beautiful thing is , if you do that , so agriculture , biogas , it &apos;s a mere country with a thousand fünftausend dollars , and they can start to get chickens and schwein and enten and schwein and vegetables and vegetables .
and the amazing thing is , the verbrechensrate in favelas are about ninety percent .
so we don &apos;t have to control people &apos;s little bad .
we can support them , good .
that &apos;s obviously , but the mixing tragen itself .
the byproduct of the water is clean water .
and they &apos;re so designed by design , which is just a farmer .
that means that the verbrechensraten go back .
and none of those facilities , we &apos;ve got over hundertfünzig , over the past 20 years , none of those facilities .
they could just easily take a liter of altöl reinwerfen and then the anlage would be .
not instead .
that means we don &apos;t need to control the people to be a little bit bad .
we can support them , good .
that means we need phosphorus .
and , by the way , if you want to do , remember , germany , in germany , the best of all the people in the best community of all the creation .
unfortunately , unfortunately , in offenbach , but maybe you can see the frankfurtern , you can help the frankfurtern .
because the frankfurter facility could be the phosphorus zurückgewinnen .
and the needs to go back .
we see that phosphorus is really critical .
and we see that it &apos;s a durchaus .
we &apos;ve been in holland in holland with us .
the dutch government has explained , they will be the first country in the world which phosphorus zurückgewinnt .
but we need to do that .
you know , there are two countries that control almost 70 percent of the world &apos;s phosphorvorkommen .
there is a bunch of waisenknaben .
these are sechsundzwanzig countries that are breaking 40 percent of the most important control .
and the oil will be , we &apos;ll replace others .
but the phosphorus will be able to replace .
that &apos;s not about that , it &apos;s not about a little less bad , but it &apos;s about doing something right .
and it &apos;s what &apos;s the right thing to be right .
that &apos;s what &apos;s about efficiency , not about efficiency .
in holland in holland , you &apos;re easier to the natural system , because of the country &apos;s country in the flowers .
yes ?
imagine if you take your wife , if you have them , and they come with them .
totally more amazing .
but i do is , yes ?
or take a lippenstift lippenstift .
one woman in germany , about six percent of their 20s three kilograms of their lives .
it &apos;s called .
it doesn &apos;t scientifically exactly correct , because we don &apos;t know how much weggeküsst is going to be .
but a lippenstift , even at that lighting , i can tell you , is totally inefficient , but pretty effective , yes ?
one of which is beautiful , is not efficient .
that &apos;s not what we did .
to ask what is the right ?
not , the klärschlamm &apos;s still a little bit better and ihn all the materials for building to lose the whole materials for building , but first of how do you learn about this ?
imagine being mozart .
yes ?
if i say it for dinner , and say , yes , there &apos;s a collaboration with a offenbach-geschmack and a glass of water .
wonderful , &quot; all right ?
that &apos;s really .
all of the most life beautiful is not efficient .
if you &apos;re going to fall in love with respect ?
yes ?
that means anything that happen to be counts is not going to be able to reduce .
all the umweltdiskussion .
we say to people , oh yes , you don &apos;t have a umweltbewusstsein in the south .
no , that &apos;s exactly the right thing , yes ?
and everybody &apos;s working on everybody , from , from , yes , you get back again .
but the wrong things .
if you &apos;re wrong , you have a müllproblem .
in how we think we &apos;ve been thinking about north .
there &apos;s every footprint .
if you walk , yes , destroyed the ground .
because the soil is going to die the mosses , and the wind and the water will reinvent the ground .
but if you &apos;re in italy , means everybody knows that the water is longer in the right now .
so it &apos;s about to create a large scale , which is a marsh .
not schuldmanagement .
we &apos;re going to say , in germany .
yes ?
but if i ask you , how do you get to your wife ?
do you say ?
one way .
then i say , herzliches beileid , yes ?
that &apos;s a minimum .
so , the way , the vermeiden .
everyone &apos;s abfall .
and it &apos;s a lust when you see in italy , like people in the senior bow , they were able to put in bow to the car , it &apos;s a lot of the car .
because you know , that &apos;s a lustvoller process .
&quot; form , yes ?
you can show , i was there .
but with the right design , i &apos;m going to go .
we have a eiscremeverpackung program that is in temperature air temperature .
they can go and stand where they go and stand .
they &apos;ve been building all over the time .
and they were paid seeds of rare plants so they &apos;re walking through the heart of the sea .
that means we &apos;re useful , not less harmful .
so it &apos;s two .
not all of course .
a television or a washing machine that &apos;s just use them , they don &apos;t use them .
just the things that verschleißen , like schuhsolen , like bremsbeläge , like autoreifen , like autoreifen , like autoreifen , the need to go in biological systems .
things that only used to be used in technical systems .
but we &apos;re talking about the biological systems .
yes ?
for example , the sneaker , yes ?
we started talking about earlier , and it &apos;s not a company puma se , but for that , that you can help this company to do this product .
because we don &apos;t do not make things more free .
yes ?
so , when i &apos;m eating it , and say , that &apos;s free of hähnchen , then you can &apos;t think anything .
no , we &apos;re holding straight .
positive .
so not like detox .
not the other hand .
but all in there , is useful .
these are the first ones that they can get the kavalierstart on the fußgängerampel and the rubber of biological knowledge , yes ?
everything is kompostierbar .
and when it comes to us , it makes us feel about the adidas for nike , for hennes and mauritz and all the textile industry .
and that &apos;s the half of all the world &apos;s world &apos;s going through the textile .
so help you to help you guys with people .
hey , puma , really , you really want to do your really serious ?
because now , the haben gewechselt .
and i &apos;m not so sure if you really dabeibleiben .
so help me a little bit .
but it &apos;s about .
yes .
what &apos;s going on is .
that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing .
we can now do things now so much that they &apos;re going to do when you verschleißen , you can get them into biological systems .
technical &apos;s just the same .
there &apos;s a direct rücknamesystem .
this is the first political rucksack , actually , who &apos;s done this is in circulation .
so , even though , so , you can browse the things .
if you come to the question , yes ?
do you remember the research ?
when the trash is the trash .
all these windeln , almost , right ?
in the countries where people are going to come to the money .
there &apos;s also the deponien , but also , in the landscape , yes ?
if we change the plastics , so that he can walk in biological systems , if we can change the wasserspeicher , you can go back to a baby , you can see with a baby or in tunisia trees .
yes ?
and if you take these windel , the zerkleinern , sterilisieren and the powder take the powder to get trees .
so , this is the baby kohlenstoffpositiv for all of the entire life , starting from beginning .
so we need not klimaneutral , we can be klimapositiv .
it &apos;s a sozusagen poop print print .
yes , so .
yes ?
we can do that .
we can even reinvent .
i have a institut founded .
now , meanwhile , now , there are many people with them and they can all sit down .
there &apos;s a lot of a lot of the time , cradle-to-cradle-verein , where everybody can get .
so , not save anymore , the vermeiden , vermeiden , not schuldmanagement , but intelligent waste .
do you do that curious ?
thank you .
the work of the interpreten .
music works as language .
in the description of my talk , i wrote that i wrote as a interpretin , myself , so i was in english , so in english , i understand english .
interpreten are the geschriebenen music of the world &apos;s leading notes .
that you can &apos;t mention a translator in another language , but also the deeper sense of words and wortzusammenhang understand the deeper translation of words and understand , that &apos;s what everybody has to do with .
and from the german sector , the english can be more , more knowledge , but it &apos;s when you go to the outhouse or even a dispute .
and the reason is , but for laien , what we &apos;re doing with our musiksprache .
when a interpretin heap , i just got to the rest of the time .
they think that the composer in the grades has all been hineingeschrieben , which he has been talking about .
in fact , the notes are very vague and ungenau .
these grades are about equivalently or ungenau , like a verbal verbal language , if you &apos;re very careful penibelst , it &apos;s a landscape .
because in this verbalen landschaftsbeschreibung , the duft landschaftsbeschreibung is not smell , the extent of the grüns is not to hear the säuseln of the system .
that means the infinity has to be the interpret of the notensprache of the terrestrial notensprache in another , which is hörbare , concrete , non-verbal musiksprache .
today i want to share what i &apos;m saying , &quot; so , even more , even in a verbal language .
so basically , a translation of translation .
so i prefer to do that all the rest of german , because if i was even english to the english to even english to the english , it would be the way for me to translation the translation of translation .
so the reason that the music works for me as similar as the novelty language .
the notierten grades , the function of letters of letters .
so it &apos;s not just a sense of learning notes , and the right to the piano , or the right place on the piano .
that would be the letters that you learned , to paint .
the point of letters , you start to get language .
so , you need to be able to be able to use least as long as the child language .
there &apos;s also the fact that there &apos;s also the hausgebrauch , whether you learn to the hausgebrauch , you &apos;re trying to be able to learn passively or you can talk to you can talk to the musical action .
the work of the interpreten is similar to the wie of a theaterregisseurs .
after you &apos;re doing a piece of a piece of a piece of play , because you &apos;re excited about it , you &apos;re excited about the other things that &apos;s been described .
you can see information about the sekundärliteratur .
you &apos;re closer into the letters , tagebüchern , notes , or whether it &apos;s words , thoughts from the composers themselves .
you &apos;ve studied the writings that he looked at before and komponiert .
you start building .
the beweggründe , it &apos;s too writing .
how did he do ?
how did the society and the politics ?
all of us all about me .
you &apos;re thinking about this time , by looking at the same , contemporary images , you &apos;re looking at the same bilder .
and with the time , you also have a rich of knowledge to see the composers that you can get a little bit of playing , and it &apos;s a way to feel easier and feel easier .
the composer is becoming more to the friend of that you &apos;re together .
his concerns , the piece of writing is getting more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more
now , there &apos;s the notes , all of others , all the other set of the composers , but a scaffolding , i &apos;m going to take this scaffold to befüllen it and meaning again .
i then say , my own words , what between that particular scaffolding .
i play what these sounds could have been able to have these benefits .
now , for the composers , and what they could do for him today .
every note , every phrase gets a sense , because i get it to be able to have my new york city now .
it has to be stimmig in this , and now i can &apos;t make my audiences not convince my audiences that my life is .
it &apos;s always a very happy concert if i could make the experience that i could have the experience that i could have been so much as long as long as i am in the way , how to experience the new way .
as you have a happy new day , though , again , again , with the same rituals of life , the frühstücken , to work , the same thing i also go to the same piece of new york .
i &apos;m a day again , the seasons shift , my pulse is going to slow slower , in a konzertsaal , it takes the longer , in a konzertsaal , it takes the longer back to the sound that sound comes back to home .
i &apos;ll take this breath for the audience , and it &apos;s bewusst .
all of that influenced me and all the native stuff that influenced my experience .
very wonderful thing is also when i &apos;m standing with a duo-partner on stage and we have the same .
then the same thing happens in a good , angeregten conversation .
you &apos;re bringing a new idea of the idea of the world and the other thing is going to be a reaction .
it &apos;s exciting , because then things happen that we don &apos;t have geprobt and what you can &apos;t be .
it makes big fun to make this way , and they &apos;ve been the audience as the audience , like the music medium .
so every concert a concert concert .
i &apos;m going to play more like that moment .
i can &apos;t play as a twenty years .
there &apos;s a lot of more than i &apos;m going to have a lot of more than today , and i &apos;m going to get to my palette of the musikklänge , more farbnuancen , and just as a result today .
certainly , i &apos;m going to have some farbtöpfe rausgeschmissen , but for new dazubekommen .
so , a nice , for example .
it was on a klavierkursus basis in my beloved old teachers , a famous beethoven-spezialist , ein beethoven-spezialist , konzertpianist and the professor professor in stuttgart .
unfortunately , i was a lot to young , so that he was emeritiert when i finally started studying myself .
but i had the big good fortune to be very early , and so i was very , i was going to see my research on his classes .
i was 17 , i was walking on a weekends again , and then i played the last half of the chopin , a spätwerk .
he wondered what the introduction of that ballade of me was .
this is so a getragenes part .
and i said , well , expectation .
he &apos;s got to be able to do this ? &quot;
that must be the altersunterschied .
because for me , she &apos;s memory .
he was talking about international science .
well , with a lot of music , you have dreams , but not significant .
i play the piece of all the time again , and it has been a reminder of me , even though it &apos;s not a single note .
every time is , because again , i read something new .
one example of a very different area , and that &apos;s the seerosen x-mal of the brain .
it &apos;s always the same garden , but to different kinds of tageszeit , in verschiedenem light .
he has the seerosen verschiedentlich , as he saw as you saw as you see in this moment .
his personal impressionen of seerosen .
the x-malige interpretation of a life is that comparable .
now i &apos;m more than a chopin vet than he was talking about a piece of years .
he has only lived with years .
and it &apos;s important to look at the grades of the notes , even though i mean , you can check them .
to keep the komponisten , right with the composers .
because the grades are the only to the point directly .
before , when he died .
now , how do you start to speak the language of music ?
i said yes , you need about as long as the gesprochene language .
often the musikunterricht is so that you learn the notes .
you learn first reading , just before you can talk only a word .
you learn the sound to the notes on the planet .
and if all of the fingers of the notes and it was like it &apos;s going to move into the grades , then they &apos;ll sound pitches , the zusammen of music .
if the sex is happening , the students will wash the nächstschwierige .
it &apos;s not a im thing about energy .
all right , there &apos;s a quick piece of presto , which is a quick piece .
lento , slowly .
and leisezeichen , f and b , etc .
so , you know , most of the right here .
but even if you &apos;re watching this data , it &apos;s still just a technical .
and it &apos;s not a interpretation .
i &apos;m going to ask me .
i &apos;m going to feel that you often agree with a little bit of the other .
namely , that to make music on the instrument , which has to do that , and feel it before .
that &apos;s singing .
a kid that doesn &apos;t learned because it doesn &apos;t learned because it doesn &apos;t have the parents , it &apos;s not going to do it .
that &apos;s like sprechenlernen .
it &apos;s necessary to use its own experiences and the idea of music to have a more chance to get a chance to get to sound .
people never have never come , never have a eigenen app as it is , a clay .
a partnership with his own breath .
the song is the extension of our bodies .
our vocal chords , our hands and feet .
so , the hammerköpfe in the piano is the sequel of my fingers .
the melody of the dance and the rhythm in dance .
the dauernde berieselung of the music is not förderlich .
you don &apos;t need to make music to make music when it &apos;s a boring .
not necessary to whistle a liedchen or too .
every time music is going to be plattgemacht when you &apos;re talking about outside of the outside .
certainly , there &apos;s some of them who say , yes , but what do you do when i can &apos;t singing .
i think that &apos;s what i do , you can &apos;t sing , a , because they believe that they can &apos;t do ?
or b , because they don &apos;t have learned ?
but the two is not too late to find out whether it can &apos;t be able to find out whether it &apos;s not true , or learn how to address these little muscles that are big einstellen .
that &apos;s what you can do .
or c , because you have a ihnen that they are untauglich .
and i &apos;m asking how fachlich &apos;s brains , this diagnosis was ?
have you already have a zweit- or a drittmeinung , how do you say it beautiful today , you know , &quot; how do you say today ?
or d , they don &apos;t like to have music and want to do with it .
what i &apos;d been called , because music is a beautiful , kommunikative thing .
but maybe you can also be umstimmen .
well , so you see all the time has been a aussichtsloser candidate .
but don &apos;t tell you , please , i don &apos;t understand anything about classical music .
i can &apos;t say whether it &apos;s good or bad .
i &apos;m sure , i &apos;m sure , but certainly can you tell you or not .
because i don &apos;t think it says somebody , i don &apos;t know if i can cook it .
so they don &apos;t eat me , they don &apos;t get food , just because they can &apos;t cook .
so they don &apos;t have to classical music because they don &apos;t play a tool .
listen to hear them , and they say , whether it &apos;s not a person or not .
the music of them are too sweet or sweet .
tell you what they feel .
and they also get a lot of time and want to be able to tell a little bit more about , or taste even what are happening .
why do i &apos;m talking about my audience that it &apos;s also active .
because the music is a language and a language is to communicate .
a artwork that you never see is not a force .
the food that created from a köchin or a chef that has been completed , and not just looked at the side .
so , please hear a music is going to be a music .
it &apos;s not just a nice geräuschtapete .
when in a environment where the adults are activated music , or at least music music , a child , it &apos;s easy to have a kind , to ask , which color has your flower ?
can you tell me now in the blue ?
and the kid playing , after a gedenkpause , rather than a red now , rather than blue .
and this sounds different than before .
and that was the first of a eigenen musical ausdrucks .
so the first step to a interpretation .
and what happens when you have a piece of today , which originally a hundred hundred 100 , before a hundred years ago ?
meanwhile , meanwhile , we have the tools .
there were no piano in the time .
it wasn &apos;t yet .
i think that the greatest thing would have been given if he could have the klanglichen powers of modern klaviere .
i can now see the klangvorstellungen that the stream has been able to sound about the sound of what a barockes cembalo can &apos;t .
so , from beethoven , you know , he was more heard than he was deaf deaf .
today is a modern orchestra in the position , all of a orchestra has been rejected .
so the composers on us is called the pieces of new york .
so they &apos;re having taken , what they &apos;re just doing in the care of .
and also , what they think would be thinking about .
or what i &apos;m doing today about today , because what they thought they could have thought .
thank you .
you know what &apos;s envy ?
did you have a bit of a sudden ?
and how did it look like ?
it &apos;s been .
i have a friend who owns a passerati .
when i come back to my little w and me , &quot; i &apos;m going to go back to this feeling .
i took some of a head .
i say , ulf , what &apos;s like you like this , &quot; whoa of the great car ?
that &apos;s what &apos;s been the first year of his pet year .
and even , you &apos;re going to be less than me .
why do i need to afford to me about ?
and then i instantly , that &apos;s been ungerecht .
it &apos;s against the justice .
and as i say , this is a awkward sense of the awkward feeling .
our organism has a fantastic way to get to the precise feelings of how to make it to go to the way .
you can also do this as a rache with words like revenge or a bit .
so i want to share with this mechanism today , something you &apos;re doing something about what you probably familiar with .
the mechanism is from the lie .
but don &apos;t think of course , think about the lie , as you may have heard , if people say , nobody has created a wall .
and then rocks auftürmt , so he &apos;ll give you the sight .
at one of these , you see that the liars itself doesn &apos;t believe what he says .
it makes sense of light that he &apos;s completely different in mind .
he just didn &apos;t just her , and not just himself .
no , the lie that i &apos;m talking about is that they deceive themselves themselves .
they need this privilege to preserve a lebenslüge , to preserve a self-deception .
they can easily easily easily easily , yes , nachprüfen or even the simplest .
they need time .
from this time , a anecdote that you may know .
spanish spanish spanish has been a woman portraitiert picasso .
this woman has opened up the portrait of it , you know , the portrait of her dignity .
picasso , wait just wait .
it &apos;s always going to be a lot of time .
and that point and when you laugh , you see how important this lie is , and how much time you need to know something that artists can actually learn to know .
because artists have a gestörtes relationship to lie .
the artist shares a bit with , and particularly , in the dame , which you don &apos;t see if you just look at the mirror .
the artist gives you in a portrait of what they &apos;re going to do is what they &apos;re going to be familiar with that , when you keep again .
then , the awkward feeling , it could be described to you and they will always be able to be honest .
so here we have this mechanism that we could use a great invention to the stabilisierung of our bodies .
and not only in the arts , also in the arts , in the mythology , in the mythology , in the mythology , in the mythology of it again .
you may know , perhaps this idea of dame that everybody who has pulled out every morning in the mirror and it &apos;s been asking who &apos;s the most beautiful thing ?
one day , this mirror , yes , there &apos;s a schönere .
behind seven and so on .
and they also know how much of that true sense of that , the mirror cannot lie , from that true , auskunft .
but we should simply make to make sense of a wife that you can &apos;t say there &apos;s a schönere somewhere .
here it is what we &apos;re seeing in the politically correctness , over again .
we need to have this lüge that we &apos;ve been using this lüge that we can &apos;t even recognize that we can &apos;t even recognize that we can &apos;t even recognize that we can &apos;t even recognize that we can &apos;t even recognize that we can &apos;t even recognize that we can &apos;t even recognize that we can &apos;t even recognize that we can &apos;t even recognize that we can
we &apos;re not only in art in the arts , in the arts , but also in the science of the great lying .
and there is this story from the woman of worchester .
she heard of charles darwin , the origin of the species and the descent of the human people .
and that man would be the monkey &apos;s abstammen and , yes , there &apos;s a common ancestry between humans and monkeys .
and then she rennte her to her husband and said , that &apos;s probably not true , which charles there .
human beings , from the monkey &apos;s abstammen or a common ancestry .
no , no , no .
and if it &apos;s true , we need to prevent that people get more .
why do we have to ensure that people get more of something that if it &apos;s true ?
because we can &apos;t live without this without any lebenslüge life .
because we &apos;re having this self-deception , abstammung of the people who exists , and that &apos;s what makes it exists , and that &apos;s what makes it exists , and that &apos;s what &apos;s going to do that is for us .
so we can &apos;t even know that things .
we need to prevent that people get more kenntnis , especially when they are true .
so you see how slowly came out of this mechanism , and how the middle of the middle , he &apos;s able to get something else that he &apos;s going to do something else as a more exciting picture of ourselves , i want to give you a more story .
very particularly , i mean , i mean .
my wife told me .
she came one day of school , she &apos;s teacher , and she told him a student .
a autistischer student .
they might be particularly happy to the sincerity because he &apos;s sincerity .
and she said , what are your math ?
and he says , well , i &apos;m the feuerwehr .
and because i &apos;m at the fire , i &apos;m interested in things .
yes , you feel it , if you &apos;re heiter at this point , there &apos;s something wrong .
i have my wife , always , when a human man in a moral sense that &apos;s because of a man &apos;s wörtchen because we &apos;re trying to replace it through the wörtchen .
take it , and then you learn the sentence .
so even though i &apos;m at the fire , i &apos;m interested in things .
it &apos;s what that &apos;s the real truth behind the cause .
so , a little bub , who cares about feuerlöschen .
and the interest is going to be fürs .
but there &apos;s no way we can devise , where you learn how to fire .
there &apos;s only the most amazing thing .
he &apos;s got to be angemeldet .
and überdies , you don &apos;t say to say that you &apos;d like to put aside , and i think when the fire changes .
no , it &apos;s just a lot of better if we show that we are in charge of that , the risks that are beginning when they put fire .
so here you have this little mechanism .
this is what this verweis that is in the mind of the bub , which he was actually related to the fire of the fire , but that he can &apos;t say loud .
here you have this zensor between the unconscious and the promise that they know something different , and the things you know about it , they know that they &apos;re different from which you know , they &apos;re going to look different , so they can sound much better for them and others .
so , in fact , these words that we could use in the language of the time again .
actually , we know something else that is that case .
but we know when we did that , the social lot are very sensitive .
we can &apos;t do that .
it &apos;s impossible to be able to do things in a society that work wants to work .
i want to share with you today , and what we found in my institute .
after all the logic of these deception , these self-deception , another reality , from which we already know , from the most that we already know that they &apos;re being able to spread the structure of the outside .
i want to give you two examples , maybe three examples .
the first example of the face of what many of you know and some of them , just need some of them , very few at all .
i mean the soul .
what is the soul ?
the soul is so much of the things that says about .
it &apos;s something that &apos;s not about the stop stofflicher , that &apos;s what &apos;s happening .
and if you have people who are working in front of the most belief that they had a soul , or you can also say that they had to say that they had to be a soul , or you can also say that they had to be able to do a seele , or you can also say that they &apos;re going to be able to do something like
and from that soul , they think that they kind of sort of like this in this nature nature , in that nature nature , anima is poisoning , the lufthauch , the präsent .
and when this lufthauch came across the people , he &apos;s a angefüllt with dignity , with nature , with nature , that can be done with soul .
and then he can eben .
that &apos;s what that &apos;s like the soul .
so she &apos;s supposed to be able to get from the people in the way .
so we should be a sense of what &apos;s going to be the basis of our lives .
and if you have this mortar , you know , you know , you know , the logic that we experience this happiness , through a lie to improve our world .
because now you can use a dreisatz .
dreisatz &apos;s mind , you know , from school .
this is now a dreisatz , which is a logic describes .
this is the way of the hardest part of my talk .
so here you need something logic , but also the willingness to lie .
namely , that they can just apply these logic .
in this dreisatz , three sentences .
the first sentence is , klaus , there is no soul .
so the second sentence is , when klaus has been right , he &apos;s not a soul .
now there &apos;s a third sentence .
i have been particularly blown up .
a third sentence , who immediately ask people to a soul .
the one who doesn &apos;t have soul , who is dead and can anything .
and here &apos;s what they do .
here comes this logic in this , yes , in this täuschenden talk , the expression .
you see it immediately .
the first two sentences that are the higgs boson .
i can start everything .
the logic doesn &apos;t make any change whatsoever .
i can say , the kanzlerin is a man .
and if i &apos;m right , the kanzlerin is a man .
if i don &apos;t quite quite right , you know , the kanzlerin isn &apos;t a man .
the logic does not have a purpose of what &apos;s going on .
i can start .
but i think , is , it &apos;s a bit of a thing when i was right .
so if klaus says , there &apos;s no soul .
secondly , if he &apos;s right , he didn &apos;t really soul .
these things are the same thing .
and now our täuschendes awareness is instantly , you can do something .
it &apos;s a third sentence that i think nothing to do with the first two sentences and the so , as if the opposite of the first sentence was already and vorausgesetzt .
because we have to prove it , whether it &apos;s soul .
but with that logic that &apos;s just saying that two sentences can be counted , and a third dazuhängt that looks like he could save anything to do that we save our lebenslüge .
so we do , we pretend to be the way it would be possible to live without a soul .
and we &apos;re very happy about it .
we can do that things like this .
in the present , we have about a whole sense of view , which is the case again .
now , you have to keep another philosophisches , a dauerbrenner from the philosophy , &quot; ok .
that &apos;s what we &apos;re going to go back into the vierzehnte century .
there was a scholars who was the hieß buridanus and after the most der esel esel .
the buridansche &apos;s a esel esel , which is made of a human nature .
not that soul .
that &apos;s so a naturding .
and when you put the exact same in the middle between two gleichgroßen , it &apos;s verhungert .
because he doesn &apos;t know what he should first to go first .
so he &apos;s right in the middle .
so the naturdinge explorer .
gleichgroße forces has each other .
there &apos;s nothing happening at all .
only if you get another example , so if you put your heart attack , you need a haystack , it needs to be a lot of reason .
he &apos;s just to be able to do the right thing .
if you have this idea that you get in nature , and that &apos;s where nature is going to be , from the larger , you have a anziehen , you &apos;ve got to anziehen the sense that it &apos;s like a free will .
and if we &apos;ve been in frankfurt at frankfurt at frankfurt , i remember the max-planck-institut for the hirnforschung .
there is a scholars who &apos;s called singer , and from him to say you &apos;re sometimes sometimes , &quot; there &apos;s no willensfreiheit .
now we can form the second sentence and can say , if you &apos;re right , you have no willensfreiheit .
these sentences are absolutely logical and correct .
and what we can read now almost every day in the daily newspaper , which is what you find in this third sentence .
it looks like this , who doesn &apos;t have any willensfreiheit , can &apos;t be used for his actions and claims to responsibility and he &apos;s so unzurechnungsfähig .
again , you &apos;ve got it again .
actually , you have to prove it as something like willensfreiheit .
but the logic of the deception allows us to do that as if the first sentence of treating any fish , you know , the first sentence of treating any opposite without proof .
and now you can just do when you want to do anything if you want to do anything if you want to make themselves more powerful , and especially if they want to make people happy , that eggs would be zur .
and they rehearse the example of the people , you can say , there &apos;s no more toil .
and please don &apos;t use the german word for vorhersager that means .
the sales of the things they do not call it , that would be a little more politically inkorrekt .
you say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
now instantly , you will be a , for granted , you know , you can &apos;t prove it .
and you have a problem .
because as you are busy , they &apos;re able to prove that there is no more subtle , the man &apos;s been quite happy .
he &apos;s very happy about it because he &apos;s misled .
because he &apos;s led to have a fährte , he didn &apos;t want to go .
because actually , this man is not interested in terms of care .
he &apos;s just interested in the need to feel themselves in front of the need to have to think that there are vorhersager .
so , in the way , in the way , the großartigkeit experience the magnificence of the lie .
and if you put them together , they &apos;re having to feel that dreisatz of the other people , they do it because they &apos;re going to make other happy if you &apos;re not going to remember their selbstlüge .
thank you for your attention .
yes , good afternoon .
i &apos;ve always been asked to have asked , whether i can mention it .
it &apos;s one of the most amazing here from this great event and i asked me , if i &apos;m a talk and my idea .
i have to say , you &apos;ve got to say , you know , i was very difficult to talk about my idea .
and i may have been a little bit of my inselprojekt , i &apos;m trying to give you to you .
but it &apos;s obviously the sum of all kinds of ideas .
i probably am probably , the two nice girl is because i probably started to study this bad öko image , which is , i &apos;m going to study in karlsruhe , engineering , i think , i think , &quot; i &apos;m going to go .
and i &apos;m having a middle of the &apos; 80s of the &apos; 80s , in the &apos; 80s , because i was going to make a shower and the result of it in karlsruhe .
there was a kernforschungsanlage leopoldshafen .
the very first time , the jülich was also die .
the hot today .
because a good engineer designed for talented cars or atomkraftanlagen .
but what &apos;s like n n , from a solarpendel , from a hundred watts coming out of the square meter of the square meter , which was a toy .
and in berlin , there was a crazy ingenieurkollektiv .
i &apos;m the premium-kola-mensch grateful that he &apos;s going to take the word back back , because after the mauerfall , you can &apos;t use the word in the word because all of the left was bad .
but not the years of the achtiziger was not like that .
there was so much that there was selbstverwaltete alternativbetriebe , and one of them was in kreuzberg in kreuzberg , where you were doing the bad .
and the ort , but that was wuseltronik and sonnenenergie and electric and sonnenenergie and there were the middle of the 80s .
and yes , a lot of what was told me , because many beautiful expressions , beautiful expressions , which i have been durchlebt .
i was 11 years in the farm , that was basisdemokratisch .
we were 20 people .
if one was told , the vetoprinzip , which has a complete zermürbt . i spent my great ingenieurstudium , because i really have spent my great ingenieurstudium , because i was really hard to a schwachsinnige thing because i was really hard to the end of my father &apos;s window , you &apos;ve got the money to the window on your own kid .
it &apos;s busy with respect .
and it was really very , very bitter , and you get stuck in such a ne , which is , you know , he showed that a picture on the planet , which is , he showed that a picture on the planet , which is , you know , he showed that a picture on the stage , whether it really was fantastic .
and i then got to sechsundneunzig ausgehalten , and then we have friends with friends , i &apos;ve been mitbegründer with friends of the company solon , who then matched with the spin-off q-cells of the world .
but there we have of course , we have the problem of a growing unternehmens and we have a small issue of a future , and we have a small issue of the future , and it &apos;s just about the next one , we &apos;re just saying that people say , it &apos;s the same thing that people say , that &apos;s the next thing that we &apos;re doing
and i &apos;ve got a project i &apos;ve got you to now .
and the title of the &#93; was , yes , as you go to a hundred percent .
and we just have a relatively einfach-verrückten story of questions , where could you be able to have a memory today .
on this island island , which is the island graciosa on the azoren .
yes , that &apos;s so the data .
there are four thousand people .
they have a total percent of the total percent .
and the question is , why don &apos;t you have any more ?
it just goes up .
if you can actually get more windkraft , we start the system to fail .
i also tell you the politicians when they besichtigen our facility , when you go into berlin-adlershof .
the granny say why ?
we &apos;ve been talking about twenty percent in germany .
but it can &apos;t be a problem .
but not , we &apos;ve got in europe seven percent and our network is just the european .
if we had fallen in europe , we have seen the same problems that people respond to this island .
the question was simple , the first one with the island of the island of the island of the island of the island of the island .
like big , because you &apos;re actually going to be a battery that &apos;s like that , you &apos;re going to be dreißig , and i &apos;m going to be dreißig , but they may have been growing up with some renewable .
and yes , i &apos;ll go back to a slide distance .
the conventional system looks like this .
by the way , a year performance based on dieselbasis zugebaut in the world .
that &apos;s the equivalent of the heart of a hundred , because that &apos;s especially fast .
the world &apos;s world &apos;s mind , the basic economy is going to be associated with a diesel , because you have no genehmigung .
it goes to .
you might go to the box box .
and then it looks like this .
in the course of the dieseln , two will continue to be more .
yes , this is a unten on the bottom .
we also have very high data .
and the windkraftanlage or whatever it is , is a back-up system of a system of a system of a system of a system of a system of a system that can only be in small quantities .
our goal was to say , okay , ok , ok , okay , ok , ok , ok , ok , ok .
the diesel is back-up and the wind , the wind , the wind that the last will be able to take the larger .
and when you &apos;re talking about twenty percent , 30 percent renewable , so energy per year , not the performance of the moment , you have to turn the basics .
that means that the moment you &apos;ve got to worry that the renewables can be able to take the whole network .
and that can be able to do , of course , if you &apos;re in any way , and this is a beautiful .
that &apos;s the one that nobody &apos;s doing this .
that &apos;s what &apos;s in the little style , so you can also use their rasierer about a small wechselrichter of the kleinen .
people ask me what forscht you were doing in adlershof ?
that &apos;s what it goes .
if you want to get a multiple of these wechselrichtern zusammenschalten and the best to build a network , it will be very complicated .
and our goal was to be , we wanted to go to the u.s. government come to the beach and then left the last 10 , the last 10 , the last 10 , and then they &apos;ll be able to get this one on the rest of the world , very expensive and that &apos;s not going to work that you do that .
it &apos;s going to be a stimulus , the way , hydrogen , methane , power , methane , power , power , power , power , power , power , it will be .
they have to go to a saisonalspeicher and winter-sommer and not just tag-nacht .
we wanted to know what about a normal , stinknormalen elektrochemischen battery .
how far you do ?
and then they had a whole bunch of simulation .
and they have wind and sun and the last and the last durchsimuliert and the result , a brand-new result of a sudden that you have a mittleren rate of about 50 cents a mittleren from about 50 cents a long , about vierundvierzig cents .
that was the first thing about six years ago .
and then we said , okay , ok , because , ok , because , ok .
is , yeah , we have a business model .
we are the same as the diesel-system , if the average five percent per year .
and then we started with the insulanern with the insulanern .
what would done everything ?
and they have investors , i have new gesellschafter .
we were just five people to build a um , and we were in order to build a society .
and here &apos;s what the title of this is .
the brown is , in the conventional system that green is our system .
and that our system also has a preisanstieg , it &apos;s because of that we &apos;re going to grow up with a little more than twenty and auch and a preissteigerung on the other things .
and the power-utility that the elektrizitätsversorgungsunternehmen on the island , is , we find that we find .
but we also want to support you that you can solve the technical problem .
and so we decided to build in berlin , we decided to build a hall where we sort of the electric electric age in the scale of the scale of the scale of the scale of the scale of the scale of the scale of the scale of the scale of the scale of the scale of the scale .
that means we have a little bit of the greatest battery in the world .
here is it .
the actual point of asia is where the falle is coming from japan .
and witzigerweise is in the &apos; 70s in the &apos; 70s , in the &apos; 70s , days , and then they were auslizensiert to the japanese .
you can see , it &apos;s a very , very large battery .
it has a phone performance and can carry six hours of bringing these power and that &apos;s the battery that we &apos;ve created in simulationstechnisch .
and they have a lock .
we also have one of these diesel-aggregate in the same size as he says , in the hall , there &apos;s the great battery , here , there &apos;s the great battery , here , there &apos;s the great battery , here , there &apos;s the great battery , here are the full battery , here are all the umrichter , and we can see the rete .
so , here we simulate the whole übertragungsleitungsystem , the kilometer-physik of wires , to sort of the wire , the schwingungsverhalten system in the net .
and you can see this again .
we can also grow zweihundert electric resources on the rete .
here we see this again here again again again again again here again , here again , the whole , individual aggregate .
and what we did was the hall , until it was the hall to be able to find anything that we did , until this one was between the individual system in the world , at software , we did .
so we &apos;re not a batteriehersteller , but we define the als , but we define as a company that only between the subject and everything is going to be able to see .
you have to communicate with the battery , you have to communicate , you have to communicate the grid , and that &apos;s very complicated .
the beauty is that you &apos;re looking at this island today , you know , all of the vorwegnehmen can be at the problems that we &apos;re going to get to the amount of renewable renewables .
so this whole discussion , how will we take the moment and herbewegt , like the island , the island is , like the island , we have to take for example , for example , dreißig percent , so we müdsen the wind and the sun .
natürlicht offers the smart-grid .
so , smart-grid , a riesenthema everywhere .
we can start at the island , we can start to integrate , rumzufragen , you can see because the burden of the load .
that means if you can go away at the rate of 70 percent renewable , you will not be able to do not without any memories .
you can go through &apos; n smart-grid , you can see from the bed nets , yes , that should be on any case , yes , that &apos;s what you can never do on the other things .
and that &apos;s what &apos;s like the message .
so many people are also many people , you know , you can see because you can see what problems .
if we do the heart attack , you didn &apos;t have the diesel crowd , which is a certain amount of inertia in the net .
and our europäisches verbundnetz is basically just about the rotating of great kraftwerken , wherever all the wave are all about europe .
we look at this grid , seeing the 50 , and if it fails neunundvierzig komma komma , we start a few ventilchen aufzumachen , then we go back to a little merh , then we &apos;ll come back up .
this is the system .
and of course , that &apos;s incredibly träge .
if you go to the tail somewhere , you &apos;re going to be dismissed .
the spinning &apos;s spinning has 10 seconds to keep the rete .
and in the time you can respond to another .
if you don &apos;t have this , these little mass , you need to replace the mit and elektrochemie .
and we can start with this big battery once again .
there &apos;s a look at what enormous geschwindigkeitsmöglichkeiten there are .
and the message is now , we have to look at this rotating of the masses , when we &apos;re going to get out of our goals , twenty percent , twenty percent , twenty percent , twenty percent , zwanzig percent and so on , if we want to reach the case , twenty percent , and so on , if we want to reach the case , twenty
then we have to do our must-run capacity in the network .
must-run &apos;s just the power to keep the frequency frequency .
yes , that &apos;s a riesendebatte moment of the kohlekraftwerken , zubau from the kohlekraftwerken , because we don &apos;t think or gasturbinen , because that &apos;s not .
and we &apos;re just trying to do that , you &apos;re trying to get the capacity , the must-run capacity , by using the elektrochemische of the grid .
there &apos;s a whole lot of studies .
and to that purpose , people are always looking at and look at our versuchsstand on the side of the , , sort of unseren .
and yes , the discussion about the question , how far can you get a piece of a piece of weit .
and many discussions i had in the last six years , similar , similar , similar , similar , the discussion i had to go to the subject .
we &apos;re not , is , kinderspielkram , we have everything , never going on .
we have called gigawatt photovoltaik in germany .
that &apos;s vorbildlich .
and i just go from that we will have the same in the next 30 years , the same capacity to elektrochemischen in the world .
it &apos;s simply that way .
there &apos;s a whole lot of widerständen and streitereien .
the beauty is that i &apos;ve been now now in the last two years , that the scientists are remembered on my side .
we &apos;ve got about 10 million förderprojekte , including the course of the ne now .
it &apos;s going to happen in the next april april .
so therefore , you know , there &apos;s a change in there , and just from this abwehrhaltung , yes , and just from this abwehrhaltung , that &apos;s what &apos;s going to 100 percent renewable .
and if you have a hundred percent , it &apos;s a ja system .
it &apos;s going to try to do this , these insulaner , these insulaner , which have a little net net , which has nothing to do with our lunch nothing .
the question is very simple when you &apos;re buying a separate or uranen energierträgern , the somewhere in the world are going to be rausgebohrt somewhere in the world and becoming they &apos;re going to be hingebracht somewhere , they &apos;re a island .
then they only only do what the sun and wind there is where they live .
and that &apos;s so much of our vision from a vernüftigen and i &apos;m also grateful to find that they said , &quot; use .
and that &apos;s what we do , and we come to the same feedback , including the talk of premium kola , that you can use a collective and electric , there &apos;s a little bit of a little bit .
and yes , i want you to do you , i want you to do you , you know , in the sense that you can make a little bit more and a vision .
and you have to stay quite trivial , but i think it &apos;s going to be .
thank you .
when steve lopez , kolumnist , the los angeles times , one day in the middle of los angeles , he heard a wonderful music .
she came from a man , a african-american , sympathisch , rau , homeless , homeless on a violin , which only had two .
many of you will know the story , because of a book that was lifted up , with robert anthony anthony , who was brought verfilmt , who was brought out of lopez , the kontrabassisten , who was arrested verfilmt , who was in the juilliard-konservatorium and whose vielversprechende anthony , and whose vielversprechende was tragischerweise by his paranoide .
nathaniel left , a woman , suffered a nervenzusammenbruch and 30 years later , he lived in the middle of the skid in the middle of los angeles .
i recommend all the , book , and i &apos;m seeing the movie , so they don &apos;t just understand the wonderful connectedness , but as the music was , how the music of the music was helped , and how they were , the way they were doing this , when this is what this is what we &apos;ve been allowed to be able to get the mithalf ,
i met 2,000 ayers in 2008 , two years ago , in the walt disney hall hall .
he had just written a screening of beethoven and an vierter and i came behind the stage to imagine .
he was talking about a very heiteren and geselligen clay about the baseball world , and i think about how the dodgers it was never in the baseball world , and that all of the tückischen passage passage , the first sentence of beethoven , the first sentence of beethoven .
and we got to speak up to speak music , and a few days later i got a email in the state that the nathaniel für for geigenunterricht bei .
i have to mention that a nathaniel treatment is , because he was talking about elektroschocks and handschellen and handschellen , a trauma that has been a trauma life .
as a consequence , he &apos;s particularly vulnerable , in particular , the sind are sometimes , sometimes , in the streets of skid row row , and he &apos;s going to be in a lot of eigenen row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row row
and in this one , a reizstadium device , nathaniel , when we were to our first time in walt disney concert , he had this legal flackern in his eyes and the whole lost .
he talked about invisible , and the loss of what he wanted to poison in the poison .
i was afraid , not meinetwegen , but i had a fear that he could get into a given of the other states , and that i had his relationship to the violin , when i started , about a tonleitern and arpeggios and other exciting forms of didaktischen geigenpädagogik .
so i just started playing .
i played the first sentence of beethoven .
and while i was playing , i noticed that in a vollkommene shift .
it was when he was under the impact of a unseen , which was a chemical reaction , which was a chemical reaction .
nathaniels manischer dances turns into understanding , in a meaningful curiosity and anmut .
and as a miracle he took his violin and i started to play after hearing a few ausschnitte of violinkonzerten and asked me to play them , mendelssohn , tschaikowski , sibelius .
so we started talking about music , started by the way , from the stream of beethoven , and all the other bs , from bartók to esa-pekka salonen .
and i realized that he was not only had a enzyklopädisches knowledge of music , but it also gave it with her close relationship with her relationship .
he was talking about her with a passion and a understanding that i could just mention my colleague in the philharmonie of los angeles .
by writing music , and was made out of this paranoiden , the man who was in the streets of los angeles , a liebenswerter , gebildeter , ausgezeichneter , ausgezeichneter , ausgezeichneter , ausgezeichneter , ausgezeichneter .
music is a way . music changes us .
for example , music is good health .
because the music allows him to him his thoughts and delusions with the aid of his imagination and creativity into something that &apos;s going on .
and so he entflieht his quälenden .
i understood that that &apos;s exactly the nature of art .
that &apos;s why we &apos;re doing something that is in all of the inside , so our feelings , we can feel our feelings , through our artistic lens through our artistic lens through our artistic .
and that reality would take us all the time , and move , inspired us and depressed .
what &apos;s happening , so it took the music back into a community of friends .
the erlösende force of the music brought him back to a family of musicians who had his talent and ihn him .
and i &apos;m going to keep again with a lot of time in the walt disney hall or in skid , because he reminded me why i have become a musician .
thank you .
bruno : thank you . thank you .
robert gupta .
robert gupta : i want to play something i &apos;ve stolen den stolen .
i hope you ask me .
so i have a lot of fishes .
i just had two loved .
this one , which was more like a passionate .
it was a beautiful fish , wohlschmeckend , good , good , gehaltvoll , a bestseller on the menu .
what a fish .
even better , he was convicted in aquakultur , the supposedly highest standards .
so you could sell it , and they sell him .
i had to have a relationship with this beauty of a relationship with this beauty .
one day called the head of the company , and i asked whether i could be a veranstaltung on the sustainability of the farm .
&quot; well , i said .
here was a company to solve the beginning of what this was the physical issue for our chefs , how do we keep fish on our speisekarten ?
in the last 50 years , we &apos;ve got the ocean as the forests .
it &apos;s hard to überbewerten the destruction .
90 percent of the big fish that we love to love , the tuna , the thunfische , schwertfisch , schwertfisch , they &apos;re endangered .
it &apos;s almost nothing left .
so , wohl or übel , fischanbau , a part of our future .
many arguments in it . fischzuchtanlagen of the environment that most of them , and they &apos;re just inefficient , we &apos;re going to take tuna tuna .
he has a futterverwertung from 15 to one .
that means 15 pounds are required to get a big zucht-thunfisch .
not very sustainable .
they don &apos;t know very good .
so here was a company trying to do it right .
i wanted to give you .
and the day i phoned the head of the öffentlichkeitsarbeit for the company .
let &apos;s call him .
&quot; do i said , &quot; just to have the facts right , you &apos;re famous for the facts , so far out in the sea that they &apos;re not going to be the environment . &quot;
&quot; this is true , &quot; he said , &quot; we &apos;re so far out that the waste of our fish is going to be the waste . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; we &apos;re basically a world .
this futterverwertung von zu , &quot; he said .
&quot; the best in the industry . &quot;
2.5 , great .
&quot; 2.5 &apos;s what do you do ? &quot;
&quot; a &quot; nachhaltige protein , &quot; he said .
&quot; great , &quot; i said .
and i was in bed , and i thought , what &apos;s a sustainable protein ?
so i called the next day , just at the next day , i think .
i said , &quot; well , what ? &quot;
he said he didn &apos;t . he &apos;ll get me .
well , i &apos;m a telefonierte with a couple of people in the company , nobody could give me a ordentliche answer until i finally telefonierte with the senior biologists .
we call it a lot of him .
&quot; do i said , &quot; what to do sustainable protein ? &quot;
well , he mentioned some algae and some fischmehle , and then he said he said , hühnchen-pellets .
i said , &quot; hühnchen-pellets ? &quot;
he said , &quot; yes , feathers , skin , reste , reste and food and food . &quot;
i said , &quot; how much of the futters futters is chicken ? &quot;
in the assumption of maybe two percent .
&quot; well , this is roughly 30 percent , &quot; he said .
i said , &quot; well , what is sustainable about this , &quot; what is sustainable about the world ? &quot;
there was a long pause in the back of the sun and he said , &quot; there are just too much chicken on the world . &quot;
i was fascinated by this fish .
no , not because i &apos;m a selbstgerechter genießer and gutmensch .
i actually am .
no , i actually micht from this fish because i actually entliebt from this fish because , i swear to the conversation that has geschmeckt after that conversation .
that second fish , which is a different kind of liebesgeschichte .
it &apos;s the romantic way of the way you learn , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , the fish were more .
i have first got it first in a restaurant .
a befreundete journalist had been talking about two billion of the fish .
it &apos;s called us in some sense .
he came up to the table with a light , almost schimmernden white paint .
the chef had him .
halt twice .
and it was still delicious .
who can be so tasty to do that after he was verkocht ?
i can &apos;t , but this guy can split it .
let &apos;s call it miguel . actually , he &apos;s called miguel .
and no , he didn &apos;t drop the fish , and he &apos;s not a chef . at least on the way that you and i understand .
he &apos;s a biologist la bei la palma la .
this is a fischaufzucht in the südwestlichen corner of the südwestlichen corner .
it &apos;s near the river &apos;s river .
until the 1980s was the farm in the hands of argentiniern .
they were züchteten on what they were doing .
they made the country by the country .
they built this complicated episode of the time , and they put water from the country and the hinaus .
well , they couldn &apos;t do that , not the wirtschaftlich .
and it was a disaster .
it took about 90 percent of the birds to the birds , which is many birds .
and so , this is a spanish company with a spanish company containing land .
what did you do ?
they have the flow of water .
they literally literally the levers .
the water used to put water , they used the channels , to the water again .
they fluteten the canals .
they created a 11.000 hektar -- barsch , meeräsche , shrimp , shrimp , aal -- and the dabei and his firma die .
the farm is incredible .
i mean , you &apos;ve never seen anything else .
they &apos;re working on the horizon that &apos;s a million miles away , and all you see are geflutete channels and that density , the lush march .
i was there in front of a long time ago .
he &apos;s a big guy , three pieces of darwin and a part of a küssen . &quot;
okay ? so , we were walking through the wetlands and i keuche and schwitze , habe up to my knees and miguel , in a biologievorlesung biologievorlesung .
there &apos;s a rare gleitaar .
now he &apos;s the mineralbedürfnisse of the phytoplankton .
and here , here &apos;s a pattern of the bundle that makes it at the tansanische .
it turns out that the most part part of his career in africa has been spent in africa .
i wondered how he was to become a fisch-experten .
he said , &quot; fish ? i know nothing about fish .
i am a expert for connection . &quot;
and then he goes and reproduce in more ways of rare birds and algae and strange wasserpflanzen .
and i don &apos;t understand that was fascinating , you know , the biotische community , you know , the biotische community , so in the way that we see in the way .
it &apos;s great , but i was in love .
and my head was weak about this verkochte fischs , which i had to go on the vorabend .
so i got it . i said , &quot; miguel , how do you feel that your fish is so good ? &quot;
he showed up the algae .
&quot; i know , young , the algae , the phytoplankton , the relations , that &apos;s incredible .
but what do you eat ?
how is the futterverwertung ? &quot;
now he goes to me that it &apos;s a beautiful system that it &apos;s so a beautiful system that the fish eat , what they eat in the wild eat .
the spirit of biomass , the phytoplankton , the zooplankton , that &apos;s what the fish are doing .
the system is so healthy , it &apos;s totally selbsterneuernd .
there &apos;s no food .
ever from a farm , your animals doesn &apos;t do füttert ?
later on this tank , i went to this tank and i asked him , i said , &quot; for a place that could be so different from the same , but to be any farm , which i ever had ever been , &quot; how do you succeed ? &quot;
in the moment , it was like a filmregisseur verlangt .
and we bow out to the corner and the ecke and the unglaublichste of the most famous sight , and thousands of pinker flamingos , a literally pinker carpet so far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as far as
&quot; this is a success , he said .
&quot; look at their bäuche , pink .
they schlemmen . &quot;
schlemmen ? i was utterly confused .
i said , &quot; miguel , schlemmen , schlemmen them , &quot; miguel . &quot;
&quot; yes , he said .
&quot; we lose 20 percent of our fish and fischeiern that the birds .
now last year , there were a lot of 600,000 birds , more than 250,000 different species .
it &apos;s the greatest part of the most important of private design in europe .
i said , &quot; miguel , is a good gedeihender vogelbestand didn &apos;t even the last thing you want to respond to a fischaufzucht ? &quot;
he &apos;s going to send his head , no .
he said , &quot; we &apos;re building extensiv , not .
this is a ökologisches network .
the flamingos fressen fressen .
the shrimp powered the bus powered .
so the heart attack the system do the system . &quot;
okay , let &apos;s do that the same time . a farm that doesn &apos;t make their animals , and one farm that &apos;s going to end their success at the health of their predators .
but also , a vogelreservat , but also a vogelreservat .
oh , by the way , the way should not be there .
they breed in a city of the time where the bodenbeschaffenheit are better for the nestbau .
every morning , they fly up with a mile wide .
and everybody else was flying back .
they make that because they can follow the gestrichelten white linie .
seriously .
i had a kind of journey of the penguins , so i looked at miguel .
i said , &quot; miguel , flying them up and fly back to the night , and then they fly back to the night ?
do you do that for the children ? &quot;
he looked at me when i was a lied from the whitney of a whitney .
he said , &quot; no . you make it because the food is better . &quot;
i haven &apos;t like the skin of my beloved , the delicious , which was delicious , and i don &apos;t like to do it . i don &apos;t like them . i don &apos;t like them .
it &apos;s this beißende , verkohlte flavor .
i never got to go almost .
and yet , when i was in this restaurant in a südspanien , she didn &apos;t have a fischhaut geschmeckt .
they were dressed and when you get a bites of the ocean .
i mentioned the gegenüber and he nickte .
he said , &quot; the skin is kind of a sponge .
it &apos;s the last ted before something in the body .
it &apos;s been evolving by the evolution of evolution , um aufzusaugen . &quot;
and then he added himself , &quot; but our water didn &apos;t have a unreinheiten . &quot;
okay . farm , the farm who doesn &apos;t ignore their fish , one farm , which is their success measures on the front of their predators .
and then i realized when he says , a farm that doesn &apos;t have a farm , he was monumental , because the water comes through this farm , comes from the river .
it &apos;s a river that &apos;s what i &apos;m talking about is what rivers is going to be , they tend to lead , chemical pollutants , using schädlingsbekämpfungsmitteln .
and when it &apos;s a system , and this is a literal verlässt , the water is the water , as it is hereingekommen .
the system is so healthy , it cleans water .
so not only one farm that doesn &apos;t copyright the füttert don &apos;t stare in the farm that their success is about their own lives , but one farm that literally is a wasser-aufbereitungsanlage , and not just for those fish , but for you , and me .
because when the water herausfließt , it &apos;s in the atlantic .
a drop in the ocean , i know , but i take it , and you should also do that , because this is what romantic romantic has always been .
you could say that you &apos;re a recipe for the future of good foods , whether we speak from barsch or fleischrindern .
what we need now is a radically new concept of agriculture , from one , in the food , in fact , in fact , in fact , actually , in fact , in the food .
but for many people , the kind of radical thing is too .
we &apos;re not realisten , we &apos;re genießer . we &apos;re lover .
we love wochenmärkte . we love little familienbetriebe , we &apos;re eating about local food .
and if you say that the things are the future of the future , somebody &apos;s lying somewhere on and says , &quot; hey , hey people , i love pinke , but how will you feed the world ?
how will you feed the world ? &quot;
can i be honest ?
i like this question .
no , not because we &apos;ve been doing enough calories to get more calories than just feed .
a billion people will be hungern .
a billion -- that &apos;s more than ever before -- because of the verteilung inequalities in the distribution of distribution .
well , i don &apos;t like this question because they &apos;ve been doing the logic of our nahrungssystems over the past 50 years .
well , grain of herbivores , schädlingsbekämpfungsmittel of monokulturen , chemicals in the earth , chicken fish , and all the time , the heart just ask , &quot; if we feed more people in the fish , &quot; if we feed more people in how awful that could be ? &quot;
it was the first time . it was the one that was the geschäftsplan agriculture .
we should call them what it is , a long-standing gewerbe , a lush , a mammal , the fast capital system , which is exactly the same production .
it &apos;s not a grid , and it &apos;s not agriculture .
our kornkammer is threatened to the world &apos;s abnehmender , but because of abnehmender resources , but because of the resources , it &apos;s due to be more efficient , but because of abnehmender resources , but because of abnehmender resources , but because of abnehmender resources , but because of the resource , resources , it &apos;s due to be more efficient , but because of the resource ,
not through the latest mähdrescher- and traktor-erfindungen , but through fertile country , not through the pump , but through the frisches country , but through the frisches , and not through fischerboote and netze , but through fishes in the sea .
they want to feed the world ?
let &apos;s start with the question : how do we feed ourselves ?
or better , how can we create conditions that make every community , self-assembling ?
to do that , look at the agrarindustrie-modell for the future .
it &apos;s really old , and it &apos;s done .
capital , chemistry and machines have never done something about food .
now let &apos;s see the ecological model .
that &apos;s what &apos;s happening for two billion years .
look like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel , like miguel .
businesses who are not really not worlds for themselves , the wiederherstellen circuitry instead of intense aufzubrauchen , farmers , the extensiv circuitry instead of intense aufzubrauchen , farmers , not just immune , farmers , not just immune , farmers , not just immune , farmers , not just immune .
because they are the ones who are experts for taste .
and if i really honestly , you &apos;re a better chef than i &apos;m going to be .
you know , that &apos;s right , because if the future is good food is going to be delicious .
thank you .
if i &apos;m a very important thing today , it &apos;s a very thing that we consume the world &apos;s dilemma , we consume , greater than the sum of their professional and rather than thinking about how we can use information that feel like we can use information that feel like that pattern and we can use information that would not be visible .
so what we see here is a typical crappy age to age .
the program i use here is a little experiment .
it &apos;s called pivot and what i can do with pivot , that i can say to a particular thing , say we &apos;re accidents .
and i see instantly , i see another pattern that &apos;s going on .
and that is because the people are at the most beautiful and they &apos;re sitting here at the gebrechlichsten .
we can go and see the data and the data and see the data and the usual suspects are , but not for everybody .
so if we go and go to age , we &apos;re going to say 40 years or younger , we &apos;re seeing that accidents is actually the most exciting thing about the people .
and who &apos;s looking for this is particularly with men .
so what you see is that the flow of information and data in this way , in this way , in this way , in this way , in a lively informationsgrafik .
and if we can &apos;t do this for raw data , why not even for the content itself ?
now what we now have here are the titelbilder of each individual illustrated , which has ever been completed .
it &apos;s all right here . it &apos;s all online .
you can &apos;t measure it for my talk in their hands .
with pivot , they can actually increase in a decade .
you can actually reach in a particular way .
they can jump directly into a certain ausgabe jump .
if i look at the athlete that &apos;s in this room and the sportarten .
i &apos;m a lance armstrong , so i &apos;m going to give my legs at all the time .
now if i want to get a psychologist to get a gröberen , i could think i could think , &quot; ok , what if i &apos;m doing anything with the topic of the subject ? &quot;
so i go back and erweitere the perspective of the perspective .
now i see the lemond .
and so you get a sense of that if you grow this kind of information , gezielter , wider , breiter , breiter , rauszoomen , you don &apos;t just want to be able to not just look or not just simply not just .
you do something that &apos;s actually a little bit differently .
it &apos;s a bit of a bit , and we think it changes how information can be used .
i want to do this idea now a little bit more about what a little bit crazy .
what we &apos;ve done here is we have every single wikipediaseite , and they &apos;re looking at a small summary .
the grandmother contains a short and a symbol of the domain that you &apos;re coming from .
i just show the top 500 of the time .
but even in this case , we can do a lot of things .
we get a sense of the topics that are on wikipedia .
i &apos;m going to choose the topic .
now , after the government i &apos;ve heard the &apos; point , i know that the wikipediakategorien that are most of the people in the year of the year .
this is really important , because this is a realization that doesn &apos;t have a single wikipediaseite .
that &apos;s just what if you look at a step , and all of the table .
so , one of these trips , i can then take the theme of the year &apos;s magazines , &quot; the people of the year &quot; in the year , and all together .
if i think all of these people , i think , i know that the majority of these are regierungsbeamte , some of the science is still less , less , come from the economy . here &apos;s my boss , here &apos;s my boss . and one comes from the musikbereich .
and interestingly , bono , a ted prize .
so we can now jump up and look at all ted prize .
you see , we first of all the web , as if it &apos;s a network that is really a grid , not just from page , but a lot of them .
and so i want to give you what a little surprise might be .
so i just show you the new york times website .
so , these things -- i don &apos;t want to call it a browser ; it &apos;s really not a browser , but you can see the browser , but you can see these zoom-technologie , to each individual website like this .
so i can go back to a step back right into a specific sektion jump .
that &apos;s why , because you just have been through the galapagos of the web in this way , the whole internet-verlauf of the same way .
so i can take my verlauf in my own .
here &apos;s the state of the entire demonstration i &apos;d ever before .
and i can all anything that i looked at now , again , again .
and , if i put a step up and down to everything i can take my legs from my side , i can see my boss after nepotistisch &apos; &apos;s favorite , here , i &apos;m looking for &apos; &apos;s nepotistisch &apos; to gesucht , right here , or here , live labs .
and from this , i can go back into the page and you can go back .
it &apos;s a metaphor that keeps over again , and every time it makes the greater than the sum of the datenteile .
right now , we think that data is a curse .
we &apos;re talking about the seventh of the informationsüberflusses .
we &apos;re talking about the drowning in information . &quot;
what if we could take this situation and the internet on the head , so that we can always go from a different way , now , in many things , now , in many things , and so pattern , what otherwise hidden the hidden geblieben ?
if we can do this , then this bisherige may be a new source of information information .
and instead of just move out to move in information , we can get knowledge .
and if we know , we can actually recognize even more weisheiten from it .
i hear you , thank you very much .
i grew up with a gehörigen portion of science fiction .
in my school , i went to school every day a hour of an hour .
and my nose was always in a book , a science-fiction-buch that my thoughts in other worlds and in my own tief , my tief weise , including curiosity .
but this particular curiosity also feel that i &apos;d always do when i was in school , and &quot; proben &quot; and &quot; sammelte &quot; and käfer , frogs , frogs and käfer and käfer and käfer and käfer and unter under the microscope .
i was completely wissenschaftsbegeistert , you know .
it was always about trying to understand the world and the boundaries of the world .
and my love to science fiction that came in my neighborhood , because then , in the late &apos; 60s , we flew to the moon and the senior and the senior and the erforschten .
jacques cousteau came in living rooms with his amazing farm that are allowing us animals and the world of miracles that we never imagined before .
and that &apos;s what then did i think was that . gepasst .
and i was an artist .
i could draw . i could paint .
and there was no video games that i had to create this übersättigung movies of all the characters in the media landscape had to create the pictures in my mind .
so , we had to do all of that , when we were a book , we took the description of the autors and the projizierten of the canvas in our minds .
my response was to draw and paint from außerirdischen , and paint from aliens , creative worlds , robots , raumschiffen and all so .
in the matheunterricht , i was constantly erwischt by the teachers , like i was hidden hidden , herummalte .
the creativity had to somehow somehow .
and it &apos;s interesting to a interesting thing . what excites me about jacques sendungen , which was the thought of a very unbekannte world here on our earth .
i would certainly never be a alien world with a spaceship . that seemed pretty unlikely .
but here was a world that i could actually make , and she was just as fascinating and exotic as i was going to see that when i read this books .
so i decided to become 15 , rather than 15 .
the only problem was that i was in a small village in canada , a hundred miles from the nearest ocean .
but i didn &apos;t want to go .
i nervte my father , until he finally had a tauchschule in buffalo , new york , made done , the other side of the border , where we lived .
i made my tauchschein in a pool of ymca in a pool of ymca in buffalo new york .
the ocean , a real ocean , i got two years later , when we moved to california .
since then , in 40 years , i &apos;ve been about three hours of water under water under water , and 500 hours of it in tauchbooten .
and i learned that the world of the deep sea , even in the flacheren oceans , so rich , as rich as we can really hardly know it .
nature doesn &apos;t exist limits to our own , ganz human imagination .
so to the days of the days , i think the deepest reverence i see in my own .
and my love with the ocean is holding the ocean , and the same intensity about how do we ever get .
when i was a profession , it was the filmmaking .
the best way to tell my inner urge , to tell stories with my own personal , images , to unite images .
as a kid i was constantly ashamed and so .
so , movies of the way , images and stories . that &apos;s the first thing .
of course , the stories i was looking at from the science-fiction-bereich , &quot; terminator , &quot; dance &quot; and &quot; abyss . &quot;
in &quot; abyss , &quot; i could take my vorliebe for the unterwasserwelt and the tauchen with the filmmaking .
so , in fact , my two two passions .
something interesting happened in &quot; abyss : to solve a erzählerisches problem : to solve a erzählerisches problem in this movie -- and that was to solve that kind of liquid wasserwesen -- we had to go back on the computergenerierte animation -- we had to go back on the computergenerierte animation , cg , back .
what was the first computergenerierte soft-surface-figur soft-surface-figur that ever ever been in a movie .
the movie didn &apos;t actually have a money in a single time , just a very fascinating thing : the audience around the world was like the magic , as romantic as the magic was about the magic .
according to the law of arthur clarke , the law is fortgeschrittliche technology and zauberei .
so they saw something .
and that &apos;s what i found myself .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that must be necessarily in the filmkunst . &quot;
so we went to &quot; terminator two , &quot; my next film , still a lot .
and together with ilm , we &apos;ve been there for ilm , and the success of the metal is how that effect would arrive .
and it worked . we had some magical geschaffen , and the effect was the same thing , but we have a little more money , and they &apos;ve got a little more money .
from those two experiences , a whole new world was a whole new world for filmschaffende .
so i started a company , with my good friend , stan stan , who was at the time of the best make-up- and creature-designer . she called &quot; digital domain . &quot;
the idea of that company was to start the phase of the local government and etc. with digital produktionen .
and we did that , and we did a while a wettbewerbsvorteil .
but in the middle of the 1990s we realized that we are in the creature- and character-design -- which we were actually discovering , slowly , slowly .
i had this piece &quot; avatar &quot; that could be the market in the things visual effects and computergenerierter effects in the whole new heights of effekte effects in the whole new heights of the höhen , with a living , expressive , the mittels were made by cg , and the world should be alle .
but the column would make , and people in my company told me that we don &apos;t have a lage yet not able to create that .
so , i get this and made this other movie about the big ship that they were going to get warm .
the filmstudio i &apos;ve described this as &quot; romeo and julia &quot; selling , it was a liebesfilm epischen , a passionate movie .
but i was really , to the real wrack of the titanic .
so i did the film .
that &apos;s the truth . the studio didn &apos;t .
i have them , i have them , by saying , &quot; we &apos;re going to go back to the higgs boson . we just movies the real estate .
we &apos;re going to show it in the eröffnungssequenz of the movie .
that &apos;s hugely important . it &apos;s a good aufhänger of fürs capital . &quot;
and i persuaded them to fund a expedition .
sounds crazy . but that &apos;s what it goes back to the own imagination .
we created a reality that i was in a russian tauchboot wiederfand , four miles under the surface of the &apos; surface , and i &apos;m going to be able to get the real titanic .
it wasn &apos;t a movie , no hd , that was really .
so , that &apos;s really , really , really .
and the age of this was enormous . we had to use cameras and scheinwerfer and everything .
and i noticed how much this tiefseetauchgänge , a weltraummission ähnelten .
well , they were also hochtechnisch and bedurften sectarian .
you go into this capsule , you take a floating in the dark , feindselige hinunter , where none of the umgebung hinunter , where none of hope is still when you can &apos;t go back .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s as if i was in a science-fiction-film .
that &apos;s really cool . &quot;
i was obsessed with a regelrecht obsessed of the deep sea .
anyway , from the part of curiosity and science , it was a adventure , it was a great deal . it was a lot of imagination .
and it was a experience that could not be able to give me .
because , you know , i could introduce a creature that we could make a visual effect , but i couldn &apos;t think i think i would see outside the other .
and at some of the following , i &apos;ve seen in thermalquellen , and sometimes things i haven &apos;t seen before , sometimes , sometimes , even before that i haven &apos;t even seen before , sometimes , and sometimes the science of time , for the science we saw them , not even found them .
so that &apos;s what i got to do is , and i wanted to get more .
and so i was going to be a little bit of a decision .
after the success of &quot; titanic &quot; titanic &quot; i want to say , &quot; okay , i want to get my hauptberuf as a filmmaker in hollywood and a little vollzeit-forscher . &quot;
and then we started , we were called &quot; bismarck , &quot; and they were doing with roboterfahrzeugen .
we went to the side of titanic .
we took small robots that we built , the ein abwickelten .
our intent was , hineinzutauchen , and the interior of the brain was going to see what had never been done before .
and nobody had the inner prize prize , you didn &apos;t have tools for that , so we evolved the technology technology .
and i &apos;m sitting there , on the deck of the titanic , in a tauchboot , and see planken , who &apos;s quite quite similar here and i know that once the band were able to have .
and i fly with a little roboterfahrzeug of the schiffs .
i just bediene it out , but my awareness is within the spinal cord .
it felt like i was physically physically in the titanic of titanic .
this was the surrealste shape of a déjà-vu that i experienced in the middle , because before i get a corner , i knew i was always what the hell of the vehicle was going to do , i was running by the film , because i was running the film .
the very thing was actually a very detailed copy of the schiffs of the absence .
so that was a very strange experience .
they made me this telepräsenz-erlebnis , that you can use such such avatare and so the conscious awareness of the vehicle , in these other forms of existence .
really important , it was really incredibly important .
and perhaps a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of what may happen in some decades , if you have to study something or other things in all sorts of post-humanen that i can think as a science-fiction-fan .
after that , we began what we were seeing , for example , the tiefseequellen , where we saw this incredibly amazing animal animals , and that &apos;s sort of aliens , but here &apos;s the auf .
they live with the help of chemosynthese .
they don &apos;t exist in a sunlight , we don &apos;t exist as we do that .
and so , you see animals that are right next to a 500 degrees centigrade that they can survive .
at the same time , i was also very interested in weltraumwissenschaft , which was again from my childhood .
and so i ended up with the people who care about space and the nasa sit on the nasa and right weltraummissionen , and they drive to russia , and then they fly to russia , and then fly to the international community and nehmen , and then we take our 3d-kamerasysteme with our 3d-kamerasysteme .
she was fascinating .
but at the end of the end of that i took a weltraumwissenschaftler with us in the deep sea .
i took them with the verschaftte of the world , astrobiologen , planetenwissenschaftler , leute , people who are interested in the same extreme situations , i took them to the vents so they could be able to take care and could take a test and so on .
we &apos;re in charge of that , but actually , science , more precisely , weltraumwissenschaft .
so the circle of my existence as a science-fiction-fan , when a child , and the most did that was done in reality .
in the course of that , i learned a lot of learned .
i &apos;ve learned a lot about science . but i think you certainly need to be able to have a director of a director , a leader has to be a leader like a schiffskapitän or so .
i don &apos;t mind very much about leadership before i go to this gun .
because one point i had to say , &quot; what do i do here ?
why do i do that ? what &apos;s going on ? &quot;
these blöden movies make money to make us make money .
we &apos;re playing the world &apos;s own .
all of thinking i was in between titanic &quot; and &quot; &quot; avatar &quot; and i would have somewhere else somewhere on a towel .
i have all of these films , these documentaries , for a very small audience .
not the glory , no honor , no money . what do you do ?
you &apos;re going to do it to be able to get to the task , and the ocean is the herausforderndste environment , which is , if a small environment , and because of the things that &apos;s when a small group of people have a team of people .
because we &apos;ve all done this with just 10 to 12 people who were pre-menopausal in the middle ages , sometimes we were two to three months in the sea .
and in this community , you realize that the most important thing is the most important thing that you can see each other , because you have a job , you can tell you any other things .
if you go to shore and say , &quot; we had to do it , the fiberglas , the schallschwächung , the schallschwächung , the schallschwächung , and the difficulty that are going to be in soldiers , who are not going to explain something together , and you can &apos;t see that other simple , and you can &apos;t see it , and you know , they can never
there &apos;s a compound , a cost-effective .
so when i went to my next film , i tried to rotate my next film &quot; too , i tried to be a team of fear and changing in return .
by the dynamic really changed .
so , there was a little team on a little team terrain , we &apos;re using &quot; &quot; you &quot; with a new technique that we haven &apos;t had .
very exciting .
one of the challenge .
and we got a zeitraum family , and we were sentenced to a richtigen family .
so , in a way , making films , completely .
there was people who were , we could have this ozeanwesen , really well , really well , and on the planet .
for me , it was more a prinzipielle way to do my job , which is what &apos;s happening in the result .
so , what can we do from all the closing ?
what lessons we learned ?
i think that first is the curiosity .
most powerful human trait .
our imagination is a force that even create a reality .
and the great vehicle is more important than all the most lorbeer of this world .
i come to me , young filmmaker who say , &quot; give me a advice , i can do something like that . &quot;
and i say , &quot; don &apos;t you feel like you don &apos;t .
that &apos;s what it does have been done for you . don &apos;t you do it , you don &apos;t even know , but take risks on you . &quot;
nasa has so a lieblingssatz : &quot; fail is not a alternative . &quot;
but in art and the study has to be a alternative , because there &apos;s a vertrauensvorschuss .
no grid , which is the innovation that we did the risk of the brain .
you have to be ready to take this risks .
that &apos;s the thought i &apos;m going to give you to the way you &apos;re going to give you to the way . is a sense of fear , but it &apos;s not . thank you .
today i &apos;m talking about energy and climate .
and the surprises may be something because my favorite vollzeitbeschäftigung is mostly about vaccines and saatgut , to the things that we &apos;re inventing inventing and deliver to allow the poorest two billion billion .
but energy and climate of the people are extremely important for these people , but even more important than anyone on the planet .
klimaverschlechterung means that their saaten has been not grow for many years , we can &apos;t grow too much , and we &apos;ll change things that we can &apos;t withstand their fragile .
it leads to the hungersterben . it leads to uncertainty . it &apos;s a lot of time .
so , you will be a climate change for them .
and also , the energiepreis for them is very important .
and the fact is that if you could only reduce one thing , if you could get from one thing , the price of all the time is going to be the energy savings .
now , the energiepreis is over time .
in fact , the fortschrittsgesellschaft auf .
the kohlerevolution trieb was the industrial revolution and even in the 20th century , there was a mechanical case in the elektrizitätspreis and that &apos;s why we &apos;ve got refrigerators , we can make modern materials and so many things are doing so many things .
so we &apos;re in a wonderful situation with electricity in the rich world .
but when we &apos;re born the price of the price -- let &apos;s get the price of those of them -- we &apos;re going to be a new barrier and that barrier to live with co2 .
co2 is the planet and the equation for co2 is actually quite clear .
they summieren the ausgestoßene , which is the temperaturerhöhung , and this temperaturerhöhung has some very negative , and that effects have a very negative impact on the weather and perhaps worse , that the natural causes of ecosystems are not able to adapt and therefore all of the systems .
now , the exact same relationship between a co2-anstieg and the dadurch temperaturveränderung and the other hand , there are some unklarheiten and the other hand , but not very many .
and there are certain these same ones that are going to be a question , but they &apos;ll be extremely bad ! but they &apos;ll be extremely bad .
i have the top-wissenschaftler team , &quot; do we really come down to zero ?
not enough half or a quarter ? &quot;
the answer is , until we come to zero temperature will continue to go up .
that &apos;s why it &apos;s a big challenge .
it &apos;s very different than saying , we have a 3,5 m who has been under a three m m , which is , you can see it &apos;s sort of a three m .
this is just to get down to zero .
now , we &apos;re feeding a lot of kohlenstoffdioxid , about 26 billion tons of tons .
every 20 about 20 tons . humans , countries , less than one .
in the average , it &apos;s about five tons of every day on the planet .
and somehow , we have to kind of changes that &apos;s zero .
it &apos;s a constant constant .
only different economic changes have all influenced and we have to go from rapidem to get to the bus and a reduction to zero .
this equation has four factors . a little bit of a multiplication . a little bit of a multiplication . a little bit of a multiplication . you have this thing on the side of people who are studying the average energy and co2 , from the people that will take a unit of emittiert emittiert .
so let &apos;s take every factor of the same , and we think about how we get it on zero .
probably has to come up with these numbers very close to zero .
now this is a fundamental range of algebra , but let &apos;s go through .
first we have the population .
today , billion people living in the world today , and today , billions of people live in the world today , and today , billions of people live in the world today , and today , billion people today , and live billion people living .
and it &apos;s about nine billion dollars that they were going on 9 billion .
if we &apos;re very successfully , with new vaccines , and reproduktionsmedizin are , we could probably have the only 10 percent of all over the time to 15 percent , but at the time we see a slope of 1.3 .
the second factor are the services that we use .
this is all the food we eat , clothing , tv .
they &apos;re very good things and armutsverringerung , these services can be almost every other on every planet .
it &apos;s great that these nummer are rising .
in the rich world , in the upper billion , we could make a abstriche and less use that number of each year and less use that number of each year and more use more than the dienste services per person .
and here we see a very fundamental service , there &apos;s home to light that you can read the homework .
and they don &apos;t have these students , so they go out and read their schulaufgaben under the straßenlicht .
now , in efficiency , the e , the energy , there are a service , there &apos;s been good news .
we have something that doesn &apos;t happen to happen , that &apos;s not going to happen , that &apos;s not going to happen , that &apos;s not going to happen .
in different successes in the lichtsektor , through other ways , there are many ways of services in the häuserbau , there are many services , whose energieaufwand some people are going to reduce 90 percent .
in other people , like the manufacturing of düngemitteln , 105 00 : 56,000 , oder , oder 00 , oder , oder , or luftverkehr , is the equivalent of improvement is very much smaller .
to be optimistic , we may be able to get a factor of three or maybe even a factor of a factor of three dimensions , or maybe even a factor of the time , a factor of the time .
but when we went from 26 billion tons , and that &apos;s simply not going to be out of the first three days , and that &apos;s simply not going to be out of the ! that &apos;s simply not going to be !
so let &apos;s see the fourth factor of -- and this is a key thing -- that &apos;s a key thing -- that &apos;s the amount of co2 that &apos;s a energieeinheit energieeinheit .
it &apos;s the question that you can get a zero in zero .
if you burn coal : no .
if you burn about natural : no .
almost every herstellungsmethode of electricity today , more and more energien and nuklearenergie .
so what we need to do on a global level , we need to create a new system .
we need to do energiewunder .
now , if i use the phrase &quot; miracle &quot; use , i don &apos;t do that .
the microprocessor is a miracle . the pc is a miracle .
the internet and its services is a miracle .
people here have the development of the development of that miracles .
normally , there &apos;s no one that you need a miracle to a particular way .
normally you just like to just sort of just some other things .
in this case , we have to have to have to have a miracle in very short time .
well , i wondered how i can actually visualize this ?
is there a natural illustration of a demonstration that &apos;s what the idea of humans have been here ?
i reminded myself on last year when i was , and somehow people that they were doing .
the idea was assigned to you , you know , there are people who live with mosquitos .
for energy i left this .
i decided that the woman &apos;s been able to be in the environment here .
so there are some natural fireflies .
you know , you know , they don &apos;t bite . actually , you won &apos;t even leave the glass .
now , there are all kinds of spielereilösungen like this , but they &apos;re all going to do all of us .
we need to have a lot of solutions , either one or a half a , or a multiple spiritual spot , and we have a lot of directions , i see , i see , i see , i really can do that big insight .
i have been gezeiten , fusion and biokraftstoffe and biokraftstoffe .
these may be perhaps a moderaten and if you &apos;re better than i expect that we have to work on all of these five five , and we can &apos;t afford to give you that we have to work on all of these five five , because they &apos;ve all have the same time , because all of the problems .
let &apos;s look at the burning fossil fuel , burning of either coal or natural gas .
what you need to do , may just have a simple thing , but that &apos;s not . you can get all the co2 that looks like , and then you have to get all the co2 that &apos;s going to take off under pressure and hope that it stays there .
there are some pilotprojekte that &apos;s going on a 60 percent -- 80 percent of the lagerung of co2 , but it &apos;s going to be a big challenge , but the biggest problem here is a big challenge , but the biggest problem here is the lagerzeitfrage .
who &apos;s going to make it ?
who can guarantee something , which literally many billion billion of billions of view that you can express from nuklear- and other things ?
this is a lot of volume .
so that &apos;s a tough .
next : nuklearenergie .
the one has three big problems . the cost of all , especially countries are high countries , and the question for safety is that you can &apos;t feel that anything can be able to go wrong , despite the fuel that the fuel don &apos;t use the weapons for weapons .
and what do you do with waste ?
because , even though he &apos;s not very big , there is a lot of concerns .
so three very difficult problems that may be more soluble , and they should work .
the last three five minutes i was .
it &apos;s the renewables that they &apos;re going to be called a lot .
and even though -- although it &apos;s great that they don &apos;t have a fuel -- they have some drawbacks .
one is the ones that these technologies make this technology as dramatically as the von of kraftwerken .
they &apos;re energiefarmen , you can speak from many more quadratkilometern , more than a normal power .
and also , the energy of this means is , in fact , and also , the whole notion of all these vents , which is , &quot; and the other sources of this means is , &quot; all of these vents is : &quot; all of these vents , &quot; and it &apos;s a lot of these vents , which is , in fact , and it &apos;s also
the sun doesn &apos;t seem all day , they may not have any day and just as they didn &apos;t get the wind .
so , if you have to use that sources of these sources , you have a way that energy is also in times when they &apos;re not available .
so there &apos;s great preisherausforderungen . if we say , there &apos;s challenges to say that the energy outside the country is , you don &apos;t need to have the technology , but they need to deal with the risk of the country that the energy of the different century .
and there &apos;s the lagerungsproblem .
and to show the dimension , i have all sorts of batteries that are made , the fact that we &apos;re going to make , all the batteries that we now producing , less 10 minutes of gesamtenergie .
so we need a big breakthrough , something that is that a factor 100 than being a factor of 100 being better than the time .
that &apos;s not impossible , but it &apos;s not that easy .
that &apos;s what happens when you try to say , this unterbrochenen sources of the verbrauchs , we &apos;re trying to get 20 percent of the time .
if you want to get around 100 percent of that , you need a tremendous wunderbatterie .
now where we should go : what is the right approach ?
a manhattan project ? how do we get to the goal ?
what we need are a lot of companies that work .
in each of these five areas we need at least 100 hundred people .
in many , you &apos;ll say , &quot; are insane ! that &apos;s good .
i think there &apos;s a ted group of ted , which already already already there .
bill has been a multiple companies , including a named esolar die die die .
vinod khosla invest in dozens companies , the great things do things and interesting ways , and i try to support it .
nathan myhrvold and i have a company that , maybe surprisingly , the nuclear approach .
there are some innovations in the nuklearbereich ; modular , flüssig .
the development has in this industry , a few years ago , so it &apos;s not a great surprise that some good concepts .
the terrapower-konzept means that you &apos;re going to be able to get instead of a part of the urans , the u235 , we decided to burn the 99 percent , we decided to burn the 99 percent .
it &apos;s a pretty crazy idea .
but actually , you &apos;ve had a long time on it , but you could never simulate the case whether it would work , but since then , it &apos;s a modern supercomputer , you can see it and see that yes ! &quot;
and because you &apos;re using this 99 percent , the most expensive is very much better .
in fact , you can see the garbage , and you can actually use the waste of today as a antriebsstoff .
instead of taking your head , you burn it . a great thing .
the uranium is also , a little bit like a candle .
you see that there &apos;s a kind of column , often as a trigger wave .
the idea is really the treibstoffproblem .
here &apos;s a picture of a place in kentucky .
that &apos;s the waste that 99 percent . you &apos;ve got the part that you &apos;re going to be given , so that &apos;s called aufgebrauchtes uranium .
the u.s. world health organization has been on the u.s. in hundreds of years .
and if you were ozeanwasser and just filtriert , you get enough fuel for the rest of the planet .
you know , there &apos;s a lot of challenges , but it &apos;s a example of many hundreds of concepts that we need to come forward .
let &apos;s think about how we should be our success .
how should our pills look like our pills ?
now , let &apos;s go to the goal that we need to do , and we talk about the zwischenschritt .
many of a 80 percent reduction in 2050 .
it &apos;s really very important that we get there .
the rest of 20 percent are being produced in poor countries are being produced , and it &apos;s still a bit of agriculture . hopefully , waldrohdung and cement .
so , to get to reach these 80 percent , the most recent , including the countries like china , their elektrizitätsgeneration .
the other note says , we can use the technology technology , whether it &apos;s in all the developed countries and we &apos;re on the way to get them to the rest of the rest .
that &apos;s great important .
that &apos;s what it &apos;s going to call this zeugnisses .
if we go back to go back , how should that be a zeugnis effect ?
it should be able to take the two elements .
we should use the effektivitätsmaßnahmen , to get reducing energy on the way , the less will be the co2-summe and the temperature .
but actually , this is the note for the things we do , not completely fully completely important to the big reduktionen , just the same thing as the other one &apos;s speed for the breakthroughs .
we have to pursue this with vollgas and we can measure in firmenzahlen , in pilotprojekten and regulierungsänderungen .
there &apos;s a lot of great books .
&quot; al gore book &quot; we have the choice &quot; and david mckays energy energy energy energy . &quot;
they go through and create a framework that can be debated in this , because we need to have the seiten .
there &apos;s a lot of things that has to have to have .
this is a desire .
a very root desire that we invent this technology .
if you &apos;re just allowed me to a wish for the next 50 years , i could pick up the president , a vaccine , and i could choose this desire to choose , or i could choose this desire to the point of co2 , halbierter energiepreis of carbon erfunden. of the desire .
this one is the greatest impact .
if we don &apos;t get this desire , it &apos;s going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be a lot of worse .
so what do we need to do ?
for what i need to do ?
we need to get to more .
if countries in places like koppenhagen , you shouldn &apos;t just talk about co2 .
they should go and they would be shocked to the odds of the ridiculously , the lächerlich that are going to be spent for this .
we need mavericks , co2 taxes , cap &amp; amp ; something that is a preissignal agent .
we need to spread the message .
we have to have dialogue and stuff , and also the things that &apos;s been going to be undertaken by the government .
it &apos;s a big desire , but i think we can fulfill it .
thank you .
thank you .
thanks ! &quot;
thank you very much . just to understand a terrapower thing to understand a better thing -- there can be a notion of scale ?
bill gates : to get the simulation on a supercomputer , all of the simulation on a supercomputer , all of the great scientists , we just have a few million materials in a russian reactor , and even if we just have our materials in a russian reactor , so they just have to make sure that it works , you just have to be working in the 100en
the tough step is building the first reaktors , another billion , another billion , the regularien and the place of the fact that actually makes the first of it .
once the first thing is , when he &apos;s like , you know , all the time , the middle , the middle , the density is so different than what we know it .
to understand that right , that means a vertical in of the ground , like a vertical säule , this verbrauchten urans and then the process begins to go down and work on the bottom .
: right . now you have to get the reactor , so there are lots of people and many of the controls you can go wrong , so that &apos;s where you &apos;re opening up and herausbringt , and that &apos;s not good ! that &apos;s not good ! that &apos;s not good . that &apos;s not good .
but if you have a very cheap fuel , you can put it for 60 years -- they think of a column -- they &apos;re still down , without all the time .
and it &apos;s sitting there and spend 60 years , and then it &apos;s done .
a nuklearreaktor , who could actually make a solution for the garbage .
bg : yeah . now , what happens to the trash : you can sit it -- there are much less waste with this technique -- you take it and put it into the next sentence and we dry it into the next sentence .
and we start by taking the trash , which is already exists in this kühlbecken , or trockenbehältern with reactors is in the reactors . that &apos;s our startbrennstoff .
so what that reactors is a problem that we put in our own and so that is going to fill the müllvolumen dramatic behavior as a process .
but as many people in this world , they have spoken about these ways , but as you talk about these options , and they have spoken to these ways , and while you &apos;ve talked about these options , and they have spoken with different people about these ways .
where is the greatest interest , so what really does ?
bg : now we haven &apos;t pursued ourselves on a place , and there &apos;s a lot of interesting offenlegungsregeln for everything in russia , india , china , i was here and talked about how this came to the energieagenda .
i &apos;m optimistic . you know , the french and japanese did something done in the direction .
this is a nuance of one thing that was made .
this is a good step forward , but it &apos;s like a smaller reactor and some countries have this built that has been built in a way that has a rapid reactor , a kandidatat for our first time .
in their imagination : understanding and really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really ,
bg : now we need one of these skalierbaren things that are very cheap , we &apos;ve spent 20 years to reinvent and then 20 years to the building .
this is sort of the supreme that we need to be the umweltmodelle , we need to have to have to have to einhalten .
and , you know , terrapower , if all of you do well , and that &apos;s a big desire , could that easy to keep it .
and fortunately , there are dozens of companies , and we need hundreds of thousands of companies , and we need hundreds of thousands of companies , and we need hundreds of thousands of companies , the way that they can work for their pilots to work for their pilots .
and it would be best when it delivered several , because then you could use a blend .
anyway , we need a solution .
so the big possible durchbrüche , this is the greatest thing you know ?
bg : a energiedurchbruch is the most important .
it would be without the umweltherausforderung , but it does it so much more important .
in the end of the public sector , there are other innovative companies .
you know , we don &apos;t know what happens as well as this , but there is the modular way , that &apos;s another approach .
there &apos;s a tag that &apos;s something difficult to seem to be able to do , but maybe they &apos;re telling us .
and so , there &apos;s different , but beautiful it is that a million times a million times a million times a million times a million times a million times as a way , we say , a kohlemolekül and the costs , the potential , so the implications of the country and other things , almost in a unique league .
if that doesn &apos;t work , what then you ?
do we have to keep notfallmaßnahmen einleiten , trying to keep the erdtemperatur stabil ?
bg : if you come into a lot of time , it &apos;s as if you &apos;ve been eaten and just before you can see a heart attack . what do you do ? you need a herzoperation or a similar .
there &apos;s a forschungsrichtung christian that sich silk , which is associated with various techniques to fund the warming , so we have 20 or 30 years of living around us .
that &apos;s just a versicherungsmethode .
you know , we don &apos;t need that .
some people say , you shouldn &apos;t even work at the insurance because you may have the point because you get further , you &apos;re going to get further , because you know that one of the herzoperation will save the herzoperation .
i don &apos;t know if you look at the importance of this problem , but there &apos;s a discourse in geoengineering about whether you should have come together , or that innovation needs to be coming together , or that innovation needs to be more than we expect .
klimaskeptiker : have you a or two sentences to convince them ?
bg : well , unfortunately , the skeptics in very different camps .
the ones who make scientific arguments are very little .
do you say that there &apos;s negative effects that have been negative to do with the clouds that things ?
there are very , very few things that you can tell you all , from which there is a chance to be in a million .
this is similar to the aids , like aids .
you make mistakes now , and you get a lot later .
and that &apos;s why the idea now , if you all have to have trouble all the potential to invest in something that you &apos;ve got to see what &apos;s going on -- and it comes from the rich world that are not so clear , and it &apos;s actually not a great szenario scenario and say , okay , that &apos;s not a great deal .
the fact is that these uncertainty are worried about .
but my dream here is that if you can make it economically economically , and at the same time , the co2 is the co2 , the skeptics says , &quot; okay , i &apos;m interested in the case that it &apos;s not a carbon footprint , i wish that it &apos;s not a co2 , because it &apos;s cheaper than the previous way . &quot;
and that would be the answer to the björn argument that if you were to solve all the time and energy to solve the co2 problem , money , money , money , money , to invest in the better things that we can do .
bg : well , the actual world &apos;s spending -- say , the u.s. billion of the research -- say , more than we have to spend 10 billion per year than you &apos;re doing -- this is not that dramatic .
not to be suffering .
you get big geldsummen , and here can be a reasonable people if you &apos;re something that &apos;s not the economic and trying to fund that .
it was because , you &apos;re very short before a kostendurchbruch and funded only funded the learning . i think we should try to do more things that have been a lot of cheaper .
if you get the abstrich , you get a very high energiepreis , then you can only keep the rich .
i mean , everybody else could get to five times so much for our energy to change their lifestyle .
for the bottom two billion , but it &apos;s a disaster .
and even lomborg .
his new masche is now , &quot; why is the research not ? &quot;
he still will still be , because of his former stories , with the skeptiker-camp , but he has understood that the one that is a very lonely and so he brings out the forschungsargument .
and that &apos;s a gedankengang that i think .
research , it &apos;s just nuts how little that is going to be .
bill , i think i &apos;m talking about every every nearly every person , i really believe that your desire wish is true . thank you .
bg : thank you .
a few years ago , here at ted , peter skillman a design-wettbewerb called marshmallow-herausforderung .
the idea is quite simple . vierer-teams , the legal freistehende structure structure with 20 , about a 1m duct tape , about a 1m tape and a marshmallow .
the marshmallow must be .
and , although it really easy , though it really easy is difficult because it &apos;s actually hard to make people really well .
and so i thought that this is a interesting idea and i &apos;ve got it into a design-workshop .
it was a huge achievement .
since then , i &apos;ve taken about 70 and the weltweit with students , with the students and architects , with ctos of fortune-50-unternehmen and architects , which is the deep sensations in nature , and i want to share some of them with them .
usually most people themselves in the task of the task .
they think about what it &apos;s going to look like , it &apos;s going to look like you &apos;re going to make a rangeln , you &apos;re thinking about power , it &apos;s going to look like , it &apos;s going to be able to make them rangeln .
then you invest a little bit of time and organisation , and they &apos;re just skizzieren .
and they invest in the zusammenbau of the zusammenbau , and they &apos;re bringing in the zusammenbau process , and they &apos;re bringing up to be a lot of their time in the zusammenbau process , and they &apos;re bringing up to the zusammenbau process , and they &apos;re bringing up to the zusammenbau process , and they &apos;re creating a lot of their time in the zusammenbau process .
and finally , you know , very short before they have no time , somebody and they put it on the top , step one step back and &quot; ta-da ! &quot;
but then , almost always , almost happened to be a &quot; ta-da &quot; by &quot; zu &quot; in a &quot; uh-oh &quot; by the weight of the marshmallows , that the whole thing is to come .
there &apos;s a number of people who have more than much more than others , and under the worst of the worst , frische are fresh bwl-absolventen .
they lie them , they &apos;re confused and producing gebilde .
and of course , there are much more recently , and of course , the best more ta-da and under the best absolventen of the kindergartens .
and that &apos;s pretty amazing .
like us , they didn &apos;t produce the highest towers , but also the most interesting structures of all .
what you may be saying is , what is that ? why ? what is that with the ground ?
and peter , peter , peter , peter , peter kinder the spaghetti gmbh time . &quot;
they don &apos;t invest in machtkämpfe .
but there &apos;s another reason .
and that &apos;s the bwl-studenten , the one of the most important plan , ok , ok , it &apos;s ok .
and it &apos;s then .
what happens when you go to the top , you have no time , you have no time and what happened ?
it &apos;s a crisis .
sounds like , what ?
what &apos;s different is that they start with the marshmallow , and prototypes , successful prototypes , and they build prototypes , successful prototypes , always with the marshmallow , so they &apos;re missing the opportunity to fix prototypes .
konstrukteure of the collaboration as a core vorgangs vorgangs .
and with every trial , the kids will get feedback what &apos;s going on .
so the performance is working with prototypes , but we see how different teams are agieren .
the average for about ca. 50cm , bwl-studenten , the half of them , they may say something more , but not much more , more than the adults .
who &apos;s a successful ?
architects and engineers , fortunately .
this is what i saw .
and why ? because they understand triangles and sich-selbst-verstärkende geometric geometric patterns , the key to build a stable structure .
but what &apos;s about average . but here &apos;s what it &apos;s going to do .
you &apos;ll be a exekutive administrator on the team , they &apos;ll be called the other .
it &apos;s incredibly . you see around and see &quot; this team . &quot;
you can predict the predictions . why is that ?
because they have serious skills .
they &apos;re the process , you can understand him .
and that team , the rate and the work is going to be improving the power of the team .
and the other and their combination of the world .
if you have 10 teams , the typical line , you &apos;ll get about six , the same structure .
i tried something .
i thought we &apos;re going to get the pokereinsatz .
so i offered a 10000 $ award for the winner .
what do you think about this ?
what was the result ?
that &apos;s what happened . it was a team structure .
if anybody had a 2,5cm hohe , if anybody did not have a look at the price of home .
so it &apos;s not interesting that the brain has a strong effect ?
we pulled up with the exercise of the same students .
what do you think you know ?
now she &apos;s got the advantage of &quot; the &quot; button . &quot;
so , the same thing is , bad team of a human team .
they were able to use the highest in the slightest .
there are tief-greifende lessons for us to think about nature and success .
they like to create a question : why would somebody get to invest a marshmallow-challenge zu ?
the reason i can use digital tools and processes to build the team , cars , video games and &quot; visual effects . &quot;
and what the marshmallow-challenge is , they &apos;re helping to identify them .
because , frankly , every project has its own marshmallow .
the challenge offers a shared experience , a common language to build the right prototype .
and this is the value of that experience , that simple exercise .
and those of you who can see it , can be the besuchen .
it &apos;s a blog where you see how to build the marshmallows .
there &apos;s a schritt-für-schritt-anleitung there .
they find crazy examples of all around the world , how people do the system .
there are also weltrekorde .
and the lesson lesson , i think , the construction is actually a verbindender sports .
it demands that we all have our senses on the task , and we &apos;re using our thinking about how our feelings and our purpose , in the challenge that we &apos;re facing .
and sometimes a little bit of the experience all it needs to be able to create a &quot; uh-oh &quot; -- &quot; to a &quot; ta-da &quot; moment .
and that can do a big difference .
thank you .
we &apos;re so much as a machine , and we &apos;re so much a machine , and we &apos;re so much a machine , and we &apos;re going to do this .
a big machine , a cool , ted-artige machine , and that &apos;s a time .
and everybody has to be in this room .
and you can go to the past , you can go in the future ; they can &apos;t go in here and now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , now , it &apos;s now .
and i wonder what they choose to choose because i had my friends in my time , and they wanted to go all into the past .
i don &apos;t know . they wanted to go back to the time before the cars were waiting , or twitter searches .
i don &apos;t know .
i &apos;m convinced that you &apos;re somehow to nostalgie , to wunschdenken .
and i understand that .
i &apos;m not part of this group , i have to say .
i don &apos;t want to the past , and that &apos;s not because i &apos;m a rock show of it , because i &apos;m a rock ago .
it &apos;s because of possibilities on this planet , they don &apos;t go forwards .
so i want to go to this machine , and i want to go to the future .
this is the greatest time that planet it was on the planet that &apos;s the greatest scale of the scale , health , wealth , mobilität , opportunities , sinkende krankheitsraten .
never had never been a time like this .
my ur-großeltern died , all of the time died .
my grandparents was built this number of 70. , these numbers on 70. 70. .
my parents are the 80 on the fersen .
so , there &apos;s better a nine at the beginning of my todeszahl .
but it &apos;s not even how much people like us , because this is a larger thing than that .
a kid that &apos;s going to be able to be able to live in the world , as the richest man on the world today 100 years ago .
think about it . this is a incredible fact .
and why ?
the smallpox is , the smallpox has billion people on this planet .
they &apos;ve also put the demographics of the earth in a way that it &apos;s not a war as it has not been done .
they &apos;re gone . they &apos;re gone .
we have them sie .
in the rich world , diseases that millions of us have been still threatened with a generation , hardly nor .
diphterie , kinderlähmung , ... ...
does anybody else that is ?
vaccines , modern medicine , our ability to feed billions of people , they are successes of scientific .
and from my perspective , the scientific method , the scientific method , look at whether it works , it works , it &apos;s not what it does is a temptation to the greatest achievements of human .
so that &apos;s the good news .
unfortunately , this is the whole good news , because there are some other problems , and they &apos;ve got a lot of other problems , and they &apos;ve mentioned , you &apos;ve mentioned , you &apos;ve mentioned , you know , it &apos;s a lot of other problems , and they &apos;ve mentioned it , and it &apos;s also a reminder of them .
and one of them is that despite all of our own young people on this world every day .
that number rises , and they &apos;re very quickly , and that &apos;s embarrassing .
and not just that , we have our imagination to get these world .
drinking drinking , urbares country , rainforests , oil , oil , they disappear , and that &apos;s soon , and if we &apos;re not going to be able to see that we mess we are also able to see that we &apos;re in this mess .
so the question is : can we do that ? i &apos;m going to think .
i think it &apos;s clear that we can produce food , the billion people feed , without the land , we &apos;re going to live .
i think we can apply this world with energy that they don &apos;t have simultaneously .
i think that &apos;s really , and no , that &apos;s not a wunschdenken .
but that &apos;s what i call at night at night , you know , one of the things that i &apos;m at night at night , we never have science as never as yet as a way now , but we never have scientific progress now never as much as you know , but we never have scientific progress now , never as much as you know , never ,
and we were also even never able to make it more einzusetzten , as we can see it today .
we &apos;re on the verge of a astonishing , particularly ereignissen in many areas , and yet i really think that we have hundreds of thousands of years , we have hundreds of thousands of years , we have to have hundreds of these things , we have to have more than now , more than now .
people are doing things in their faith , and that &apos;s so tightly that you can &apos;t free .
not even the truth .
and listen to his mind , even a law to the progress , for progress , to progress , to progress , and you know , it &apos;s a law to progress , to progress , and it &apos;s a law to the progress , and it &apos;s a law to progress .
but you know what you don &apos;t have ?
they don &apos;t have a relatively right of your own facts . &quot; tschuldigung , they don &apos;t have them .
and i have a while to figure out that out .
about a decade ago , i have a paper about a impfungen for &quot; the new yorker , &quot; one little article .
and i was amazed to try to get up to the resistance of what most of the most health issues in health care is in the history of humanity .
i didn &apos;t know what i should do , so i was just what i do , i wrote a paper and drove .
and soon i wrote a paper about food , we had changed .
same thing , just bigger .
the people who played .
so i also couldn &apos;t written about this , and i couldn &apos;t understand why people thought that would be &quot; frankenfood , &quot; why they believed that molecules in a certain kind of random rather than a random type of einen einen einen the area of nature .
but you know what i do . i wrote the article , i made it .
i mean , i &apos;m a journalist journalist , i &apos;m a journalist journalist .
we see , we &apos;re going to eat the way that &apos;s okay .
but they were worried about , and i couldn &apos;t figure out why , and eventually i found it .
and that &apos;s because that &apos;s that , that &apos;s that , that &apos;s where i was made of all the things that were happening .
they were umsichtige people , people , decent people .
they were just like the people in this room .
and that &apos;s what happened to me .
but then i thought , you know what we are honest : we &apos;re honest , &quot; we &apos;re honest , &quot; we &apos;re honest , &quot; we &apos;re honest , &quot;
we &apos;re at a point of view that we don &apos;t think about the same way progress as we used to the same .
we &apos;re talking about it .
we &apos;re talking about ironic , with little environmental : &quot; progress &quot; progress . &quot;
okay , there is reason , and i think we know what are the most common .
we have faith in authority , in authority , and sometimes they lost science and there &apos;s no reason to be so .
you can just call a couple of name and people will understand .
chernobyl , bhopal , die , weapons , weapons , die 2000 .
i mean , you know , you know , you can choose your own list .
there are questions and problems with people who believed that they &apos;d have quite a bit .
ask , desire , they desire to evidence .
take nothing as a leader .
but now comes in the case , if you get evidence to you , you have to adopt this evidence , and we don &apos;t really do good .
and i can tell that from the reason that we &apos;re going to be in a epidemic of fear , as i never seen , and hopefully never again again .
about 12 years ago , a story was published , a horrible story that came out with the measles , mumps , and röteln vaccine .
very frightening .
in all the research were conducted to see whether the polio .
in all trials , the whole thing is , which is a serious issue .
the data came in .
the data came out of the united states , from sweden , from sweden , and they were all alike , no correlation , no connection .
it doesn &apos;t make any difference . it doesn &apos;t make any difference because we believe in anecdotes , we believe we think we think we &apos;re going to feel about .
we don &apos;t believe in a broad documents , the data gives us data , and i understand that , i understand that .
but you know what ?
the result was a very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , the result .
in fact , the united states is one of the most effective countries in the world that &apos;s working on the planet for a foot .
that &apos;s skandalös and we should ashamed .
it &apos;s awful .
what happened we could do that .
now i understand that . i &apos;m doing .
because this is what happened ?
a single person in the audience , you see in the audience , see in the audience ?
not very much .
but it &apos;s not happening in this country , but the last year , in the world last year .
this is a lot of death , 20 per hour .
but because that &apos;s not here what happened is we can do it , and people like how to be able to be able to eat and analphabetismus of the fear and the botschaften of platforms like the lack of the local and the larry king .
and that can make you feel because they don &apos;t get .
they don &apos;t understand that these things are being consistent , but almost never the same thing .
and that &apos;s something we need to learn , and that &apos;s very quickly .
this guy was a hero , jonas salk .
he &apos;s driven by one of the worst geißeln of the human .
no fear , no qualen , puff , puff , puff .
the guy in the middle is not so much .
he &apos;s called paul offit .
he just got a rotavirus-impfstoff entwickelt .
he can save the lives of 400- , 500,000 children per year in the developing world .
not ?
now , that &apos;s good , except for the vaccines and talk about vaccines and says how valuable they are , and that people should be trusted .
and that &apos;s what he actually like to do .
paul is a terrorist .
paul in a public anhörung , he can &apos;t ohne with no bewaffnete .
he gets to get tired of home because people like to tell you that they know where the children go to school .
and why ? paul einen has done .
i don &apos;t need to say that , but the vaccines are essential .
you take them , the diseases back , and that &apos;s what happens right now .
we &apos;ve now now now working in this country now .
and that &apos;s getting worse , and pretty soon , children will die , because that &apos;s just a question of the numbers .
and they &apos;re not only going to die at the age of christ .
what about kinderlähmung ? let &apos;s do this . why not ?
a kommilitonin loan me just a couple of weeks , and i &apos;m going to say i &apos;m a little bit too .
nobody said the people said .
she would not have to go against kinderlähmung . it doesn &apos;t matter .
fine .
why ? because we don &apos;t have throwaway , and you know what ?
we had no kinderlähmung in this country .
today , i don &apos;t know , maybe a guy in lagos and fly after los angeles , right now he &apos;s about pakistan .
and in a few hours , he &apos;s a car , and he comes forward to long beach , and he &apos;s going to be a long beach , and he &apos;s going to visit one of those fantastichen ted-dinner tonight .
and he doesn &apos;t know that he &apos;s with a lähmenden disease , and we don &apos;t know that because this works , because this works the world is now .
that &apos;s the planet that we live . don &apos;t do it as if he &apos;s not .
we love to be in lying . we love that .
do you have all the vitamins ?
echinacea , a little antioxidantium , which helps you to be the sprünge .
i know that you &apos;ve done this because the half of americans is going to do every day .
they take the stuff , and they take a sense of the food , and it doesn &apos;t make any difference , how often we find that they are useless .
the data is the whole thing .
they were ihren their urine . they do almost never .
it &apos;s okay , they want to be 28 billion dollars for dark .
i agree with them .
dark blue .
why do we do that ? why do we do that ?
well , i think i &apos;m starting to be -- we hate the industry .
we hate a strong government . we didn &apos;t have a faith in the system .
and we should not be doing . we should be aware of our health care system .
it &apos;s cruel to millions of people .
it &apos;s absolutely staggering cold and seelentötend itself that can afford to afford .
so we &apos;re running away where we are going to run where we &apos;re going to run ?
we &apos;re running into the poor .
this is great . i love the placebo-industrie .
but you know , that &apos;s really serious , because that stuff is crap , and we &apos;re spending billions of dollars for that .
and i have all kinds of little over here .
none of it -- gingko , fraud , betrug , betrug , betrug , i know what that is , but we &apos;re spending billions of dollars for it , it &apos;s a betrug .
and you know what ? when i say this , you know , you know , people say , &quot; what do you do ? let &apos;s do you , let &apos;s do what you want .
so they feel good . &quot;
and you know what ? they have changed .
because it &apos;s no matter whether it &apos;s the gesundheitsminister , who says , &quot; hmm , i &apos;m going to adopt the evidence of my experts , &quot; or any krebs-quacksalber , who wants to treat his patients with kaffe-einläufen .
if you &apos;re going to go to this way where it makes faith and science , you &apos;re not going to be in a place to not be .
they &apos;re going to südafrika mbeki in south africa .
he brought 400,000 his people around , because he insisted that red beete , knoblauch and zitronenöl much more effective than intense drugs , we know that they can control the course of aids .
hundreds of thousands of unnötiger deaths in a country that was worse than any other disease .
don &apos;t tell me that these things don &apos;t have consequences .
they have them .
now , the hirnloseste epidemic , in which we &apos;re just seeing is that we &apos;re in the befürwortern gentechnisch foods , and the bio-elite .
this is a idiotische debate . you have to stop .
it &apos;s a debate about words , thinking about metaphors .
that &apos;s ideology , not science .
all we eat , every reiskorn , every zweig petersilie , everybody zweig , was affected by the human .
you know , there was no mandarinen in paradise .
there was no cantaloupe-melonen .
there was no weihnachtsbäume . we did all this .
we &apos;ve done it over the last 11,000 years .
and i &apos;m working on it , and i don &apos;t .
we &apos;re losgeworden , which is not working .
now we can make it more precisely . and of course , there &apos;s a risks , but we can do something like vitamin a health and rice , and that &apos;s able to help millions of people to be able to live their lives .
do you want to do it ?
i have to say , i don &apos;t .
we felt eating food .
why do we do that ?
now , what i &apos;m saying is : too many chemicals , pesticides , hormones , we don &apos;t want to be huge , but we don &apos;t want to say no grid of the thing that is wrong .
we don &apos;t want to think of companies .
we don &apos;t want to have a lot of time .
and you know what my answer is to all this ?
yes , they &apos;re right . we do .
it &apos;s true , we have a huge nahrungsproblem , but that &apos;s not science .
it has nothing to do with science .
it &apos;s right , morality , patentkram .
you know , the science isn &apos;t a company .
it &apos;s not a country .
it &apos;s not a sense of the way ; it &apos;s a process .
it &apos;s a process and sometimes it may work , and sometimes it does not work , but the idea that we should not allow the science to do their work because we &apos;re afraid of the science , and it &apos;s keeping millions of people from the aufblühen .
you know , in the next 50 years , we will 70 percent food , we have to have higher than 70 percent . 70 percent .
this investment in africa in africa .
embarrassing .
they need that , and we don &apos;t give them .
and why ? changes food .
we don &apos;t want to eat this verrottete stuff , like maniok .
now , it &apos;s something that &apos;s a billion people eat .
it &apos;s about a potato potato .
it &apos;s just a privilege . it &apos;s too .
it doesn &apos;t have an nutrients ; it has no protein , and scientists just build all the time in it .
and then people would eat the food and won &apos;t deserve .
they would not starve , and you know what ?
that would be nice . it wouldn &apos;t be nice , but it would be nice .
and all i can say to say is : why do we fight that ?
i mean , we ask ourselves : why we can do this ?
because we don &apos;t want genes ?
it &apos;s not about genes . it &apos;s not about chemicals .
it &apos;s not about our ridiculous passion for hormones , our food on the brain , better food , better food .
it &apos;s not about the rice , it &apos;s about people to get life , and it &apos;s used time to understand what that means .
because you know what ?
if we don &apos;t do that if we do so much how we do so far as we do so far as we do so far as we do , i think , i think , is not guilty , high-tech .
there &apos;s no other description for what &apos;s happening here .
it &apos;s very selfish , it &apos;s ugly , it &apos;s our not worthy , and we have to really have to really do that .
after this incredibly amazing entertainment want to say , &quot; you want to say , &quot; you want to go into this ridiculous action and go into the future ? &quot;
anyway . i want to go on everybody .
in the moment , they &apos;re in the present , but we have an incredible opportunity .
we can do this to anything we want .
we can browse them where we want to go and get out there , we &apos;ll move them out where we want .
we have to take these conversations , and we have to think , but when we go into the order and the future we &apos;re going to be able to do that .
i know that we can make it , and it &apos;s a way to do something that needs the world needs .
thank you .
thank you .
for some time , i &apos;m interested in the placebo-effekt . it may seem to be that a magician is that a magician would be interested in , it was like me , &quot; one of the one who &apos;s going to be a little bit , &quot; one of the somebody who &apos;s going to be a little bit of it . &quot;
in other words , zuckerpillen , in some studies , the placebo-effekt , and that &apos;s just because the patient &apos;s only one thing that if the patient &apos;s only one thing that &apos;s going to be on , and that &apos;s just because the patient &apos;s only one thing that if the patient &apos;s only one more effective impact in the body , which is called the placebo-effekt .
one of them will be a echtem because somebody &apos;s like that .
so we can also understand each other , i want to give you a elementaren , just showing simple .
and i &apos;m going to show you how it works . this is a trick that has been at least since the 1950s in every zauberbuch for the 1950s .
i even learned from the cub scout of the pfadfinder in the 1970s .
i &apos;ll explain it and it makes it .
and then i &apos;ll explain why i &apos;ll explain him .
so , you see what happens .
the knife that you can see , my hand , which you can study .
i &apos;m going to hold this out in my own backyard .
i literally literally go back to my sleeve .
and to make sure that nothing in my sleeve or from him , i &apos;ll just give my wrist right here right there .
and this is what you can see is that there is no time to be anything . i can &apos;t see here , can &apos;t be anything in my sleeve or herauskommen .
and the goal is very simple .
i &apos;ll open my hand , and hopefully , when all the time is good , the knife is going through that bloßen of my magnetismus .
it &apos;s actually just the place in his place that i can shake it without the knife .
nothing goes out in my sleeve or come out , no trickserei . and they can study all .
hoo !
now , this is a trick that i often beibringe , little kids that are interested in as well as well as you can learn a lot about deceit , if you &apos;re more closely learning when you &apos;re more closely learning when you &apos;re more closely learning when you &apos;re more closely learning when you &apos;re more closely learning when you &apos;re more closely learning when you &apos;re more
probably probably a trick in the room .
he &apos;s working on this , he works , &quot; he works , &quot; he &apos;s going to work .
i think that &apos;s going to be the knife in my hand .
i say i &apos;m my wrist umschließe , to ensure that nothing is in my sleeve or a limb , and that &apos;s a lie .
the reason i &apos;m my wrist , the wrist , is that the actual secret of illusion is .
in the moment , where i &apos;m talking about you , so you see from the back , my finger , just by the back , just from the back , just from there , in a position , he was so passionate .
great trick ?
there &apos;s somebody who had no childhood .
so he &apos;s here . right .
and when i umdrehe , the fingers of the fingers .
and now you could talk about why that &apos;s a deception you don &apos;t even see here at the bottom of the world , they &apos;re not going to see the bottom of the mind , they &apos;re not going to be able to see the way , one , two , three , but she looks like a group .
but that &apos;s not actually going to be here , and then i &apos;ll be my hand .
of course , it &apos;s going to be there , but not through the magnetism of my body , but it &apos;s a trick , through my favorite , who &apos;s now .
and if i do my hand , the same thing i &apos;m going to do is becoming a thing that i &apos;m going to be able to recover through these motion .
i &apos;ll hand this hand away . and here &apos;s the knife .
this trick can be able to have their friends and neighbors .
now , what did the placebo-effekt do with the placebo-effekt ?
a year or so , i read a study that was really quite a richtig right .
i &apos;m not a doctor or spouse , and that &apos;s why this was a startling thing .
it turns out , if you &apos;re a dummy in a white pill , in the form of a aspirintablette , which is just a round of white pill that &apos;s simply a particular effect .
but if you look at the shape , in which they take the same time , in a smaller pill , and that blue and a letter hint of it , they actually measurable effective .
and that , although none of them , despite any pharmazeutische -- it &apos;s just zuckerpillen .
but a white pill is not as good as a blue pill .
what ? that &apos;s really impressed .
but it turned out that this is not all about it .
if you take a lot of time , they &apos;re more effective than any form form .
a colored capsule that &apos;s been on a end and most red red is better than a white capsule .
also , the case is a role .
a pill twice is not as good as three pills -- i can &apos;t believe in the exact statistics .
the key thing is , &quot; well , you know , ...
... that &apos;s also the dosierungen plays a role .
and the shape will be a role .
and if you want to have ultimate , you need to grab the needle .
right ? a syringe with a wirkungslosen -- a few milliliter of a wirkungslosen substance that you would ignore a patient .
it generates a very powerful picture in your head . that &apos;s a lot more powerful than a white pill .
and that &apos;s really , this is really , i &apos;ll show you a different time when we have a different one .
so , the fact that the white pill doesn &apos;t as well as the blue pill , not as well as a capsule that doesn &apos;t feel like the needle .
and none of it has a really pharmazeutische feature , it &apos;s just our faith in us a lot of a stronger effect .
i wanted to know if i could use this idea of a building .
i &apos;ll take something that is obviously a deception , and it will be really .
we know , we know that you have to do this , when it &apos;s going to go to the point .
this is a 18 inches long . it &apos;s very , very spitz , and i &apos;m going to make a little bit of a little bit .
this is really my meat . it &apos;s not damians spezielles meat meat meat .
this is my skin . this is not a matter of hollywood .
i &apos;m going to get this needle in my skin , and through them , until you &apos;re on the other side .
if you &apos;re going to show you -- if you &apos;re easy to get it easy into this -- i have a few friends in the hotel last night , and some people i don &apos;t know , and this is a woman almost identical .
so i &apos;m going to suggest , when you get bored , you &apos;ll look at the next 30 seconds . or , you know , i &apos;ll take the first degree of here .
you can see it right , you can see , but also , if you want to .
so , it &apos;s like this , right here , where my flesh starts to put on the bottom part of my arm , i &apos;m just going to make a little einstich .
i &apos;m sorry . it &apos;s what makes it crazy ?
and now , just a little bit of my skin and on the other side of the other side .
now we &apos;re actually the same situation we had in the same situation that we had .
about .
but now you can &apos;t necessarily have counting , right ?
so , i &apos;m going to show you . this is one , two , three , four , five , five .
well , yes , yes , yes , yes , yes , yes , yes .
i know what people think when you see that .
they say , &quot; okay , who &apos;s not so dumb and durchsticht himself just to talk about us for a few minutes . &quot;
well , i &apos;ll show you .
what does this look like ? pretty good .
yeah , i know .
and people say , &quot; okay . i didn &apos;t really see it right . &quot;
people in the nebenräumen come in the nebenräumen .
let me show you from the closeness of the closeness .
it &apos;s really my skin . this is not a matter of hollywood .
that &apos;s my meat and i can browse the herumdrehen .
sorry . sorry . when you get to make it , look away .
the people who are beginning to see the later on video , you &apos;ll say , &quot; well , this looks quite impressive , but if it was really cool , but if it was really cool if it really really would be really , it would be the gun . &quot;
okay , let me give you a little blood for them .
yes , here it is .
normally i &apos;d go to the needle now .
i would submit my arm and show them that there are no wounds .
but i think , in this context and with the purpose of a fake , i &apos;m going to get the needle out there and so on the stage .
we &apos;re going to be able to start with the next few days .
i hope you &apos;ve been looking for it . thank you .
everybody talks about happiness .
i have some people who spent number of books who are using the number of books in the last five years , and they gave them about 40 , and there was a lot more .
there &apos;s a tremendous wave of interest in happiness .
there &apos;s a lot of glücks-coaching .
everybody like to do people happier .
but despite all of these sequences , there are several cognitive ones that it can sort of impossible to make it possible , we &apos;ll see about happiness .
and my talk today is mostly used by this cognitive microwave act .
and it &apos;s true for laien , the more about their own happiness , and it &apos;s true for scientists that are thinking about happiness because we &apos;re like everybody else , like everybody else .
the first of these fall is a widerstreben , complexity .
it turns out that the word happiness is just no more likely to more than a useful word is because we &apos;re looking at many different things .
i think there &apos;s a certain meaning that we could , but in the big and all that is something we need to be , and we will have to have the complicated view of what &apos;s well-being .
the second one is a verwechslung , and it &apos;s basically what &apos;s basically what is basically the way it &apos;s happy in his life or happy about his life or happy with his life .
and these are two very different concepts , and they &apos;re both zusammengeworfen in the idea of happiness .
and the third is the konzentrations-illusion , and that &apos;s the fact that we can &apos;t think about a sense of thinking about a sense of being able to distort your meaning .
i mean , that &apos;s a real cognitive cognitive .
there &apos;s simply no way to get it right .
now i &apos;d like to start with a example of someone who had a frage-und-antwort-sitzung , who was a frage-und-antwort-sitzung , who was a story after a half of mine who was a story , and it was absolutely the same music , and it was absolutely the same music , and then the end of the recording was written a fürchterliches kreischendes sound .
and then he added , really , really , really , really , really , all the experience .
but it didn &apos;t have it .
what it was meant to the experience .
he had the experience .
he had 20 minutes of music .
she doesn &apos;t know because he was with a memory ; they had been ruined ; the memory was ruined , and the memory was all he had to get the job .
what &apos;s really says we think about ourselves and thinking about other people think about other people think about two kinds of self .
there &apos;s a erlebendes self , in the present , and the present knows , capable of the past , but basically , basically , basically , basically the present .
it &apos;s the wiki self , the doctor anpricht -- you know , if the doctor says , &quot; do i feel painful , if i &apos;m going to go back here ? &quot;
and then there is a erinnerndes self , and the self self is that the mitzählt and the story of our life , and it &apos;s the doctor that the doctor picks up calling him , &quot; how did you feel at last time ? &quot;
or &quot; how did your journey after albania &quot; or so similar .
these are two very different units of the einheiten self and the erinnernde self , and the two to be part of the durcheinanders of the happiness .
now , the wiki self is a storyteller .
and it &apos;s really what really starts with a fundamental reaction to our memories -- it starts instantly .
we &apos;re not only stories , if we do about it to tell stories .
our memory tells us stories that means what we keep from our most important is a story .
and let them start with a example .
there &apos;s a old trial .
these are real patients that evolved to a different procedure .
i won &apos;t go into the details . it &apos;s not painful , but it was painful when this trial was done in the 1990s .
they were asked to report all the news seconds about her pain .
and here are two patients . that &apos;s your records .
and they &apos;ll ask them , &quot; who &apos;s from both of those who have more ? &quot;
and that &apos;s a very simple question .
patient b has spent more of it . his darmspiegelung was longer , and every minute of pain that the patient &apos;s a steady had a steady and more and more .
but now there &apos;s a different question : &quot; how do you think this patients , they were doing ? &quot;
and here &apos;s a surprise , there &apos;s a surprise , and here &apos;s a surprise , that &apos;s a surprise .
and the surprise is that patient a much more distinguished erinnrung of the darmspiegelung , as a much worse erinnrung at the time , as a patient , as a patient , the patient &apos;s been a much more effective erinnrung at the time , as a patient , as a patient , the patient &apos;s been a much more effective erinnrung at the time .
the stories of the darmspiegelungen have been different , and because a very large part of history , as you can see -- i think -- -- i think -- and because a very large part of the story , how she ends .
and no one is very erbaulich or great -- but one of them is this clearly -- but one of them is this clearly .
but one of them is more than the other .
and the one that was worse was the ones where the pain was on his peak . it &apos;s a bad story .
how do we know that ?
because we &apos;ve been asked these people after their darmspiegelung , and also , much later , &quot; how bad was the whole thing to be the whole thing ? &quot;
and she was a lot more powerful for a while a year in the erinnrung .
now , this is a direct fight between the erlebenden self and the erinnernden itself .
from the sicht itself , a very schlechtere time ago .
now what you could do with patient and we actually have a clinical experiment , and we actually have a clinical experiment , and it &apos;s done , you could actually do the darmspiegelung of patient by simply the tube , you could just get the tube in the tube , without having the tube .
that &apos;s what they will do is that the patient &apos;s suffering , but just a bit more than it before .
and if you do that , you have a few minutes , you have a matter of the erlebende self , and you have a bewirkt , you have a lot of better than a much better than a much better than a much better than that , because now you have a better story about his experience .
what &apos;s a story ?
and that &apos;s true for the stories that makes the memory , and it also brings for the stories that we invent .
so a story , a story is umbrüche , and end up , and end up .
so , very important , very important and that case the end of this case .
now , the most important thing about life is continuously .
it &apos;s a augenblicke , one after the other .
and they ask : what happens to these moments ?
and the answer is really simple . they &apos;re lost forever .
i mean most of our life -- and i have the same -- you know , the psychological present of them , which is about 600 million of them , about 600 million of them , about 600 million of them , in a month , there is about 600,000 million , most of you don &apos;t have a trace .
most of you are completely ignored by the erinnernden themselves .
and yet , they get to the sense of the sense that they should have proven that what happens during this is that what &apos;s happened in our life .
it &apos;s the most resource we consume as we are in the world .
and as we use them , but that &apos;s not the story that the most important itself for us is .
so we have the erinnernde self and the erlebende self , and they &apos;re really quite different .
the most difference between time , and it &apos;s the most difference between time .
and from the lens itself , if you have a holiday and the second week , it &apos;s just like the first one , then the zweiwöchige vacation is the zweiwöchige vacation , the zweiwöchige vacation is the zweiwöchige vacation , the einwöchige vacation .
so , that &apos;s what doesn &apos;t work for the erinnernde itself .
for the erinnernde itself , a zweiwöchiger vacation is barely better than the einwöchige vacation , because there &apos;s no new memories .
they didn &apos;t change the story .
and in this way , time is actually the critical variable that is a erinnerndes self , and time has very little impact on this story .
now , the more interesting itself is doing more than to remember and stories .
it &apos;s actually the decisions that we can , because if you have a patient , the wählt , the wählt , the wählt , the wählt , the wählt , the wählt , the wählt , the wählt , the less bad and that &apos;s the surgeon .
the erlebende itself has no voice in this option .
actually , we &apos;re actually choose to be able to do between us . we choose in between memories .
and even when we think about the future , we think of our future , we think about our future .
we think about our future to interpret a vorausgesehene memories .
and basically , you can look at the way that you know , you know , as a tyranny of the erinnernden self , and you can think of the erinnernde itself as one , which is the sozusagen itself through experiences that doesn &apos;t need the erlebende itself .
i have the impression that if we make a holiday that if we make a sense of the case is that means we &apos;re making vacation of the urlaub of the system itself .
and this is a little bit hard to justify me .
i mean , how do we get from our memories ?
this is one of the explanations that &apos;s going to be the dominance of the horizon itself .
and when i think about it , i think , i think , a few years ago , the eindeutig was the best part i had ever had , and i think , quite a lot of times in the proportion of how many times i think about other urlaube .
and i probably probably my memories of my memories of this dreiwöchige journey , i would say about 25 minutes long over the last four years .
now , if i had ever had the folder of the folder , i would have been able to see another hour .
now , that &apos;s three weeks , and that &apos;s the höchstens of a time .
there seems to be a movement .
well , i may be a little bit extreme , you know , how little i &apos;m on the zehren of memories , but even if you do a real question : why we give memories of a lot of weight in the verlgeich weight , we &apos;re going to give up ?
so i want you to think about a lot .
so , imagine your next vacation , you know , that the end of the urlaubs of the urlaubs alle all your pictures are going to be taken and you get a amnestisches drug so that they &apos;re going to remember .
well , you would choose the same holidays ?
and if you will choose a different quality of the other , there &apos;s a conflict between their own and you think about how you make this conflict and not really obvious , because if you get a reply , and if you &apos;re not obvious , because if you can get a answer . and when you think of memories , you may get another answer .
why we &apos;re having the urlaube record that we &apos;re able to pick up with a problem that is enabling us with a choice between the two ways of self .
now , the two types of self is two begriffe from the happiness .
there is actually two concepts from the happiness we can use , one person self .
so you can ask : how happy is the erlebende itself ?
and then they would ask : how happy are the augenblicke of the erlebenden itself ?
and they &apos;re all -- happiness for a long process , and they &apos;re all quite complicated .
so what are the emotions that can be measured ?
and , by the way , we &apos;re now able to get a pretty good idea about the happiness of the erlebenden itself of the erlebenden itself .
if you &apos;re looking for the happiness of the body itself , it &apos;s a very different thing .
it &apos;s not about how happy a person .
it &apos;s about how happy or sad , the person when they think about their lives .
very different term .
everybody who doesn &apos;t believe that terms of happiness , and i &apos;m able to create a lot of researchers about well-being that are the second of the happiness that we have the study of the happiness that we have this kind of money .
the distinction between the happiness itself and the happiness itself is in the last few years , and now you can measure the two superpowers .
the gallup poll , a global survey , at which more than half a half a half of half a half of people are about what they think about their lives and think about their experiences .
so , in the past few years , we started thinking about the happiness of the two kinds of self .
and the nice lesson we have learned is that they really are really different .
you can know how someone interact with his life , and that teaches you really not much about how happy he lives his life and vice versa .
just to give you a sense of correlation that says that &apos;s about .5 .
what that means is that if you would hit somebody and you would say , oh , his father is a zwei-meter-mann , how much would you know about his size ?
well , you would know something about his size , but there &apos;s a lot of uncertainty .
they have so much uncertainty .
if i tell you that somebody has eight to life as a skala of 10 , you &apos;ve got a lot of uncertainty about how happy he is with his erlebenden .
so correlation .
we know something about what the happiness is going to happen .
we know that money is very important , goals is very important .
we know happiness is mostly being happy with people that we like , we like to spend time with people that we like .
there &apos;s other delight , but that &apos;s what it is .
so if you want to be able to be able to maximize the happiness you &apos;re at least at the end of the self , you &apos;re going to do different things .
the conclusion of what i told here is we &apos;re really lucky to be able to do not think of as a backup for a well-being .
it &apos;s a completely different term .
now , just a very short reason , from which we can &apos;t think about happiness is that we can &apos;t think about the same things as we think about life and when we actually live .
so if you ask the simple question , how happy people are in california , they &apos;re not going to get the most effective answer .
if you think that question you think that people have to think that people have to be happier when they say , we &apos;re going to go in ohio .
and what happened is that if you think about life in california , think about life in california , think about the difference between california and other places , say , we say , in climate .
now , it turns out that climate is not very important for the self for the self for the self and it &apos;s not even very important for the nachdenkliche itself , the beginning of how happy people are .
now , because the nachdenkliche itself is responsible , you can end up at the end -- some people could go to california .
and it &apos;s sort of interesting to pursue what happens to california , and to become happier .
now , you can &apos;t get happier .
we know that .
but one thing is going to happen . you will think that they are happier because if you &apos;re going to think about it , you &apos;ll be reminded by how awful that was coming in ohio and they feel they have the right choice .
it &apos;s very hard to think about well-being , and i hope i have a sense of how hard it is .
thank you .
thank you . i have a question .
thank you .
well , when we were a couple of weeks ago , they &apos;ve told me that there was a pretty interesting effect that came out of that gallup poll .
is that something that you can do to make us can now be able to have a few minutes left now ?
daniel kahneman : sure .
i think the most interesting thing that we found in the gallup poll , which is a number that we absolutely had absolutely .
we found that in terms of the erlebenden itself .
if we look at the income , how feelings with income .
and it turns out that under a income of 60,000 dollars in the year , for americans , and that &apos;s a very large amount of americans , under a income income from a income income from a income dollars , under a income of 600.000 dollars , under a income of 600.000 dollars .
60,000 .
dk : 60,000 .
60,000 dollars a year , people are people , and they &apos;re increasingly increasingly , the poorer they will be .
we get a perfectly side line .
i mean , i &apos;ve been able to see the side lines .
what happens is obvious that money doesn &apos;t make money doesn &apos;t a erlebnis-glück , but that lack of money is a kein , and we can actually get this misery , very clear .
in the spirit of the other self , you get another story .
the more money you give you a lot of things .
it &apos;s not true for emotion .
but in the whole american world &apos;s whole world &apos;s life , freedom , freedom , the pursuit of the brain .
if people take this befund seriously , i mean , it seems all to the head , all of it all of it all of the head , all we think about , for instance , in terms of steuerpolitik and so on .
is there a chance that politicians that the country could be more honest about how to take a befund like serious and that &apos;s what &apos;s going on ?
: : you know , i think there are recognition of the glücksforschung in politics .
the recognition will slow down in the united states , not a question , but in the united kingdom , they &apos;re just going to be able to just get the right now .
people are doing this in the future that they should think about happiness when they think about politics .
it &apos;s going to be a while , and people are going to discuss whether they want to study whether they want to study whether they want to study , so we need to get this conversation pretty soon .
how to make happiness , it can be very different dependent on how you think about it , and whether you think about the erinnernde itself or whether you think about the erlebende itself .
that &apos;s going to be the way i think , in the next few years .
in the united states , you can measure the erlebnis-glück of the population .
that &apos;s what i think , in the next one or two decades , the national statistics .
now , it seems to me , this topic , or should the most dramatic political debate over the next few years .
thank you very much for the invention of the behavioral community .
thanks , danny kahneman .
i &apos;m jane , i &apos;m famous video games .
i develop 10 years now , and my aim for the next decade is to save the world in reality as they &apos;re in online-spielen .
i have a plan for this . i want to convince people to do more people , including all of them more time playing with playing games .
now , we spend three billion hours a week with a week .
some of you may think , &quot; this is a whole lot of time for games . &quot;
perhaps something to be much more much when you think about how many problems we desperately desperately and the real-world world .
but in fact , my research at the institute of the future , is exactly the opposite .
three billion hours per week are not nearly enough to solve the world &apos;s problems .
in fact , i convinced that if we want to survive the next century in this planet , we want to have to increase this time .
i &apos;ve calculated that the time of 21 billion dollars a week .
now that &apos;s first going to happen , so i &apos;ll be able to make it up with this , so it can be the best thing to be , poverty , global conflicts and obesity , i think , we have to try to play for at least for at least for at least for at least for at least hours a time for at least hours a time
no , i really do .
why ? this picture is quite exactly what i believe is that games are so essential to the survival of human species . &quot;
this is a tudor portrait of the photographers of photographers .
he wanted to work on the playing . so he took a camera out of the players .
this is one of the classical star .
if you &apos;re not a players , you may have some of them some of the nuancen in this picture .
you &apos;re probably going to see this sense of urgency , something fear , but also , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very
if you play , you see some of the nuancen here , the nach eyes and the mouth are a sign of optimism . the brow has been zeigen .
this is a players who &apos;s at the edge of a so-called sogenannten sieges .
oh , you know , ok . yeah . yeah . so , we &apos;ve got some players here .
a epischer victory is a result that &apos;s so positive is that they &apos;re not knew that it was possible .
it was almost beyond the imagination .
and if you do it , they &apos;re shocked to be able to actually get something that they &apos;re actually able to actually get something . that &apos;s a epischer victory .
this one is just a epischen victory .
and this is what we need to see on millions of problemlösern over the world , if we have to see the one that the one in attack is the face of the next century , the face of the next century , at the edge of a epischen sieges .
well , unfortunately , we see a face in real life when we see difficult problems .
i &apos;ll call it as that &quot; in life , i &apos;m bad &quot; -gesicht . &quot; and it &apos;s actually my face , see ? yes .
i am , i &apos;m bad in life , i &apos;m bad &quot; -gesicht .
this is a graffiti in my former home in berkeley , california , where i &apos;m in my dissertation , we &apos;re better in my dissertation better than living in real life .
this is a problem that many players have gamers .
we think we &apos;re not as good as we &apos;re not as good as in play .
and i don &apos;t mean just less successful though that &apos;s going to happen .
we &apos;re doing more , i mean , well , in the context of motivation , to do something inspired with motivation , inspired to the collaboration .
if we &apos;re in a spielwelt , i think many of us are changing in our best best and to solve the problem trying to solve the problem , so long as necessary required , it &apos;s going to try it .
and in reality , when we fail , if we &apos;re failing if we &apos;re failing when we &apos;re going to feel different .
we &apos;re feeling overwhelmed . we feel we feel we feel , we feel threatened , maybe depressed , frustrated or zynisch .
so we never have never , if we never play games , you &apos;re just playing games .
and that &apos;s what i wanted to study .
why is it possible , you couldn &apos;t do anything ?
how can we play these feelings in reality ?
so i looked like the world &apos;s world &apos;s world &apos;s warcraft , the ideal environment is to the final problem .
and i have some things that epic epic in online-welten are possible .
so first , when you go in one of these online-spiele , especially in world of warcraft , there is lots of different characters that are willing to be ready to give you a weltrettende mission , and it instantly instantly .
but not only any mission , but a mission that fits perfectly perfect level , right ?
so they do that .
they never get a job that they can &apos;t solve .
but always , on the edge of their skills , so they have to do a game . but there &apos;s no unemployment in the world of warcraft .
you don &apos;t sit around , and it &apos;s always däumchen . it &apos;s always to do something important .
and there &apos;s plenty of collaborators .
and where you can go hundreds of thousands of people who live with them to mission their epic journey .
we don &apos;t have a real life not so simple , that sense that the fingerschnipsen is ready .
and furthermore , there &apos;s this epic story , which is what we tell story about why we are and what we &apos;re doing .
then we get this whole positive feedback .
they have determined to &quot; level up &quot; level , &quot; + 1 &quot; belongs &quot; by &quot; + 1 &quot;
this constant feedback is not true life .
if i miss this stage , i don &apos;t think : &quot; + 1 1 , &quot; + 20 crazy idea .
i get this feedback life in real life .
so , the problem of the world &apos;s mind like world &apos;s world is that it &apos;s so satisfying , because at the edge of a epischen sieges , we &apos;ll actually spend our entire time in those spielwelten .
they &apos;re just better than the reality .
until now , world of warcraft-spieler million years of warcraft-spieler million years to solve the virtual problems of azeroth .
that &apos;s not necessarily bad .
it sounds horrible .
but to see it in the context of 5,93 million years ago , we started to go to the first primatenvorfahren .
so the first meeting of the world &apos;s primate .
ok , so , if we talk about how much time we currently play with play with play with play , just admitting for a matter of when you see the scale of human flourishing , which is what is interesting .
but also , because it turns out that we &apos;re going to use this whole time of time using this whole time of play , actually , what we &apos;re doing as humans as humans as humans as humans as humans .
we &apos;re developing to decide , they &apos;re herzlichen .
that &apos;s the truth . i think .
and look at this interesting statistics , the kürzlich of carnegie mellon published : the average boy was released , the average young man in a country with a starker spielkultur spends 10,000 hours with online-spielen .
so , 10,000 hours is a very interesting number of two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : two reasons : &quot; two reasons , two reasons , &quot; two reasons , &quot;
first of all , for kids in the united states , 10.080 stunden are the exact genaue that they spend in school , from the fifth grade , until the high school -- if you &apos;re never absent .
so we have a complete parallelbildungsweg of parallelbildungsweg , on the young people as they &apos;re learning as well as it means , a good player , how everything else you learn in school .
and maybe some of you have the new book from malcolm gladwell , &quot; überflieger , &quot;
so you know his theory of success , the theory of the success of 10,000 hours .
it &apos;s based on the great research that if we take 10,000 hours with the mühsamen of a private way to the 21st of it , we &apos;ll be able to be too meistern .
we &apos;re going to be able to do what &apos;s going on , how the most young people in the world .
so what we have here is a complete generation of young people who are meister-spieler .
so the big question is , &quot; what are the gamers of meisterhaft ? &quot;
because if we could figure that out , we could have never been able to have a quasi before human potential .
so many people we have in the world who give at least a half per day .
these are our meister-spieler . 500 million people who are remarkably good in &quot; something . &quot;
and the next decade we have another billion , which is desperately good good .
if you haven &apos;t heard it , you haven &apos;t heard it , you know , if you haven &apos;t heard it , you &apos;ve heard it .
the spieleindustrie entwickelt , , the energy save energy and on mobilfunknetzen , rather than the world &apos;s breitband-internet , instead of all around the world , especially in india , china , brazil in india .
you would expect a billion billion and a half billion .
so we have a billion of billion .
so i started thinking about what it is , what it is to do .
there are the four things i thought . first , dringlichkeits-optimismus .
ok , imagine what &apos;s like extremes .
dringlichkeits-optimismus is the desire to do something that is a partnership with believing to believe that we have a shared hope .
and the reason always believes a epischer victory is possible , and that it &apos;s always worth of it , and that it &apos;s almost worth of it , and that &apos;s why .
players don &apos;t sit around .
players are masters of social security social nets .
there &apos;s a lot of interesting that we show people , we like to have more , after we &apos;ve been able to have them , even when they defeated us .
the reason for this is a lot of trust playing a game with someone playing a game .
we have trust that is that somebody who will help us spend the rules that we &apos;re going to have the same goal and to the spielende .
so , the zusammenspielen of ties , trust and each other .
as a consequence of the consequence we build with the social relations .
glückselige produktivität , fantastic ! &quot; fantastic !
you know , there &apos;s a reason why the durchschnitts-word of warcraft-spieler 22 22 hour for a week , and that &apos;s a reason , as a teilzeitjob .
the reason is that if we play , we &apos;re happier to work hard , working hard when we &apos;re relax or anything .
we know that we know as human beings , when we do hard , major work .
and the players are always ready to work hard , when they get the right job .
and finally , epic .
and the players love to be part of the things that are part of awe .
here &apos;s a hintergrundinformation , to go back to the right light . you know , the greatest world &apos;s largest mortality of the world .
the second world &apos;s dilemma is , with almost einträgen , the world &apos;s world of warcraft .
five people use every month .
they have more information about world of warcraft in the internet as a result of any other topic in any other economic issue .
they create a epic story .
you create a epic resource of knowledge about the world of warcraft .
ok , so that &apos;s four superpowers , which are four , and players are super-mächtige , hopeful .
it &apos;s people who believe that they can change as a individual change .
and the only problem is that they think they can change the virtual worlds , but not the real ones .
that &apos;s the problem i try to solve .
edward castronova is a volkswissenschaftler .
his work is genius . he &apos;s looking at why people so much time and money laundering .
and he says , &quot; we won &apos;t be less than a massenemigration in virtual worlds and online-spielumgebungen . &quot;
and this is a economist . so he &apos;s logical .
and he says ...
not as i -- i develop , i &apos;m a bit more überschwänglich .
so he says that makes sense of meaning , because players can achieve more than real life .
they can play social spaces , more than real life , they get more feedback and rewards in playing as living in real life .
so he says it &apos;s a lot of the logical that players will be more time than in the real world .
i &apos;m not going to do that .
but it &apos;s definitely not a optimalsituation .
we need to start to transform the real world .
my inspiration comes from a incident , the 2,500 years of zurückliegt .
there &apos;s this ancient cube , from schafsknöcheln , you know ?
this fantastic spielecontrollern had es .
and that was the first of people spielgeräte .
and if you &apos;re using the werken of the old greek griechischen familiar , you know , you may be familiar with this story . the story about how and why games invented games .
according to the laut , genauer würfelspiele , in the kingdom of königreich during an hungersnot .
and it was a such big killer that the king of lydien sich himself to a crazy idea .
people were doing .
it was a extreme situation . you needed a extremes .
so , according to me loud herodotus , the würfelspiel and vereinbarten national strategy , and a day would be a national strategy , you would play .
and they would be so much in the würfelspiel , because games was so fascinating and gave us with befriedigender , glückseliger produktivität , they would forget that there was nothing to eat .
and then , on the next day , you would play , and the next day would be eating you .
and according to herodotus , they were so cheese for 18 years by slipping on a day and on the next day , and on the next one .
so , like , i think we &apos;ll get a games of games today .
we put games to get the suffering in the world .
we put games a fundraiser to avoid anything that is not working in the real world , all of real life is not raw raw life , and we &apos;ll get us from the play .
but that doesn &apos;t have to be the end .
that &apos;s the exciting thing .
according to 18 years , after 18 years , didn &apos;t get better , so , decided to king , a final würfelspiel anzusetzen .
they shared the kingdom in two .
they played a würfelspiel and the sieger durften adventure .
they lydien and made it up looking for a new home , they just had to be so many people , like it was working with a neighborhood where they were able to thrive .
that sounds crazy , right ?
but latest dna-beweise show that the etrusker , the etrusker , the später empire , the same as the old lydier .
so , so , scientists came to the notion of the verrückte , which is actually true .
and geologists found a global abkühlung , which almost 20 years almost took the hungersnot could explain what the famine could explain .
so this crazy story of voices .
you may have seen their people through playing , by taking 18 years , and then they had this eingebung and so much about the other thing that they were able to have the entire world civilization .
so , we can also .
we &apos;re playing for 1994 .
this was the first strategiespiel in real time of the world of warcraft-serie . that was 16 years ago .
she played 18 years , we spent a 16 for 16 years .
i &apos;m saying we &apos;re ready for our own episches game .
so , they sent the half of their civilization , looking for a new world , so i take my 21 billion spielstunden pros a week .
we should übereinkommen that half of us have a half of us a half of us a half of a hour , until we &apos;ve solved the problems of the real world .
i know , you &apos;ll ask , &quot; how do we solve problems of the real world ? &quot; and that &apos;s what i &apos;ve done my work in the last few years at the institute for the future .
we have this banner in our office in the office , it &apos;s what we should be able to understand the future .
we don &apos;t try to say the future to say .
what we want to create is the future .
we want to do the best way of thinking about it , and then people have to do the other , these kinds of reality .
we make them more muslims in the field of clothing and people who are the opportunity to reach them .
i &apos;ll show you a very short play that i designed to try to try to get rid of people in their own future .
this is &quot; the world without oil . &quot;
the game is from 2007 .
it &apos;s a online-spiel , where they have to get a ölknappheit .
the ölknappheit is invented , but we have enough online-inhalte , so it &apos;s realistic , and they &apos;re going to figure out how much of oil , which is not what they do , they say , &quot; and then we have to figure out how much the petals that you &apos;re going to do , and then we ask them , how much oil is going to make
we have this game with absolutely spielern in 2007 , and we &apos;ve got them over the past three years .
and i can tell you that it was a verändernde experience .
nobody wants to change because it &apos;s good for the environment or because we should .
but when you &apos;re in a epischen adventure , and they said , &quot; disenthrall is the oil . &quot;
this is a very fascinating adventure , you go .
find out how they survive , most of our players have the players in the game of gelernten behavior .
so we &apos;ve given us for the next weltrettende game , a bigger goal , as just ölknappheit .
we have the game in the institute for the future .
so , the computation of a nickel that is that people are only 23 years on the planet .
this supercomputer is called the global aussterbungs- sensibilisierungs-system , &quot; of course .
the call on the player , you can see how a jerry-bruckheimer gestaltet .
they know the jerry bruckheimer-filme , where there are &quot; dream-team &quot; -- they have the astronauts , the scientists , the scientists and only together , they can save the world .
but in our game , instead of just five five of five people , we &apos;re going to say , everybody is in the dream-team , and it &apos;s our job that we &apos;re going to create security , security , security and the future of social justice .
8,000 players played the game for eight weeks .
they found 500 unglaublich solutions that you can read when they &apos;re &quot; googlen . &quot;
and the last game we march , it &apos;s a 3. thing , it &apos;s a game in collaboration with the world bank .
if you can finish the game , you get from the world bank , &quot; social umgestalter . &quot;
we work with universities in the same way and invite them to learn social umgestalten .
we have a comic book . we have &quot; level to regionales , nachhaltigkeit , sustainability , vision and ingenuity .
i want to share all of the data , this game with young people , all over the world , especially in entwicklungsgebieten , especially in entwicklungsgebieten , especially in entwicklungsgebieten , in entwicklungsgebieten , who benefit together their own social enterprises to save the world .
i come here to the end .
i want to ask you something .
do you think , what happens when next ?
we have all of these fantastic players , we have games that we see what we can do , but we have the real world .
well , i hope you to agree that players is human resources that we can work in real life , and that games can be a big meaning for change .
we have all these superpowers , glückselige productivity , the ability to knit social degradation regimes and the desire for epischer .
i really hope that we play together , we &apos;re using the paper games to survive on this planet .
and i hope you &apos;ll design with me playing with me playing with me playing bad .
if i &apos;m in the next decade , i &apos;m in two things that we can make any clues future , and that we can play all kinds of games .
so i say , let &apos;s say , &quot; let &apos;s start with the weltverändernden games ! &quot;
thank you .
i like to give you something , what i &apos;m proposing about a few months ago , a few months ago , i was in wired magazine .
i always writing my synonym-wörterbuch , but i was with the accent of the center of the center of the center of the center , and i noticed that i &apos;ve never lived in my life , which is the word &quot; guitar &quot;
i read you the post .
&quot; dig &quot; behindert : verkrüppelt , hilflos , hilflos , destroyed , zerstört , zerstört , zerstört , gelähmt , gelähmt , gelähmt , gelähmt , gelähmt , gelähmt , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , zugerichtet , aus , aus , aus , aus , aus , siehe , siehe , siehe , siehe , nutzlos , useless and weak .
antonyme : healthy , strong . &quot;
i have this list of a friend of mine and had to laugh , it had to laugh so ridiculous , but i came up until the &quot; &quot; war , &quot; and i had to collect after that überfallartigen wortflut and so to read and damit emotional emotional shock .
of course , the ausgefranstes , old synonym-wörterbuch . i just thought that the issue was pretty old .
but in fact , it was a ausgabe on the early &apos; 80s , when i started with elementary school and started studying my purpose to build my self outside of my family and shapes and the rest of the world around me .
and god forbid i was not used a synonym-wörterbuch .
i would take this post seriously , i would be born in a world that somebody like me in a world that somebody like me to a person whose lives in a psychiatric way . but now i &apos;m going to have the opportunity and adventure i &apos;ve experienced .
so i &apos;ve been die the online-ausgabe of 2009 , and i expected that i &apos;m going to get here .
here &apos;s the aktualisierte version of this eintrags .
unfortunately , they &apos;re not much better .
and especially , the last two words &quot; was &quot; and &quot; healthy . &quot;
but it &apos;s not just about the words .
it &apos;s about what we think about people we describe with this words .
it &apos;s about values that are pulling in these words , and how we construct those values .
our language affects our thinking and how we see the world and the people around us .
many altertümliche societies , including the greek and the romans , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , what you can also see , can also manifestieren .
so , what do we want to do is a disabled person , or a powerful people ?
in fact , a human being achtlos as a kid , could be , they could give them and give them .
wouldn &apos;t be the way to open them doors ?
a man who had opened for me , my pediatrician was at the a.i. dupont in wilmington in wilmington .
he &apos;s called dr. pizzutillo . a italo-amerikaner whose name , which is how they can think , most americans couldn &apos;t respond to the people . so he was called dr. p. .
and dr. p. was always very colorful and was the work with kids .
i found the time i spent in this hospital , just great -- until my physiotherapie .
i had to get a lot more sophisticated , a lot of the most seemingly often starts to get these dicken , called bändern -- in different colors -- that &apos;s familiar with these thick , elastischen bändern -- in different colors -- i think it &apos;s a little bit more than anything . i &apos;ve got it .
and imagine , i even have even more than fünfjähriges kid with dr. p. and so trying to stop these kinds of medications , natürllich without success .
and one day he took me in a gentleman , these were just horrible and junges -- and he said to me , &quot; wow , aimee , you &apos;re so a strong , and young girls , you &apos;re going to be one day of a day .
and if you can do it , i &apos;ll give you a hundred dollars . &quot;
of course , was a simple trick of dr. p. , so i could not make the case , with the prospect of dr. girls that i wanted to do not make my daily übungs-horror with new eyes , but he actually helped me to see my daily übungs-horror with new eyes . so that &apos;s been a new and vielversprechendes experience .
and i &apos;m asking today how much his vision of me as strong and the children of my self was my self and i could imagine , i could think of a lot of nature , and atlethischen human populations .
that &apos;s just a example of many , how adults in the machtpositionen of a child &apos;s imagination .
but as the usual zitierten of examples of examples , we all wish our language to imagine , and it makes us all wish to be able to see : it &apos;s allowing to enable itself as a noble human being .
our language hinkt the social changes in many cases that have been in many cases through a technological change .
from the medical point of view , you can say that my legs , the laser-chirurgie for sehbehinderungen , kniegelenke für for sehbehinderungen , kniegelenke für for sehbehinderungen , kniegelenke für for sehbehinderungen platforms , and use the limits that they enable their own opportunities to build and to the limits that they enable their own opportunities to build and to the limits that they enable their own opportunities and
perhaps this technology is that there &apos;s always a very different truth that any human being taught a lot of human society and very low and very low and very low and very low , adapt to be our biggest plus .
the human skill is still -- this is a very interesting story because people always wondered me , and i &apos;m always going to talk to you about a little bit of a very uncomfortable : this sentence that &apos;s the question of people , i think , and i think , i understand , i understand why .
this sentence from the notion of the notion that success or luck depended on , because i could have the possible drop of a life with a prosthetic , or whatever people me with my disability .
but the truth is that we &apos;re going to change . of course , we &apos;re being able to make them whether they &apos;re physically , emotionally or even both or even both of the same thing .
and i want to argue that &apos;s good .
widrigkeiten are not a obstacle that we need to have to get to our lives .
widrigkeiten of our lives are simply going to live .
and i tend to see the widrigkeiten as my shadow .
sometimes i &apos;m not saying that he &apos;s very , very , sometimes he &apos;s hardly too , but he &apos;s constantly .
and i want to do with that the impact , the schwere of a human people .
there are widrigkeiten and challenges and challenges and the result are just alllzu and every person on all around , but the question is , whether we &apos;re not going to be able to get with widrigkeiten &apos;s clearly or not , but how we get started .
so we &apos;re not just what we love to love , from the people we love to keep schicksalsschlägen , but they also have to get a vorzubereiten , it &apos;s going to be clear .
and we don &apos;t have our kids to be able to do , if we don &apos;t adapt to the sense that they can &apos;t adapt .
you have to be two things to be clear : to take a medical thing , and to the other things that i &apos;m going to be disabled .
and to be honest , the only real and universal disability that i had to have to have a question , is that the world is constantly , they can describe with these definitions .
in our desire to protect people who are going to be alive to the quality of the quality that they may have to figure out that we don &apos;t have the subjects for that , somebody &apos;s actually .
perhaps the most concept that just happened to be in a broken , and how we repair the repair fix every single disability than the most dramatic thing .
if we don &apos;t have a human race , and not all his powers and that , and that we can do that we may have to struggle to have to do another disease .
we degradieren a human , which is value for our society .
so we need to go beyond the patologie and we &apos;ve all the bereich of human possibilities .
but the most part is that there are between the perceptions of our bodies and our great erfindergeist , a connection .
we should not be abwerten at the time capsule , or we should try to avoid them , we should be able to avoid them , we should be able to avoid the rug , but it &apos;s about to see the widrigkeiten opportunities .
it &apos;s probably about to be clear to be clear that we don &apos;t necessarily have to have widrigkeiten , but we &apos;re lying to the hug , but we &apos;re open to the hug , you know , even a kampf-ausdruck and maybe even dance .
and perhaps we do it , we can make a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of a natural and useful and useful and nützliches .
in this year , we celebrate the 200 . birthday by charles darwin and when he wrote about evolution , in my eyes , in my eyes , in my eyes , in my eyes , in my eyes , in my eyes , in my eyes , in my eyes , in my eyes , in my eyes , in my eyes , in my eyes , in my
i would like to adapt it so much , not the most powerful part of the way , but also not the most fundamental thing that changes changes at best .
from conflicts to us .
not only do we know that the capacity of people , and aufzublühen , from struggle to struggle to struggle to struggle to struggle to go through conflict .
so again , change , change and adjusting are the greatest abilities of people .
and we may know we &apos;re just wood , we &apos;re going to be really , really , really .
perhaps the meaning of widrigkeiten , a perception of the ichs , a sense of our own power .
we can make ourselves so much .
we can make a new meaning that &apos;s going on the ground for heavy time .
perhaps we can see as a change .
widrigkeiten , for a change that we haven &apos;t adapted .
i think the biggest damage that we &apos;re learning ourselves is that we should be normal .
times , who &apos;s normal ?
there &apos;s no normal .
there &apos;s the usual . but not the normal thing , and they would learn to learn this poor , so , in fact , if you really want to learn what they really do ?
i think , rather than .
it would be great if we could take this paradigm from another nation or the starches to make a little dangerous to the other children , and they can build their powers and they gain their very many children , and they can build their skills in society .
anthropolgen , it turns out that we humans from the members of our society is that we have a gefordert : useful to contribute .
there &apos;s evidence that is that the neanderthals that 60,000 people in 60,000 years ago , and people were able to do with a moral physical injuries with the moral physical körperlichen with a moral physical injuries with the moral physical and people with a moral physical verletzungen with the moral physical character , and that was because the lebenserfahrung of this person was , &quot; because the lebenserfahrung of
they didn &apos;t have these people as a broken and useless ; they were considered a bit special and collective .
a few years ago i was in the town in the city i grew up in a lebensmittelmarkt in a red herring &apos; red zone , and i was sitting there a scheffel experiment .
it was summer and i had shorts .
and i hear , like a guy behind me , &quot; well , if that &apos;s not true . &quot;
and i was walking around and see this older man . i didn &apos;t know who he is .
and i said , &quot; excuse me , sir , sir , i can &apos;t remember . &quot;
and he said , &quot; well , you know , you know , you know , they &apos;re interested in me .
when i first saw them for the first time , i was able to read her from the belly of her mother . &quot;
oh , the one .
and of course , it did .
so this was dr. kean , a man that i just knew from narratives of my mom &apos;s mom on this day because i was very , i was very , very , very , very birthday to my birthday .
the doctor for pränatale diagnostics in my mom was in the vacation , and so my parents knew me to the world , at all .
and because i was born without wadenbeine , and my feet came up and i just got a couple toes on this and a few toes on the other foot , he was the überbringer , that strangers had to be able to be able to be able to see the bad news .
he said to me , &quot; i had to say , &quot; i had to say that you &apos;re never going to walk out of it , and never as soon as other children have come to their life , and they &apos;ve just been lying out of the unabhängiges . &quot;
actually , i thought he was having a gesammelt of my entire childhood , whether i won at a buchstabier-wettbewerb in the second class , whether i had a buchstabier-wettbewerb in the second class , whether i had my scholarship or my sportlichen siege , and he used this ausschnitte to teach his students at the pfadfindern of the hahnemann medical of the hahnemann medical school and the hershey medical
and he called it this part of his favorite factor , the potential of human being on human .
you can &apos;t emphasize how crucial that factor is to be the quality of the quality of the quality of the quality of life .
and dr. kean told me , &quot; i learned that kids don &apos;t get anything else , and even if you &apos;re going to get a little bit of support if you can get kids to yourself , kids can achieve a lot . &quot;
look dr. kean has changed his thinking .
he understood that medical diagnosis , and how somebody can do that two different things are .
and even my thinking of my thinking is changed by the time i had , if you were to be able to have my prothesen on the age of 15 years , i would have no sekunde in flesh and bones , i wouldn &apos;t have a second gezögert .
i wanted to go back to the time .
if you ask me today , i &apos;m not sure .
and that &apos;s what happened , because i &apos;ve been doing something with my legs and not all of those experiences .
and perhaps that change , because i &apos;ve been so many people that i &apos;ve been hearing so many people who have opened me , instead of people who wanted to go to me or me .
you see , it takes a human , which you can do , how they can manifestieren , and they &apos;re in the way they are .
if you do it possible , your own , inner forces , to activate the human spirit -- if you can do that , and for somebody in a critical moment , they &apos;re actually a door , they &apos;re actually a very good teacher .
they &apos;re going to make them in their doors .
the real meaning of the worts &quot; is &quot; in the word &quot; educe . &quot;
it means something that is in a ist , the potential .
again : what &apos;s the potential we want to do now ?
in the &apos; 60s , in britain , in britain , in the &apos; 60s , in gesamtschulen , in .
they call this &quot; streaming trials &quot; in the u.s. &quot;
students will be going to go into grades .
and the more powerful will be geprüft , the better teachers , the better teachers and so forth , and so they &apos;re going to be so much .
they then started a dreimonatigen zeitraum with a &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; the &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; the &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; the &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; the &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; the &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; the &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; the &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot;
and of course , it &apos;s because of a heart that had been told that the einser-schülern was told , they &apos;re just sufficient .
and the same way was that the three months .
but only one who were still in school -- except for the students who had been school .
but really crucial at that trial , that the teacher were not nicht .
the teacher didn &apos;t know that was something changed .
they were basically told that the einser-schüler and the students who are sufficient with the higher , and they have some of them things and they are treated .
the only real disability is a gebrochener ghost , who has been broken , the broken has no hope . he finds nothing more schön. it lacks , and our innate capacity , the imagination is the imagination .
but if we do it , we can continue to try to get the human mind , and to hope to be able to hope to find yourself and more phantasievoll and phantasievoll , then we have our forces to really positive .
if a spirit of these qualities we can do a new reality and new kinds of daseinsformen .
i want to end with a poem that was written by a persian poet named hafiz in the 14th century , and i want to repeat this all the time he &apos;d just have to repeat the god of the name , but the poem means &quot; every kid who knows the god of the name , but the poem means &quot; every kid who knows the god of the
&quot; come with me . thank you very much .
how would you better do , when you are in the right ?
assuming i told that , through a few changes of their genes , a better memory , could be more and faster .
or , like , you want to be stronger force .
do you want to become attractive ?
how would it be the longer living thing to live ?
or perhaps , you know , you know , they &apos;re still going to become more creativity .
what would you like to do most ?
what would you like to do , if you could only have one thing ?
creativity .
how many people would choose to vote ?
raise your hands . let me see you .
some of them . probably about how people here are creative people here .
that &apos;s very good .
how many would you choose to do ?
you can do a couple more .
how about fitness ?
a few less .
what is a longevity ?
ah , the majority . i love to think about a doctor .
if you could only have one of them , it would be a different world .
is that all of that ?
or maybe it may be possible ?
evolution is a andauerndes issue on the ted conference , but i want to give you the idea of a doctor &apos;s going to be a doctor .
the great geneticists in the 20th century , t.g. dobzhansky , who also had a kommunikant in russian orthodoxen , wrote a paper , which was &quot; none of meaning in biology doesn &apos;t make sense of evolution . &quot;
now , if you are a number of those who don &apos;t believe the proof of biology , that would be a very good stage , your hörgerät , your hörgerät , your hörgerät , you can see that , because nothing is , because nothing is to be wrong , because nothing is going to be a little good thing , because nothing else will make sense of mind
but when you accept biological evolution , they think it &apos;s about the past , or it &apos;s also about the future ?
is it a different geltend or so it &apos;s also ?
this is another peek on the tree .
in this picture , i have a bush in this picture , because if you look at the margins of the life in evolutionary terms , because if you look at the margins of the life in evolutionary terms , and we &apos;ve got the survived ; it has its environment and starches .
the human part of this busches , far on the end , of course , that &apos;s what we &apos;re interested in .
we zweigen by a shared ancestor to do a modern vorfahren about six or eight million years .
in this time , there was 20 or 25 different kinds of hominids .
some of them have come and went .
we &apos;re going to have been here .
it seems like we were right to the other part of the tree , but actually , in the greatest part , the basic mechanisms of our cells are pretty much .
is that we can take away from this , and the no-take community of a shared bacteria can make the protein of human flourishing to produce the protein of human security ?
this is not like humaninsulin ; this is the same protein that is chemically ununterscheidbar of what comes from the pancreas .
and we &apos;ve been talking about bacteria , you know , that every one of us in our gut more than the cells of us in our gut , the rest of our bodies ?
maybe 10 times .
i mean , think about what antonio damasio after your purpose , think about the bacteria ?
our gut is a wonderfully gastfreundlichen environment for this bacteria .
it &apos;s warm , it &apos;s dark , it &apos;s a very , it &apos;s very gemütlich .
and you will give them all nutrients that they can only offer and offer without effort .
it &apos;s really a lighter way of bacteria with occasional interruptions , unterbrechungen , jeodch , forced to the point .
but , again , you &apos;re a wonderful environment for this bacteria , just as you care about your life .
they &apos;re helping out of the digestion of the essentiellen , and they protect them against certain diseases .
but what will come in the future ?
are we in a kind of evolutionäres balance in a species of a species ?
or are we really determined to be something else -- something that may be even better at the environment ?
now , let &apos;s go back to the time of the world &apos;s urknalls billion years ago -- the earth , the solar system , about four billion years ago -- the first mehr-zelligen organisms , maybe a half billion years -- the first anzeichen organisms , maybe a billion years -- and then the human species , maybe the first species of -- and then the human species that
in this huge scale , life on earth is just a little bit of the earth &apos;s just a little bit of a single takt , and the animal life , a small notenverzierung .
we were .
this is also the unterhaltungswert of these talk , so i hope i &apos;ve been working on a conversation about this .
well , when i was a neuling on college , i had my first biologiekurse .
i was fascinated by the elegance and beauty of biology .
i fell in the power of evolution , and i posed something very fundamental , in most of the existence of life in einzelligen organisms , and all the genetic information that &apos;s going to be in both genetic .
but at the time , as a mehrzelligen organisms , and they started to change the things .
sexual reproduction , in the picture .
and so , very important : to the sexual reproduction that &apos;s the genome , it &apos;s going to be the rest of the body .
in fact , you could say that the unausweichlichkeit of the death of death in the evolution of the nature of the nature of the time , as sexual as sexual reproduction .
now i have to confess if i was a dermatologist , i thought , ok , sex / death , death / death , death -- it seemed pretty much at the point -- it seemed pretty much at the time -- it seemed pretty much at my own time .
i was thrilled to see the feelings of george burns , which is in las vegas , his show in the 1990s .
and one night , there &apos;s a pat of his hotelzimmertür .
he opens the door .
he was a wonderful spärlich showgirl .
she looks him and says , &quot; i &apos;m here for a super-sex . &quot;
&quot; this is wonderful , &quot; i &apos;ll take the soup . &quot;
i came to the realization when i was a goal that i was going to speak about evolution -- not necessarily , just a different thing .
i tried to preserve the body .
i wanted to keep healthy .
i wanted to have the health of a disease .
i wanted to lead a long time .
evolution is all over the sea of the genome , and we want to go generation generation generation .
from a evolutionary perspective , you are and i developed like booster rockets , and i developed a entwickelt to the next level of fracht into the next level of the sea .
i think we would all the mood , the worst allen brought to the expression of all the expression of the expression , when he said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to get through my work .
i want to do it by stopping me . &quot;
evolution doesn &apos;t necessarily have to try to figure out the longest life .
it doesn &apos;t necessarily necessarily have the largest one or the fastest , and not even the smartest .
evolution priviligiert the creatures that evolved to their environment .
it &apos;s the test of survival and the success of the survival and the success of the bottom and the success of the bottom and the success of it , and you know it &apos;s the test of survival and the success .
at the bottom of the ocean , bacteria are the same , the thermophil are , the thermophil are , and they &apos;re going to survive , would have been there , would have been able to have a bewohnbare environment for themselves .
so what does that mean when we look at the back , what happens in evolution , and how we &apos;re going to think about the space of the space and we like vorausschauen in the next stage , i would say that there are a series of possibilities .
the first thing is that we &apos;re not going to be .
we &apos;ve done a kind of balance .
and the reason for that , it &apos;s been able to make a sense of medicine , which is a lot of genes that had been considered rausgewählt and from the population of the population .
and second , we as a species we &apos;ve managed to be our environment so that we &apos;ve managed to adapt to us , and we adapt them , we adapt to us , we adapt to them , and we adapt to them , we adapt to them , we &apos;re not going to adapt to them .
and by the way , we wander and zirkulieren us so much that they can &apos;t tell the longer that they can &apos;t say to say that the evolution , the evolution , um .
a second way is that it &apos;s a evolution of the traditional way of course , imposed from the forces of nature .
and the argument that would be the wheels that the wheels that &apos;s slowly , but they &apos;re unerbittlich .
and so , as far as the isolation continues , when we &apos;re a species on planet , it will be the equivalent of the grid and changes the changes of environment that may produce evolution .
but there is a third way of a verlockende , fascinating and terrifying possibility , and terrifying possibility of how do we do .
i call it neo-evolution -- the new development that doesn &apos;t just come , but led and decided to us as a individuen. in the decisions that we &apos;re doing .
now how could that happen ?
how could we do this ?
now , we &apos;re looking at the reality that people are going to be able to do in some cultures .
they are in some cultures , the choices to have more than women as women as women .
it &apos;s not necessarily good for the society , but it &apos;s what the family and the family .
so , if it doesn &apos;t just be possible to choose the gender of their child , but also to the body genetic adaptations , the disease , and they would be able to use .
what if you could do the genetic change to diabetes diabetes or alzheimer &apos;s disease or alzheimer &apos;s disease or schlaganfälle , right ?
would you like to do this change in their genes ?
when we vorausblicken , these kinds of changes are being possible .
the human genome started in 1990 , and it took me 13 years .
it cost 2,7 billion dollars .
in the next year when it was done , they could do the same thing for 20 million dollars in the four months .
now , you can have a sequence of the three billion miles of human genome to a price of about 2,000 20,000 and in the space of the week .
it &apos;s not going to be long as the reality that it &apos;s going to be the 1,000 dollars and it will be more accessible to be available .
one week , we had to use a woche of engineering engineering , the national academy of engineering , the natürlichen prize for francis and willem stemmer , two scientists , who &apos;s unabhängig the natural process of evolution to work and to make a proteine in a sense of a project -- which is called frances , &quot; direct evolution . &quot;
a few years ago , the scientists was awarded the scientists of the scientist of the scientists for his research in his research in his research in his research in his research in a life cycle of the only research , the cell to be able to get them to a life cycle of your body .
these changes are in the world .
the same technology that the human insulin can make human insulin in bacteria can do not just protecting the immunity to other viruses .
if you don &apos;t believe it or not , it &apos;s a graphic study in gang with vaccine against the cells of a tabakpflanze .
can you imagine something good , which is coming from tobacco ?
this is all of us and in the future that will be a lot more possible .
so , just imagine two other little changes .
you can change your cells in your body , but what if you could change the cells of their own .
what if you could get the sperm and eizellen or the fresh befruchtete , could transform a better chance for a living life , eliminating the diabetes , the diabetes , the diabetes that are the hämophilie of cancer ?
who wants to have children ?
and then the analytical technology , the same engine of science can enable the changes can enable the changes to prevent disease , could enable us to adopt super-attribute -- the better memory .
why not the schlagfertigkeit of a ken jennings hben , especially if you can extend it , with the next generation of the watson-maschine ?
why not the fast choices that will enable you faster and longer ?
why not live anymore ?
these will be unwiderstehlich .
and if we can take it on a place where we can take it on the next generation , and we can take the attributes that we want to be transformed by alt-stil evolution .
we &apos;re going to have a process that &apos;s going to have 100,000 years , and we can actually take it on a thousand years -- and maybe even on the next hundred years .
these are decisions with their grandchildren , or their grandchildren will have to deal with .
do we use these decisions to form that is better , the more successful is that &apos;s the most important ?
or will we choose the general dynamic of the lens that we want to think about some of us , and not for others ?
are we going to be formen a society and uniformierter , or robuster and vielseitiger ?
these are the kinds of questions we need to meet .
and most of all of all , we will ever be able to develop the wisdom and the wisdom that we need to make these decisions ?
in the good way , and they used to be thinking , they &apos;re going to be able to get these decisions .
thank you .
i want you to imagine a little bit of a tragbaren robot , which gives you a partnership of fähigkeiten , or another , the rollstuhlfahrern process helps to go back and forth again .
we call berkeley bionics that robot .
they &apos;re not different than something that they would get the morning and the next government of their velocity and the speed will continue to keep their velocity and will help them , for example , your balance .
that &apos;s in the fact that &apos;s the true of human being and machine .
but not only that -- so that &apos;s so , and connect them with the universe and others out there .
that &apos;s not just a crazy idea .
now , to show you now what we &apos;re working on , we start to talk about the american soldiers , which is about 100 pounds of pfund on the back of about 100 pounds of his back and it &apos;s the fact that they should carry more .
of course , this leads to a few complications -- rückenverletzungen , 30 percent of it .
so we thought we would recognize this challenge , we would embrace this challenge , and a exoskelett that &apos;s going to help with this problem .
so let me introduce you now , or the human universal load carrier .
soldier : with the hulc-exoskelett , i can carry 200 pounds about verschiedenartiges terrain , for many hours .
so his purpose design enables to be able to get deep , and highly wendige of the movements .
it feels what i want to do , where i want to go and then my strength and perseverance .
we &apos;re so far , with our industriepartner of this device , this new exoskelett of exoskelett in this year .
so true .
let &apos;s now focus on the wheelchair , something that i &apos;m particularly passionate about this .
there are 68 million people who are in the world today .
this is roughly one percent of the population .
and that &apos;s what happened in the fact , is estimate .
we &apos;re talking about very young people who are talking about very young people who live in their lives -- and i stopped , &quot; 20er , &quot; which was made -- from the most powerful and wheelchair .
but it &apos;s also about the basic population , whose numbers will evaluate .
and so , pretty the only option -- when it comes to a hirnschlag , or another complications -- is the wheelchair .
and so it &apos;s been since 500 years , since the way i have to say , very successful .
so we thought we could start with this , a completely new chapter in the field .
so let me introduce you now , the von is to be von by the amanda , which is a rückenmarksverletzung of the time that came out of a rückenmarksverletzung , which is that they couldn &apos;t walk for 19 and now .
thank you .
like i said , amanda is our elegs .
it has sensors .
his completely non-invasiven sensors in the crutches , the signals zurücksenden in our onboard-computer , who &apos;s sitting on her back .
there are batteriepackungen , the motorantrieb is to be in their own hüften , like their kniegelenken , which they move forward to the very geschmeidigen and very natural .
i was 24 years old and in bestform , as a monströser purzelbaum während während .
in a second , i lost every feeling and every movement below my beckens .
not a lot of time a doctor in my krankenzimmer and he said , &quot; amanda , you &apos;ll never go back again . &quot;
and that was 19 years ago .
he steel , he was able to take a fünkchen hope of my consciousness .
anpassungsfähige technologies have been allowed to tell me about , to learn to get to ski , and even with the hands of bike .
but nothing was invented to let me go back to now .
thank you .
as you can see , we have the technology , we have the platforms to discuss us and to discuss them .
it &apos;s in our hands and we have the whole potential to change life from future generations -- not just for the soldiers , or for amanda and all the rollstuhlfahrer , but for all of the time .
thank you .
home in new york , i &apos;m a boss of the entwicklungsabteilung of a non-profit named robin .
if i don &apos;t get poverty , i &apos;m a gehilfe bei of a feuerwehr-hauptmanns bei in a volunteer löschzug .
now , in our city , in the volunteers of a hochqualifizierte berufsfeuerwehr , you have to be quite early on the brandstelle to können .
i remember my first fire .
i was very good opportunities in the brandstelle , so i had to be able to learn good opportunities .
but it was still a wettrennen against the other volunteers to get the verantwortlichen and figure out what our tasks would be .
when i found the hauptmann , he had just been able to find a very serious conversation with the hausbesitzerin , who had the sicherlich of their lives .
it was in the middle night and they stood in the middle night and barfuß under a umbrella outside the strömenden rain while her house in her 20s .
the other volunteers , the only thing was to me was -- we call it lex -- was the hauptmann first and was asked to go to save the dog of the hausbesitzerin .
the dog i was about to envy .
there was a lawyer or vermögensverwalter , who was going to tell you for the rest of his life , the people told me that he was in a brennendes house , just because he was five seconds faster than me .
well , i was the next one .
the hauptmann winkte me .
he said , &quot; honey , you have to go into the house .
you have to go up to the fire , and you have to get a couple of shoes . &quot;
i swear .
now , not exactly what i had , but i went to the stairs -- the treppen , the hallway along this stage with the speed of the &quot; &quot; the &quot; the real world &apos;s been done with the speed of the time to get some shoes .
i know what you &apos;re thinking now , but i &apos;m not a hero .
i was wearing my prey back to the bottom , where i was standing on the front door and the beloved dog .
we &apos;re looking forward to the hausbesitzerin , where , not surprisingly , but more than mine was more than mine .
some weeks later , the feuerwache einen , the feuerwache einen , the feuerwache , the feuerwache , in which they &apos;re in their house for the tapferen of their house .
one of all the allem kindness : somebody had a couple of shoes .
and both in my profession , robin hood , as well as a volunteer volunteer , i &apos;m witness by generosity and kindness in the big scale , but i see the world &apos;s helping and the muts of individual .
and you know what i learned ?
they &apos;re all important .
so when i see in this room , and people see that they &apos;ve been either beachtenswerten success , or on your way there , i want to offer a reminder of paper : wait .
wait to make a difference in the life of a different life , until you have their first million .
if you give something something you &apos;ll give it now .
in a suppenküche , they &apos;re bringing a park in the neighborhood , they &apos;re a park in the neighborhood , and they &apos;re able to take a park in the neighborhood neighborhood , they &apos;re a park in the neighborhood , and they &apos;re just looking at the neighborhood neighborhood , you know , a park in the neighborhood , in the neighborhood , and that &apos;s in the
be a mentor .
not everybody will give us a chance to save lives , but every day offers us to change one .
so they &apos;re going to save the shoes .
thank you .
chef guissani : mark , mark , come back .
thank you .
i come from a community that &apos;s secret to the secret of the fortbestands of the world .
a place that women &apos;s doing the zepter , with sex , &quot; and that &apos;s the game that the day is -- where is a serious issue .
and no , it &apos;s not burning or san francisco .
ladies and gentlemen , their verwandtschaft .
this is the world of wild bonobos in congo .
bonobos is about chimpanzees our closest relative relative .
that means we have a common ancestor , a evolutionary grandmother that was about six million years ago .
now , chimps are known for their aggressivität .
but unfortunately , we have this aspect of überbetont in the narrative of human evolution .
but i show you the other side of the coin , the ability to be the medaille of the field of the field .
while chimpanzees , fear , fear kerlen , die kerlen , die of ermächtigten females .
there really is what he &apos;s doing , because that leads to a ausgesprochen society , in the fatal violence .
but unfortunately , bonobos are under the primates .
they live in the deep sea of the kongolesischen , and they &apos;re just hard to be hard .
congo is a paradox -- a country &apos;s collective biodiversity and beauty , but also the heart of a violent argument that has been wütet and almost many lives as the first world war ii .
not surprising that this destruction were survival of the bonobos of the bonobos .
and the decline of the baumbestandes lead that you can &apos;t even get a handle with the verbliebenen and even though , we &apos;re not sure to be honest .
and yet , in this country , in this country and chaos , you can hear a verborgenes , you know , the trees are erschüttert .
who are these related ?
we know they know , &quot; rather than war , because they have häufigen , including sex , auch sex , with wechselnden partners , with wechselnden partners , with wechselnden partners , and the rules so conflict and social networking .
i don &apos;t say , well , that would be the answer to all the same problems -- because the life of the bonobos is more than the kama .
so -- how humans -- love to play their lives .
play doesn &apos;t just kinderspiele .
and it &apos;s a game for the outside of relationships and the care of tolerance .
and we learn about trust and the rules of the game .
and game , creativity and resilience , and it goes all over the climax of diversity -- variety of diversity -- variety of diversity -- variety of diversity -- variety of things -- variety of behaviors , diversity , diversity of connections .
and if you can see , if you can see the evolutionary origins of human lachens and von .
and game is the kitt , the kitt .
now i don &apos;t know how to play , but i want to share some unique photographs from the wild .
first of a ballspiel on bonobo-art -- and i don &apos;t think about fussball .
so here we see a calf females and males in a verfolgungsspiel .
look what they do .
this could be the origin of evolutionary : &quot; she grabs it at the eggs . &quot;
just that i think it &apos;s more like it , not true .
yes !
so , sexspiele , both of these things as well as well as well .
and this video is really interesting , because it shows -- and this video is really interesting , because it shows the ideenreichtum , which is both of the game of the game -- like the testes -- and the game is both confidence as well as well as a result , while it &apos;s simultaneously .
but the game is a formwandler .
now , game is a formwandler and many forms of what some of them is something about a strong , phantasievoll , phantasievoll , neugierig , maybe to explore the food system .
and i want to show you , that &apos;s a fuku , a young female , and she plays a little bit of water .
i think , just as you play sometimes , and we need to be able to do loten boundaries , our inner and the outer worlds .
and it &apos;s the playful curiosity that makes us see , and we interact , and the unexpected wiring that we form , the real risk of creativity .
this is just a little vorgeschmack on the insights , the bonobos that we &apos;re lying in our past and present .
but they also have a secret to our future , a future that we &apos;ve taught taught us to change challenges through bigger creativity and druch .
the secret is that the game is to that the system is key to that .
in other words , game is our anpassungsjoker .
to be a unbeständige world , we need to play with a unbeständige world .
but we &apos;ll do this more than our spieltrieb ?
play is not silly , but it &apos;s not just silly , but it &apos;s not silly .
it &apos;s essential .
and for bonobos , people don &apos;t have the life of life , and even claws .
now , if it &apos;s not appropriate about it , you may have been at the nötigsten .
and so , my favorite primatenkameraden , let &apos;s take this gift of evolution and together , while we &apos;re bringing the creativity of the research and the staunen .
thank you .
i want you to think about two pairs , in 1979 , in 1979 , at the same time , every time , every single child -- okay .
so two pairs , every zeugt a baby .
now i don &apos;t want you to spend a lot of time , the zeugung , because , if you &apos;re all the time to imagine the zeugung , they won &apos;t listen to me .
so , you know , you know , you know , you know , just a moment .
and in this scenario , you imagine that in a case , the sperm electric sperm is a y chomosom , which is actually the x chromosome .
and in the other case , the sperm is a x chromosome that applies to the x chromosome .
both are überlebensfähig , both of them .
we come back to these people .
most of my activities i &apos;ve been doing two hüte .
under a hat , i &apos;m going to be with the history of anatomy .
i &apos;m an studierte historikerin , and i study this case , i study how people with anatomy umgingen -- that &apos;s a human body , energy , how they interacted with körperflüssigkeiten umgingen , with körperkonzepten , how they thought they have .
the other hat i &apos;ve been working on my work is the aktivistin , the aktivistin or , as i sometimes , as a doctor -- from people who are patients about doctors .
in this case , i worked with people who have körpertypen , the social norms in question .
so , for example , with people who are siamesische twins , two people in a body .
i worked with people with zwergenwuchs -- so people who were little as a typical .
and very often , i &apos;ve been working with intersexuellen people whose gender gender is atypisch -- so people who don &apos;t have the average male or female .
and as a general term , we can use that word .
intersexualität &apos;s in many different forms .
i &apos;ll give you a couple examples of the possible of geschlechtsvarianten that are not going to be seen by the male or female .
in a case , you may have someone with a xy chromosomenbasis , and the sry gene of the y network is the protogonaden of the y y , we all have to have everybody to have been heranwachsen .
and that &apos;s why the testes in the economic stadium testosterone .
but because that individual lack of lack of lack of lack of lack of lack of the testosterone of the brain , the body doesn &apos;t respond to testosterone .
and that &apos;s called androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so much testosterone , but no response to it .
as a result of the physical , the typical female .
if the kid will look like a girl .
she &apos;s a girl . it &apos;s considered as a girl .
but it &apos;s mostly until they reached puberty and their breasts and evolve them , but not their period , until somebody comes out there &apos;s something else .
and they do some tests , and you find that they &apos;re doing instead of eierstöcken and uterus in a very , in fact , in a very , very hoden in it , and that they have a y chromosome .
in addition , it &apos;s important that you could actually give up this person for that , but they &apos;re not really .
women , like men , in our bodies , something that you &apos;re going to call adrenalindrüsen .
it &apos;s in the back part of our bodies .
and the nebennieren stellen , which is virilisierende hormones .
most of women , as i -- i think a very powerful woman , i don &apos;t think i &apos;m probably the typical value -- i don &apos;t think i &apos;ve probably seen the typical women -- most of the women i actually talk about .
we &apos;re starting to produce sprawl and we talk about androgene .
the consequence is that somebody like i actually found a brain that has more androgenen , as a woman who was born with his grandfather , and a androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so , you really intersexuelle , intersexuelle is really complicated ; intersexuelle are not just the middle of the spectrum of the spectrum of the spectrum of gender -- in a way , you can see the whole range of the range of the range of the range of the range , you can see the whole range of the range of the range of the range of the range
one example : a few years ago i received the phone call a 19 article of his son , who was born , he had a friend , she was having a friend , she was having a friend , she was having a friend , and he had just found out that he was eierstöcke and a uterus .
he had a total form of a angeborenen nebennierenrindenhyperblasie .
he &apos;s got xx , and in utero , his nebennieren was so strong that they have basically been basically created a male cell division .
and as a result , his konsequenz was able to run his brain &apos;s been male in the typischeren male part of the hormonenspektrums .
and when he was born , he saw a boy from -- no one knew something .
and it was only when he was 19 , he got 19 medical problems because he got to the doctors that the doctors found that he was walking on the inside .
okay , just a quick example of intersexualität .
some people with xx chromosomes , develop something called the ovotestis , which is eierstockgewebe by hodengewebe .
we don &apos;t know what happens .
so gender can be in many different varieties of auftreten .
the reason , why children with this kind of bodies -- whether it zwergenwuchs twins , it &apos;s intersexuell twins -- from surgeons , it &apos;s intersexuell twins , not because this is the physical health of advantage .
in many cases , these people are perfectly healthy .
the reason , why about you often disparate , many ways of design is going to be more profitable , because they threaten our social categories .
typically , our system is based on the idea that a certain smile is going to be a specific identity .
so we have the concept that we have to have a female identity ; a person in the person , to have a person , means , supposedly , a afrikanische anatomy of the anatomy of the story .
so we have this awful terrible idea .
and if we &apos;re faced with a body that &apos;s actually something very different , which is very different , and we &apos;re putting this in terms of that kategorisierungen .
so we &apos;ve done in our culture , a lot of things about individualismus .
and our nation really exists in a very romantic concept of individualismus .
now , how amazing it is , when children are born , which are two individuals in a body , which are two individuals in a body , which are two individuals in a body , which are two individuals in a body .
where i experienced in recent years , the südafrikanische läuferin caster caster semenya last year , whose gender were weltmeisterschaft last year in the leichatlethik of the leichatlethik .
a lot of journalists came up with the question : &quot; what a test will make you do whether or männlich , ? weiblich female or a statue ? &quot;
and i had to explain the journalists that there are no test .
now we now know that gender is complicated , that we need to admit that nature &apos;s männlich and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and weiblich ; d are we like that , which proved these same as of course .
so we have a situation where the more we need to do our science , we have to have to have to make ourselves , that this categories was developed , which is very simple to create permanent identitätskategorien , which is very unschärfer to create permanent identitätskategorien , much more unschärfer than we have accepted .
and that &apos;s not just what they do .
and it also helps to be a lot more than our terminologie &apos;s approved .
and we &apos;re all going to do in all kinds of unbequemen .
we have the same to take for instance , we &apos;re at least 95 percent of our dna with chimpanzees .
what do we want to do with the fact that we can actually see you through a few nukleotide ?
while we kept our science to keep forward , we &apos;re increasingly increasingly , we &apos;re increasingly increasingly in a zone of the unbehagens , where we need to recognize that the simplistischen categories that we were probably .
we see this in all kinds of human life .
one of the areas we see the beipiel , in our current culture , in the united states , are the kämpfe over the beginning and the end of life .
we have tough conversations about the thing that is a body to human beings , so that it &apos;s a different kind of recht life .
we have very difficult to the fact -- not as though in medicine -- not as distorted as in medicine -- when somebody dead .
our ancestors would never be so hard to fight at the question of that somebody was dead .
they have a feather under the nose , under the nose , and if you were , if you were , they haven &apos;t been buried .
if you don &apos;t think , they were buried .
but we are now in a situation where we humans recognize organs and they want to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to
and as a consequence , we &apos;re looking at the fight of the really hard question , when someone dead is , and that brings us in a really difficult situation , in which we don &apos;t have a really simple categories in the world .
now , that the whole thing was to adopt that the whole thing of categories is somebody like me .
i &apos;m a politically progressiv , i verteidige people with perfect bodies , but i have to admit it &apos;s nervous .
to realize that these categories are really much more than we thought , makes me .
and it makes me angespannt in terms of the democracy .
so to tell you from this anspannung , i have to first say that i &apos;m a big fan of the founding fathers .
i know they were rassisiten , i know they were sexisten , but they were great .
i think they were so tapfer and so smooth , in what they did was that i &apos;d been banging on the back of this , and it &apos;s not because of the music that absolutely forget .
it &apos;s because of what &apos;s happening with the gründungsvätern .
the founding fathers were composed of my childhood , the original activists and that &apos;s why .
what she was was to war , and she &apos;s got it through a different concept , and we were having a different , and 200 years for us .
as you all remember , it &apos;s our founding fathers to the concept of monarchy , and the monarchy -- the monarchy -- the monarchy -- the monarchy is sitting on a very vereinfachten concept of anatomy .
the conventional world had not been in the dna world , but they had a concept of the geburtsrechts .
they had a concept of blauem blood .
they were the notion that people who had political power , that political power , should have been sollten , because of the vererbten blutlinie from the grandfather and so on .
the founding fathers have been back and forth through a new konzept concept , and this concept said that all humans have created created .
they nivellierten the spielfeld and decided that the anatomisch was , which is , not the differences . and that was very radical .
now they did this for the part , because they were part of a football system in which two things together .
democracy grew up , but also , at the same time , also the science .
if you look at the history of the fathers , clearly clear , that many of you are interested in science , and they were interested in a concept of a naturalistischen world .
they went from explanations from explanations from explanations to the explanations of explanations , and meadows things like a traditional concept of power , back , where the transmission is on a very vagen konzepts konzepts konzepts .
she moved to a naturalistischen concept .
and when you look at the declaration of the declaration , you talk about nature and the god nature .
they talk about god and nature of god .
they talk about the power of nature to say who we are .
and as part of it , we have a concept of anatomischen gemeinsamkeiten .
and so they have really prepared for the future of the future .
they didn &apos;t have thought that , but what they did for us was great .
so what happened was , what happened ?
for example , women who das the concept of anstrebten that concept the concept of founding fathers that the konzept of founding is more important than a difference , the concept of founding the anatomical difference and said , &quot; we should be the wahlrecht , the most powerful thing is that we should have the wahlrecht , the most powerful thing is that we should have the wahlrecht ,
and women argumentierten the same .
next , the successful was , where we were seeing people saw as sojourner truth , who &apos;s not a woman , &quot; am i &apos;m not a wife ? &quot;
we &apos;re finding men in the marschierenden &apos;s marschierenden , who say , &quot; i &apos;m a man . &quot;
again , people unterschiedlicher , people who cared on a anatomische efficient , again , successful .
we see the same thing in the behindertenrechtsbewegung .
of course , the issue is that we &apos;re starting to look at all the common things , we have to look at question , why we have to bring certain kinds of trennungen .
now , i want to certain certain trennungen , glass , glass , in our culture .
i want to make a fish , for example , for example , like a human rights .
i don &apos;t want to say that we should shatter from anatomy .
i don &apos;t want to say that the 5-jährige is right to be right to sex your consent or to get married .
so there &apos;s a few anatomic trennungen , which makes me sense , and we should keep .
but the challenge is to try to figure out what it is , and why we keep them , and whether they are .
so we come back to those two creatures that are beginning to the beginning of the talk .
we have two creatures , both in 1979 , in 1979 , the same day .
so , let &apos;s imagine that one of you , maria , three months , three months , it &apos;s been born in the one in the one in the one hand .
further , on the other side , it &apos;s a 1k march , it &apos;s a 1k march , it &apos;s a 1k march , it &apos;s the one that he &apos;s born , so at the one march , it &apos;s a 1k march , it &apos;s like a 1 march , it &apos;s a 1 march , it &apos;s like a 1 march , it &apos;s a 1
only because of the fact that maria three months was born , they were able to put all the way three months before the time -- the law to have sex , the law to choose to drink the law .
but further , to give you all this waiting , not because he actually has a different biological age , just because of his birth of his birth .
we &apos;re finding other people &apos;s merkwürdigkeiten about what their rights are .
now , my face because you &apos;re having a couple of times , although i don &apos;t tell you that he &apos;s related to xy -- because he &apos;s going to be able to get to the other , it can be more , it can be more effective , what will not worry about .
maria , if you can &apos;t all the same thing in all states that are very distinctive in all states and the right to the final .
another can be a woman in every country , but maria can only get a woman today in a few states .
so we have these dauerhaften categories that we are in many ways and questionable .
and for me , the question is , what we are going to do , because our science works in the area of the anatomy that we have to have a point of admit that we need to admit that a democracy that &apos;s based on anatomy , auseinanderfallen ?
i don &apos;t want to give you the science , but at the same time , it feels like the science has been doing .
so where we are ?
it seems like our culture , it seems to be a kind of a pragmatische : &quot; well , we have to pull somewhere else , so we pull them somewhere . &quot;
but a lot of people who are in a very strange position .
so for example , texas , texas , texas , texas , a man &apos;s decided that you don &apos;t have a y , and a woman means that you don &apos;t have a y chromosome .
now in practice , people are not going to have tested on their own .
but it &apos;s also very bizarre because of the story i &apos;ve told you about the androgenrezeptor-defekt .
if we take one of the founding fathers of modern democracy , dr. martin luther king , he &apos;s sitting in his 20s , he &apos;s a dream of a solution .
he says , we should not look after their country , but after the characteristic of the character , and it goes beyond anatomy .
and i want to say , &quot; yes , that sounds like a really good idea . &quot;
but how do you do that in practice ?
how do you have been people in their charaktereigenschaften ?
i want to point out that i &apos;m not sure that we &apos;re going to be sure that we &apos;re having right now to be able to get right now to try to get to people to be able to get to the extent of a series of high-tech , which is probably more than some people i know .
i want to submit that i &apos;m probably a few of these kinds of helle know that fähiger are fundiertere , and the way decisions to meet their sexual sexual relations as some 40-jährige that i know .
so how to do the question to the properties of the character ?
it turns out .
and a part of me feel what if the content was a little bit of a personality that would be a little bit of -- could be made by fmri visible visible .
do we really want to go to this direction ?
i &apos;m not sure where we go .
what i know is that it &apos;s really important to be important to think about the idea that the united states is in the way to do about questions about questions about the questions of democracy .
in our first time , we have done our story , and i think we would make our job in the future good .
we don &apos;t have the situation that it &apos;s in iran is to be a man who deals to the sexuell of the case , because he &apos;s ready to be ready to be ready to be ready to be ready to be ready to be a geschlechtsumwandlung in which he &apos;s going to stay in .
there &apos;s not a way of doing this kind of exist .
i &apos;m glad that we don &apos;t have these guys -- a surgeon that i talked about a few years ago , which has a surgeon that &apos;s a few years ago , which is a surgeon that &apos;s a surgeon to make them together , partly to make a name .
but when i was walking with him , and he asked him why he was this little cute -- it was very high to be treated , and that children had a very bad job , and that &apos;s why he had to do it .
i said , &quot; well , you have a politisches team in a way of a surgery in order to separate them ? &quot;
the u.s. states provide incredible opportunities that they are , without having to be able to get to the state without the state of the state of the state of the state of the state .
so i think we need to be a führend .
well , just to say , i want to notice that i was a lot about the fathers of the fathers .
and i want to think about the possibilities like democracy , or maybe , if we could have the mothers more .
and i want to say something that &apos;s a feminist thing is something radical , and i think there are different kinds of insight that are dependent on different kinds of scale in the anatomy , insbesonders when people are using a gruppendenken .
for years , because i was interested in intersexualität , i &apos;ve been interested in research in the field of the geschlechterdifferenz .
and one of the things i really thought is the difference between men and women in ways , how they think and in the world .
what we &apos;ve learned from kulturübergreifenden studies is that women , in the average -- rather than any average , but in the average , but in the average , but in the average , but in the average , which is in the group of group , very much attention to give a lot of attention .
and so , if we think about it , we have a interesting situation .
and i was a gentleman , i was a gentleman , i was asked to one of my favorite studienbetreuer , who was crying my interest -- i was a feminist , so i was doing -- a really big question .
he said , &quot; say , what is the feminism and feminism . &quot;
and i thought , &quot; well , that &apos;s the dumbest question i ever heard .
in the order of feminism , it &apos;s about gender gender , that &apos;s where the higgs boson is .
but the more i thought about his question to do that , so i thought there could be some more blame in the feminism .
it &apos;s supposed to be something that could be something that could be something that could be a little bit of male brains of male what makes us aufmerksamer for social social relationships , and aufmerksamer for the schutzbedürftige .
so where founding the founding fathers were extremely much more difficult before the state of protected , we could be able to get a concept of , , not just how to protect them more , but how to worry each other .
and perhaps it &apos;s where we have to go in the future when we democracy about anatomy -- less about the individual body , and more about the other things , more than relations .
so that when we &apos;re born as people to make a partnership connection , we think about what we can do for each other .
thank you .
i &apos;m jessi and this is my suitcase .
but before i show you what i &apos;ve done , i &apos;m going to make a very öffentliches material , and that &apos;s what i &apos;m obsessed with .
i love to learn to each other chance to find a different farbenfrohes , to find a verrücktes cannon , and also in the last time , and in the last time .
but i buy nothing new .
i get all my clothes from the second hand and in second-hand-shops .
ooh , thank you .
second-hand-shopping allows me to reduce the impact of my garderobe on the environment , and also the geldbörse .
i &apos;m making all kinds of fantastic people ; my dollars -- all the time for a good purpose ; i see quite unique , and it does shopping shopping my personal schatzsuche .
i mean , what will i find today ?
is it going to have my height ?
am i like the color ?
it &apos;s less than 20 dollars ?
if all of answers , i feel like i won .
i come back to my suitcase , and i tell you what i &apos;ve been here for this conference for ted .
i mean , what do somebody with so many outfits with this ?
so i &apos;ll just show you what i &apos;ve got to do .
i &apos;ve got seven and seven , and that &apos;s all .
a few days , all i did in my suitcase .
i have a gewettet , i &apos;ve been gewettet that i wanted to wear anything , find , when i get to go to the palm .
and since you &apos;ve heard since i heard since the woman here at ted in their underwear , i mean , i found a couple of things .
and i want to thank you my outfits for this week .
sounds good ?
while i do that , i &apos;m going to share some of the lessons that i &apos;m going to believe , whether you believe it or not , from those abenteuern learned , nothing new .
let &apos;s start with sunday .
i call the strahlenden tiger .
you don &apos;t have to spend a lot of money to go to the great deal .
you can almost less less than 50 dollars .
this whole value , including me 55 , and it was the most expensive that i took over this week .
in fact , color is something more important .
it &apos;s almost impossible to impossible , bad gelaunt when you &apos;re hellrote .
if you &apos;re happy , you get other happy people .
tuesday : hey will be totally überbewertet .
i spent a lot of my life with that , and i spent to try and to adapt to me .
be easy to be who they are .
if you surround with the right people , you won &apos;t just understand it , they &apos;ll also appreciate it .
wednesday : embrace your child .
sometimes i &apos;m proposing to me , i was going to be a little bit of like i &apos;m doing , &quot; i remember your water .
i love , &quot; thank you . &quot;
thursday : skin is the key .
if you think you &apos;re looking at something good , then it almost safe as safe as it is safe .
and if you think they &apos;re not good in something that &apos;s not good , you probably have right .
i grew up with a mother that reminded me the day for day .
but i was only when i was , i really understood what that means .
and i &apos;ll summarize that for you .
if you believe that they &apos;re inside , and they &apos;re a wonderful person , you have nothing to be doing anything they can &apos;t .
so there &apos;s no excuse in this audience here in this audience .
we should be able to make anything , and what we want .
thank you .
so , very , very universal truth : a universal truth : golden words to everything .
and finally , saturday : a potential to develop a great style to develop a great way to develop a great way to have a word for a word .
it was always kept me over and over again when this week people come to me , just because of what i was wearing . and i had great conversations .
clearly , not all of that is not all in my tiny suitcase .
before i go home , i &apos;m going to take all the things back again .
because the lesson i &apos;m trying to learn is that it &apos;s okay to let me go .
i don &apos;t have to emotionally , because the same thing is about the corner of the corner , it &apos;s about a ecke agent , farbenfrohes , which is just waiting for me when i have a little love in the heart and it &apos;s looking for .
thank you very much .
thank you .
good afternoon , all together .
i have something i want to show you .
think about this as a flying bildpunkt .
that &apos;s what we call in our lab , wahrnehmbares design .
let me tell you a little bit about that .
if you take this picture -- i &apos;m a phd , and every young in italy with this picture in italy with this picture in italy with this picture in italy with this picture in italy with this picture in italy with this picture in the formula .
some time , if you wanted to get a formula 1 1 &apos;s going to get a formula for a race , they took their budget and put her money on a good driver and a good car .
and if the car and the driver was good enough , then they won the race .
now , if you want to get a race , you need a race , actually like this -- something that &apos;s like this -- something that &apos;s going to take the car in real time , some thousand sensors , some of the tausend , some of the sensors , some of the sensoren , some of the sensors , some thousand sensors , some thousand sensors , some
this would you , in ingenieurteams , a echtzeit-kontrollsystem externality .
and basically , it &apos;s a system that &apos;s made of two parts -- a spürenden fraction of them and a reagierendenteil .
what &apos;s interesting is that the echtzeit-kontrollsysteme start in our lives .
our cities were given , the last few years , just with networks and electronics .
they &apos;re going to be used to the computer in the free .
and as a computer in the shop , start them to be able to see other kinds of ways , and they &apos;re going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to get up and .
when we cities cities , it &apos;s actually a big deal .
only by the way , i want to mention that cities are only two percent of the world &apos;s surface , but 50 percent of the world population live there .
they &apos;re 75 percent of the energiekonsums -- we &apos;re not to 80 percent emissions .
so when we do something with cities , that &apos;s a big deal .
over the cities , pulling all this kind of wahrnehmen and what we &apos;re in objects of everyday life .
this is from a exhibition , the former health of moma , in the summer , during the summer , in the summer , in the summer , in the summer .
it &apos;s called me . &quot;
now all of our objects , our environment , start to speak back to us back .
in a sense , it &apos;s almost like any atom out there to be , a sensor and a antreiber .
and that changes the interaction we have people with our environment .
in a way , it &apos;s almost as if the old dream of the old dream ...
you know , when the &quot; moses says , &quot; it &apos;s called the moses , it means that he &apos;s got to see the hammer and it &apos;s got moses , and he said , &quot; perché non parli ? why not you want ? why not you ? &quot;
now , today , our environmental environmental , we &apos;re going to answer ourselves .
i &apos;m going to show you some examples of just a few examples of this , with the idea of our environment and anzutreiben .
let &apos;s start with the audio .
now the first project i &apos;d like to show you is in the truth of our labs .
it &apos;s a lot of four years ago in italy .
and what we &apos;ve done was actually a very much more recent way that was used to the entire world -- that &apos;s a mobiltelefonnetz -- and anonymous and aggregierte information from this network that are being done by the operators , which has been made by the way to understand how the city works .
summer was a happy summer .
it was considered a italien won .
some of them will remember when the italien was french , and then finally , at the end of the zidane , the kopfstoß .
and no matter , italy , the end of the time , i won the end of the world championship .
now you see what happens at that day , just watching activity that happened in the network .
here you see the city .
you see in the middle , the fluß tiber .
on the morning , before the game .
you see the timeline .
earlier , people here and there , the more and moving .
the game begins -- silence .
france is a gate . a gate .
halbzeit , people make a brief call , go back to the bathroom .
second halbzeit : the normal model .
first of the other , second .
zidane , in a moment of kopfstoß .
italien . yeah .
now , in this night , it &apos;s all the center in the center .
they saw the big deal .
the next day , all the central estate to meet the central siegerteam and the prime minister of time .
and then all went down .
you see the picture of the space circo massimo , where , since the financial days , time , the people are going to go to the people , and you see the blind on the end of the day .
now , this is just a example of how we can feel the city , in a way we didn &apos;t know a few years ago .
another example is another example of self : there &apos;s not about people , but to do things we &apos;re using and consume .
now , today , we know everything that we do about that we are doing where our things come .
this is a map that you show you all the chips from a mac computer , as they came together .
but we just talk about where the things go .
so we actually have a project in this project , a few little marker to pursue some small marker to pursue the system .
so we &apos;ve started with some volunteers who told us something more than a year , in seattle , which they have helped to tag , and different kinds of things that they can see -- different kinds of things that they can see .
then we got the little chips that we have little brands and started to pursue it .
there are the results we just have just .
... &quot;
after a week .
with this information that we realized that there are lots of ineffizienzen in the system .
we can do the same things into doing with less energy .
the data was not available .
but that &apos;s what happens to a lot of things and more complicated things .
but the other thing is that we think when we see every day that the cup that we &apos;re in the middle of the planet is that it &apos;s still somewhere else on the planet .
and the plastic that we still stays every day .
and if we were to show that people , we can change a behavior .
so that &apos;s why for this project .
my colleague at mit , assaf biderman , could you even more about the second part of the world , and the other things that you can do with a lot more about the second part of the second part of the world &apos;s going on , and that &apos;s the most fundamental care system .
and the first project is that we did a few years ago in zaragoza , made a few years ago .
it started with a question of the bürgermeisters of the bürgermeisters that we came up and said that spain and südeuropa , in public places as part of the architecture .
and the question was : how could you get technology to new technology ?
and one of the ideas that were working with in a arbeitskreis ermittelt , it was , imagine this one , and they make this tubing , and they magnetventile , valves , valves , valves and closing .
they &apos;re like this , what a wasservorhang with bildpunkten water .
if these bildpunkte , you can write it , you can see patterns , images .
and you can see him , and he &apos;s going to open up to see them , how you can see on this picture .
now we have the mayor belloch .
it has been very frightening .
and we got the mission of the eingang of the expo .
we called it the digital water .
the whole building was drying out of water .
there isn &apos;t no doors or windows , but when they go to it , it will open up and you .
the roof was also covered with water .
and if you want to get the change , you can actually make the roof .
or you could take the building and the whole architecture , what in this case , you know , that days when you get the roof of people who were there , you get pictures of people who were there and say , &quot; they did the building . &quot;
no , they didn &apos;t have the building , it &apos;s just that that architecture is almost disappears .
you see , how the building works .
you see the person who behave what happens in the inner .
and so here you can see me when i was trying to test the testen , the water of the world can be detected .
now , i should tell you what one night happened to function as all the first of the first time .
but actually , it was a very clear .
all the children came from zaragoza came to the building , because the way they were playing with the building .
no longer , a building that would open up to be able to let them make a sense , but a building that was still in the water , you had to jump up to the springen without getting .
and that was , for us , very interesting because architects , engineers , think about how people do , think about how people do things that we design .
but reality is always unvorhersehbar .
and this is the beauty of the beautiful things that can be used and with the people .
here &apos;s a picture of the building with the physical bildpunkten , the bildpunkten from water and the projections .
and this is what makes it that we &apos;re showing that the project i &apos;m showing you now .
so , you could start this video game .
imagine , you could have little helicopter that could fly through the air , and each of you with a little bildpunkt light bulb light into wechselndem light , almost like a cloud that can move through the space .
here &apos;s the video .
imagine a helicopter like that you saw , you &apos;ve seen the one who deals with other disabilities .
you can have these cloud .
they can have a kind of flexiblen , or display , like this -- a kind of effective formation in two dimensions .
but even though , in three dimensions , where changes changes , the light is not the position of the bildpunkte .
you can play with different kinds of play .
so , imagine the screen could be simply in different formaten or sizes in different phonemes .
but then the whole thing is only a 3d light cloud , you can take away from bildpunkten , and through the way you can move through the way they can take out of many , many of the way you can think of .
here &apos;s a real flyfire-steuerung of the herabsinkt to form a gleichmäßiges v .
if you look at the lights , it looks like this . so , as we saw it before .
imagine that every single of human beings are .
it may be a impulse of the impulse that &apos;s from people from the movements of humans or something .
i want to give you something here .
we &apos;ve worked with roberto bolle , one of the best balletttänzer of our time -- the étoile theater in milan , in milan , the étoile theater in milan , in milan , the étoile theater in the middle theater in the middle theater in the middle theater in the middle theater in the 3d theater in 3d terms to use them for the flyfire for the flyfire .
here you see roberto .
on the left-hand side , you see the bildpunkte , the different eindrücke .
it &apos;s a echtzeit-3d-scan and a bewegungsaufnahme .
so that they can be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to
you can do that all the time .
but then , if we all have a bildpunkte , you can play with a spielen movement and play with color movement .
we want to do that as a potential impulse for the flyfire .
i want to show you the latest project we work .
it &apos;s something that we work for the olympics in london .
it &apos;s called the cloud -- the cloud .
the idea is again , imagine that we &apos;re going to engage people with a bit about something that we call it to do something that we call it , as we call it , you know , as you &apos;re a scheunentor , but with a cloud .
imagine that every one can give a small donation for a bildpunkt .
i think the remarkable media last year , the last decades , that we &apos;re being driven by a physical world .
it has all digitized , knowledge , and it &apos;s through the internet .
now , we can first ever -- and the campaign has demonstrated that -- we can actually have the world , from the digital world , from the world &apos;s networks to change the networks .
that &apos;s where our case is that we use it to design and create a symbol .
this is what &apos;s built in the city .
but it can make it to make it to make us make the next challenges -- think about climate change , think about the climate or the co2 emissions -- how to change the digital world .
so the idea is that we actually actually make people with vulnerable that you can do things together .
the cloud cloud is a cloud of bildpunkten , in the same way as a real cloud cloud a cloud cloud .
and these particles are water , as our cloud , we know , our cloud is a cloud of bildpunkten .
it &apos;s a physikalisches in london , but with bildpunkten covers .
they can move inside , different kinds of experiences .
you can actually look at the bottom of the bottom that are important moments for olympia 2012 and the other parts , and it as a kind of link to the link to the community .
so both the physical cloud in the sky and a little bit of what &apos;s going to be able to go to the sky , like the new berggipfel berggipfel .
you can .
and a kind of digital leuchtturm in the night -- but as a allerwichtigstes , a new kind of experience , a new kind of experience that are going to go to the top .
thank you .
as artists , he was very important .
through my work , i &apos;m trying to express that people are not dependent by nature and that all connected .
so , the first time i was in antarctica 10 years ago where i saw my first person .
i &apos;m going to be awe .
my heart was schwindelig , i was schwindelig , while i tried to summarize what was happening before me .
the same ones around me , ragten at the water , and i could only comment that , i could only hear that a program was on a woman , year after year .
they &apos;re born as a calf or calf by eisschollen , brechen .
every iceberg has its own individual personality .
they interact with their environment and their experiences .
some districts are sich and klammern to the bitter end , while others can &apos;t withstand and in a network .
if you look at a iceberg , you think , you &apos;re actually going to be isolated , separated , separated , separated , and just as we see people see us .
but the truth is far away from it .
and as a iceberg , i was able to put his vorzeitliche atmosphere .
as the iceberg was floating trinkwasser , which is called trinkwasser drinking water , which is a lot of life .
i go to my photographs of this kind of like i do before , in my ancestors , in the conscious mind that they &apos;re going to do in this way , and never again again .
it &apos;s not a death when you melt melt , it &apos;s not a end , but a fortführung of their pfades along their life .
a part of the ice in the eisbergen that i photographiere is very young , some thousand years old .
and one part of the ice is more than 100,000 years old .
the last pictures i want to show you , show a iceberg that i have in kekertsuatsiak in the u.k.
very rarely will be able to see a rollenden .
here &apos;s what you see .
on the left hand , you see a little boat .
this is about five feet long .
please look at the shape of the iceberg and where he &apos;s looking at the wasserlinie .
you can see here he begins to roll , and the boat is moving to the other side of the man .
this is the average size of a grönland-eisbergs .
he was about 120 feet from water , or 40 meters .
and this video is in real time .
and simple , just to give you the iceberg a different page of his personality .
thank you .
my life is really extraordinary blessed in a couple of work , and really , work in a couple of work .
but the coolest thing i &apos;ve ever been working on this guy .
his name is tempt .
tempt was one of the leading graffitikünstler of the mid- 80s .
then , one day came back from walking back and said , &quot; paps , my legs . &quot;
and that was the outbreak of the system .
tempt is completely paralyzed .
he can only use his eyes .
i was thrilled to him .
i have a company that design and animations , so that &apos;s a complex part of what we &apos;re looking at in the world and look at them .
so we decided to support tony -- tempt -- and his thing .
i met with his father and his brother and said , &quot; we &apos;ll give you this money , and she said , &quot; we &apos;ll give you this money , and she said , &quot; we &apos;ll give you this money , which is , you know , we &apos;ll give you this money .
what do you do with that ? &quot;
and his brother said , &quot; i want to talk to tony .
i want to talk to him and i want to talk to him , &quot; wait a minute , that &apos;s not -- i &apos;ve seen stephen hawking hawking -- can not all the people of this devices ? &quot;
and he said , &quot; no , just when you go to the higher record , and i have a remarkable insurance , you can really do that .
normal people are not accessible to these devices . &quot;
and i said , &quot; how do you do ? &quot;
anybody has somebody who &quot; have seen &quot; the movie . &quot;
so they communicate -- so that &apos;s going on their fingers .
i staunte : &quot; very archaisch , how can that be ? &quot;
so i came with a need to just a bedürfnis , and instead i hired a check out of the leiseste , i didn &apos;t know the test , i should him .
i go and go and down to his brother and his father -- with the words , &quot; well , my suggestion is , &quot; well , my suggestion is , &quot; well , my suggestion is , &quot; well , my suggestion is , we &apos;ll make a machine , and we &apos;ll find a way that he can make his art .
because it &apos;s a farce that somebody who can &apos;t be able to get into it . &quot;
so i was talking a conference in a conference .
i met these guys , early research lab and they have a technology that allows you to see a light on every desktop on any surface , and then with a laserpointer that &apos;s just the negative area of the registriert .
so they &apos;re like the . , and they &apos;re doing like this .
they say all of the things that are on the top , a life .
it starts with the testes , then the schimpfwörter , then the bush-verleumdungen and finally people really want to actually art .
but there was always a little life in their presentation .
so i went home and i was going to dinner with my wife and told her and told her and i was told her , &quot; well , second time , if you can use this technology to go out a laser can use a laser can use a laser can use a laser can , so that it &apos;s able to make a laser , so that &apos;s what
this was the beginning of the journey .
and about two years later , about a year later , after a year later , after a lot of organization and a lot of organization and the amount of things we &apos;ve done some things .
first , we have the insurance die , and we actually have a device for tempt , which he can communicate -- a stephen hawking-maschine .
that was incredible .
and he &apos;s really extremely funny -- i call it yoda , because you &apos;re talking about him , or gets email and think , &quot; i &apos;m so unwürdig , this guy is incredible . &quot;
and also , we have seven programmers from all over the world -- literally from all the world -- to us home .
my wife , my children and i are in the garage , and that hacker , and they have programmers and verschwörungstheoretiker and anarchisten haben our house .
so many of our friends thought we were dumb stupid , and that we were zurückkämen and all the images to the walls would be an .
but for over two weeks , we have programmed , we went to the strandpromenade in venice , my children were gone , and we &apos;ve created this .
it &apos;s called eyewriter and you can see the description .
this is a cheap sonnenbrille that we bought in the strandpromenade of venice , we bought some kind of kupferdraht and a few things from the baumarkt and the elektronikhandel .
we took a ps3-kamera , they have auseinandergebaut , they have auseinandergebaut , they have a led-licht and now we have a device that we have to be free -- you can build the code , we can make free of free free of free software that you can build you free .
so we have a device that &apos;s completely devoid of ownership .
no insurance can querstellen , which is , querstellen , which is , versicherung , , .
it &apos;s not a hospital .
so everybody can actually communicate with his eyes in your eyes .
thank you .
thank you very much , that was incredible .
at the end of the two weeks , we went back to tempts .
i love this picture , because it &apos;s the room , because it &apos;s the room and this is his bedroom .
there is all of these rummel before the great unveiling that we have learned before the big computer screen .
and after a year of the planning , two weeks , nudelparties and durchgemachten nights , nights , drew tony for the first time , for the first time .
and that &apos;s a unique picture , because this is his life , and he &apos;s going to be a lot of time .
we have his bed , so he can see outside out .
we have a projector called a wall against the hospital in front of the hospital .
and he &apos;s doing for the first time , in the beisein of his family and friends -- and you can only imagine what a sense of parking parking lot .
lustigerweise , we had also even also mussten in the parking lot , we felt like a part of the sprüher-szene .
and he did a email with this kind of content , &quot; for the first time , i have a little bit of a time .
i have the feeling of water , i became under water and finally got somebody down , and i got somebody to go and my head on the bottom , so i can breathe . &quot;
isn &apos;t that ?
that &apos;s what our kampfschrei .
it keeps us on the fight and let &apos;s continue on .
and we have to enhance a lot of time .
it &apos;s a amazing device , but it &apos;s a zaubertafel moment .
and somebody who &apos;s a potential künstlerisches potential , you know , you know , much more .
so we &apos;re doing this , how do you get better , faster and stronger power .
for this time , we all get to the kinds of recognition .
we won a couple of awards .
now , what they think is free , none of us deserve .
it &apos;s all of our own pockets .
so the best were , &quot; oh , that &apos;s fantastic . &quot;
armstrong and then , in december , in december , i think , as one of the most powerful best innovations in 2010 , which was really , really , really .
the coolste thing is -- and that includes the circle that the whole circle of los angeles is a exhibit , in the inner-city of los angeles , a exhibit will exhibit a show of the way of los angeles , &quot; the way of the &quot; kind of &quot; of the streets of the streets . &quot;
and that &apos;s where they will be very much the toughest need of the straßenkunstszene &apos;s anwesend , banksy fairey , shepard fairey -- all fairey -- all these boys are there .
tempt will be part of the show , which is pretty significant .
so basically , if you see something that &apos;s impossible , you can do it .
all in this room was impossible -- this stage , this computer , this computer , this computer , this computer , the eyewriter -- all the time was impossible .
do it possible -- you all right here .
i &apos;m not a programmer , and i had never been doing anything with a augenerfassungstechnologie , but i just got something about the amazing people , so we could put back on the legs .
and that question each one of you and that is all of every single day that you have to get something that will have to be done . if not now , when not now , when not , when not me , who ?
thank you .
so i &apos;m going to write for kids and most of america &apos;s most important .
and i &apos;m telling people like a scientist that &apos;s going to come .
you can see me as a farmer or in it , but nobody has ever been farmer .
today i want to share with you about circles and i &apos;m going to tell you about circles .
now , one of these is a epiphany that you can find somewhere else .
you go to the block and take it as a revelation .
this is a painting of a circle .
one of my friends did it -- richard bollingbroke .
it &apos;s the kind of the circle of that i want to tell you today .
my circle started in the &apos; 60s in the &apos; 60s in stow , ohio where i was the klassenschwuchtel .
i was the one who was in the jungentoilette green and blue was beaten up until a teacher .
they saved my life by letting me the toilet toilet .
that she did , they &apos;re like , they &apos;re like , they &apos;re like to act , they &apos;re like , that &apos;s what they did .
she did it for three years , it was three years , it was three years , it was three years .
and i had to go out of the city .
i had a thumb , i had a thumb , i had a dollar , and i proposed to a lover -- and then i found a lover -- and then i found a lover , and then i found it really important to the &apos; 80s , i found a work in aids-organisationen .
about three or four years ago , i got a call from this teacher , mrs. posten , who said , &quot; i have to see you .
i &apos;m sad that we &apos;ve never learned each other than adults know .
can you please go to ohio and please come together with the man , i know that they found him .
and i should mention i &apos;m bauspeicheldrüsenkrebs , and i want you to ask yourself . &quot;
now , the next day we were in cleveland .
we saw them , we saw , we know , we &apos;re weinten , and we knew that they had to be in a hospice .
we found one for them , we brought them together and we &apos;re going to take care of them , and we gave us all over their family , because it was required , and we gave us eight , because it was required , and we gave us eight , because it was required .
it was something we can do .
and just as the woman who wanted to know me as adults , i met myself , they turned into a box of ash and got into my hands .
what happened was that the circle was closed , it was a circle -- and the revelation of the i have been talking about .
the revelation is , the death of life is part of life .
she &apos;s got my life , and my partner and i &apos;m going to be a ride .
and you know , this part of life needs all the rest of life .
he needs truth and beauty , and i &apos;m so happy that this is a lot of this today .
he needs to do it as -- he needs it , love and delight . and it &apos;s where we &apos;re doing things to give them .
thank you .
now imagine a big explosion , while they &apos;re on 1,000 feet .
so envision a philosopher full smoke .
imagine a spiritual , das , das , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack .
it &apos;s frightening frightening .
well , i had a unique place on that day ; i sat down on 1d .
i was the only one who could speak with the flugbegleitern .
i looked at her , and they said , &quot; no problem we &apos;ve got some birds . &quot;
the pilot was already gewendet , and we were not so far away .
you could see manhattan .
two minutes later , three things simultaneously simultaneously .
the pilot is looking for the hudson river .
it &apos;s usually not the route .
he &apos;s going to turn the engines .
imagine a geräuschloses airplane .
and then he said three words -- the most important words that i ever heard .
he says , &quot; bereitmachen , &quot; bereitmachen , &quot; bereitmachen . &quot;
i didn &apos;t have to talk to the bordpersonal .
i could see it in her eyes , because it was a man &apos;s life .
so i want to share with you three things that i learned in this day .
i learned that in a moment , a moment .
we have this lebensplan , we have these things that we want to do in life and i thought to all the people i was going to do a hand , and it didn &apos;t really make the fences that i wanted to do was to make the experiences that i wanted to do .
so while i was thinking about it , i was a saying , the one thing is , &quot; i &apos;m gonna use bad weine . &quot;
because the wine is the wine , and the person is , i &apos;ll get him .
i never want to live something in life .
and this research , this goal , has really changed my life .
the second thing i learned in this day -- and that was when we were the george washington , so quite a um -- there was , man , there &apos;s one thing that i really bereue .
i had a good life .
in my own humanity , and with my mistakes , i was longing to become better , and i think , in everything i &apos;m going to do .
but in my humanity i &apos;ve given the ego .
and i &apos;m bedauerte the time i &apos;ve been living in verschwendet , with people who have something .
and i thought to the relationship with my wife , to friends , to people .
and after that , when i thought i could think about , i could start my energy from my life .
it &apos;s not perfect , but it &apos;s much better .
i didn &apos;t have two years with my wife &apos;s gestritten .
it feels great .
i don &apos;t try to have more , i &apos;m right to be right . i &apos;m interested in happy .
the third thing i learned -- and that &apos;s as the interior clock , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 .
you can see the water .
i said , &quot; please flieg in the air . &quot;
i don &apos;t want this thing in 20 parts of the brain , like you know .
while we &apos;re going to get this feeling , human , and that &apos;s not a terrifying thing .
almost , as we would take our lives for our lives .
but it was very sad .
i didn &apos;t want to go ; i love my life .
and that sadness is really in a thought that i wish for a cause .
i wish i could see my children .
about a month afterwards , i visited a performance of my daughter -- erstklässler , not much more künstlerisches .
... not .
and i &apos;m feiere , i &apos;m like a little kid .
and in the world , the world was a sense of me .
i realized , by the dots , i was going to find the dots , that it &apos;s about to be a great father .
more than anything , all others , is my goal in life , a good father .
i was told to die at that day , not in the case .
i got a more gift to see the future , which is to see the future , and to live in life .
my call all of all , my call all of you who are flying : imagine , the same thing happens in your flight -- not — but imagine it , and how would you change ?
what would you do , they &apos;re doing , because they think they &apos;re going to be used for granted .
how would you change their relationships and the negative energy ?
and more than anything else , they &apos;re the best parents that they can only do .
thank you .
the idea behind the stuxnet computer-wurm is to be quite simple .
we don &apos;t want iran to be building the bomb .
the most important thing that the development of nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear nuclear weapons is the uran-anreicherungs-einrichtung in natanz .
the gray boxes you see here , they &apos;re echtzeit-kontrollsysteme .
if it &apos;s the more interesting that &apos;s starting to kompromittieren the systems which control freaks and valves , we can actually make a lot of problems with the centrifuge .
this gray boxes is not with windows-software ; they &apos;re looking at a completely different technology .
but if we do it that a effektives windows-virus on a laptop that &apos;s been used by a wartungsingenieur , which is a wartungsingenieur agent to konfigurieren this gray box to konfigurieren this gray box , then we &apos;re in the business .
and that &apos;s the planning behind .
so we start with a windows-dropper .
the nutzdaten will be put into the gray air , which is the centrifuge and iranian kernenergie-programm -- that was going to be a iranische .
this is a piece , right ?
i want to tell you how we &apos;ve found that .
when we started to stuxnet six months ago , we started a health , which was the purpose and purpose of this konstrukts .
the only thing we knew is very , very complicated , what the most part part of the time he made a machte schwachstellen schwachstellen schwachstellen .
and it seemed something that we did with these calls with these calls , that echtzeit- kontrollsystemen .
the erregte of our model , we started a project that we started to do our environment with stuxnet , and we studied this fiery .
and then something weird .
stuxnet verhielt like a laborratte , which is not the good ones , the our cheese didn &apos;t like -- but didn &apos;t eat him .
this was no sense in my mind .
and after we &apos;ve been looking at various ways of cheese , i was going to have a gezielter attack .
completely auf , a particular goal .
the dropper streift aktiv aktiv aktiv aktiv aktiv aktiv , when a special configuration discovered , even when the particular program that we tried to go beyond the particular program that we &apos;re going to do that .
and if not , then stuxnet .
so , the really focused interest and we started working with it , almost about the clock , because i thought , well , well , well , we don &apos;t know what the goal is .
it could be , we say , for instance , a us- farmer , or a chemieanlage in germany .
so we should do better than what the goal is .
so extrahierten and dekompilierten , we found the angriffs- code and found that he &apos;s in two digital sprengköpfe -- a smaller and a bigger .
and also , in fact , they were very professional constructed by people who were able to have all the insider- information .
they knew all of these strands and bytes that they had to attack .
probably even knew the schuhgröße of the maschinenbedieners .
so they knew everything .
and if you &apos;ve already hinted that the dropper of stuxnet complex and high-tech is , let me tell you , the nutzdaten are a science for themselves .
it &apos;s a lot of what we ever saw .
here &apos;s a clip of this angriffs- code .
we &apos;re talking about 15,000 lines .
looks pretty much like the altmodische assemblersprache .
and i want to tell you how we can be able to get out of this code .
so after what we were doing , systemfunktions- aufrufe , because we know what that machine .
and then we came up to timern and datenstrukturen and tried to bring this with the real world -- with potential purposes in the real world .
so we needed on the goals that we could see .
to build this theories , we call ourselves in memory that it &apos;s definitely about hochgradige sabotage , it &apos;s going to be a hochwertiges goal and a very likely to be a sehr goal , and so it &apos;s very likely to be able to recover because most of the infections were .
now , in this area , there &apos;s no sign .
basically , it &apos;s walking on the buschehr and the urananreicherungsanlage in natanz .
so i said to my assistant , &quot; i &apos;m going to give you a list of all experts for zentrifugen and kraftwerke from our kundenstamm . &quot;
and i called them up and zapfte her , to compare their expertise to compare their expertise with what we found in the code and we had found .
and that worked very well .
so , it was possible to be able to get the little digital sprengkopf with the rotorsteuerung in the process .
the nature is part of that part of the centrifuge within that black object that you see .
and if you take the speed of this rotors , you can actually take this rotors , you can actually get the rotor to the speed of the sahara and eventually , the zentrifuge explode .
what we &apos;ve discovered is that the goal of the brain was actually getting slowly and lassen , obviously in the attempt to make a versuch verzweifeln , so that they can &apos;t be able to get to the situation .
the great digital sprengkopf -- we got a little insight , by letting us a very precisely and datenstrukturen .
so for example , the number of 164 sticht , which is very , you can &apos;t do it .
i started using scientific literature , and it was like this zentrifugen built in natanz , and found out that they were structured in sogenannten , and every kaskade contains 164 zentrifugen .
so , the idea of meaning , it &apos;s been used together .
and it was still better .
these zentrifugen in iran are aufgeteilt levels .
and guess what we found in the angriffscode .
a fast cell structure .
so again , that &apos;s what we really good at .
and this was the great confidence for that we were looking at this .
now , don &apos;t understand me , that &apos;s not just as the way .
they were separated by a couple of weeks .
and we often put it into a way and we had to collect us .
anyway , we found that both the digital sprengköpfe in a reality and the same goal , but from different directions .
the little sprengkopf takes a kaskade , and überdreht the rotoren and slowed down the great sprengkopf and manipuliert , and they manipuliert the great sprengkopf tritt and manipuliert .
so , in large , we &apos;re very hopeful that we actually have determined what the goal is .
it &apos;s natanz and it &apos;s just natanz .
so we don &apos;t need to worry that others can be made by stuxnet .
here is something really cool stuff that we &apos;ve discovered -- really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really
there &apos;s the gray box , and the top you see the zentrifugen .
now , what this thing is , is that it &apos;s the eingehenden of sensors -- so , for example , von and vibrationssensoren -- and it makes legitimen code to the disposal , which is still during the angriff , with wrong .
and actually , this false works of stuxnet before .
so it &apos;s like in hollywoodfilmen , where during the verfolgungsjagd die die die die .
that &apos;s cool , right ?
the idea is obviously not just the maschinenbediener of the kontrollraum .
in fact , it &apos;s much more dangerous and more lonely .
the idea is to start a digital policy .
we need digital sicherheitssysteme , where a human maschinenbediener can &apos;t respond fast enough to not fast enough .
so in a power of example , when the great dampfturbine , to get to the speed of the way you have to get entlastungsventile within milliseconds .
of course , this is not being done by a human being done .
so , at that point , we need digital sicherheitssysteme .
and if the same time , they can happen to things .
the power can explode .
and neither maschinenführer , it &apos;s going to notice it .
that &apos;s frightening .
but it &apos;s going to be worse .
and what i &apos;m saying now is very important .
think about it . this is generisch .
he has nothing to do with zentrifugen , with urananreicherung .
so he would work in working with this as well -- in a power plant , or in a automobilfabrik automobilfabrik .
it &apos;s generisch .
and you don &apos;t have to do -- when the attacker -- you don &apos;t have to think about a usb- of the world , as we saw it at the nutzdaten .
you could use a gewöhnliche technology for a spread .
you &apos;ve got to spread it as much as we can .
and if you do that , you get a cyber- massenvernichtungswaffe .
that &apos;s the consequence we need to ask .
so unfortunately , the greatest number of goals in the middle east didn &apos;t have been east in the middle east .
they &apos;re in europe and japan .
so all these green areas are the zielreichsten environments .
we have to take us the consequences and we start to go back to us .
thank you .
i have a question .
ralph , it was very much about it , that people assume that the mossad is the hauptorganisation .
does that your mind ?
okay , you want to know that ?
yes . okay .
i think , after the mossad , but the driving force is not israel .
so the driving force behind this is the cyber- superpower .
there &apos;s only one and the united states -- fortunately , fortunately , fortunately .
because otherwise , our problem was even larger .
thank you , thank you .
i spent the last couple years to do this , in situations that normally work very difficult and at the same time somehow .
i went to prison -- hard to prison .
i worked in a kohlebergwerk , working on a kohlebergwerk .
i &apos;ve been put in kriegsgebieten -- hard and dangerous .
and i spent 30 days to do nothing to eat this , by the beginning -- i start to start a little bit of a little bit in the middle , very dangerous .
actually , i have the largest part of my career to fürchterlichen situations and the only thing to try to build the effort to explore the publikum and interesting , and hopefully to be a kind of a prediction of what they &apos;re doing for the audience and accessible .
so when i knew i &apos;d come here in a tedtalk in a tedtalk and sponsoring , i knew i &apos;d make something a little bit about it .
some of you may have heard that i was a couple of weeks a display in ebay .
i &apos;m going to give you a couple of facebook-nachrichten , some twitter-nachrichten , and i gave people to erstehen the namensrechte of my tedtalk 2011 .
really , some happy people and companies and firmen , the unique opportunity -- because i &apos;m sure that chris anderson is never going to be -- because i &apos;m sure the namensrechte to buy a lot of time and not many clues on the time , which was actually going to be the subject .
so what you got to do was , my tedtalk : your tedtalk here , my tedtalk , from you know what the subject is going to be , and the you &apos;re going to take for the content to fly out , especially if i gave her company for your involvement .
but it &apos;s a very good thing , it &apos;s a very good thing .
you know how many people do these tedtalks ?
lots of a lot .
that &apos;s the way by the way .
so despite this warning , i knew anyone who buy the namensrechte .
if you were to have been asked me a year ago , i couldn &apos;t get to say that with certainty .
but in the new project i work in working on the new film , we study the world &apos;s new film , the advertising .
as i said , i &apos;ve been working on a couple of years in a couple of terrible situations , but nothing could be prepared to me , nothing could be able to do anything to me , and so to make a room like this guy in a room .
you know , i had the idea of a movie .
what i want to do is a film about product placement , marketing and advertising , where the whole team funded by the funded by product placement , marketing and advertising .
and the movie is called &quot; the greatest movie sold sold . &quot;
so what in &quot; the greatest movie ever &quot; is that all of the top , the unten , from the top to the bottom , the marke , the unten , the marke , the marke , which is , fundamentally , by the end of the end , the brand x. , which is the brand x. , which is the brand x. , which is the brand
now , these brand , the staples center , the staples center in ...
these people are going to be connected to the movie .
and so the movie of this whole idea is -- this is what ?
i &apos;m a redundante person .
that was more to the world .
it was &quot; in the eternity . &quot;
but we won &apos;t just the basis of x as a titelsponsor , we &apos;ll ensure that we &apos;ll be able to sell every possible category in the movie .
so we may have a shoe , and it &apos;s going to be the greatest shoe that you &apos;ve ever worn in .
the greatest car , they ever known the dangers , &quot; the greatest movie sold &quot; the greatest getränk &quot; the greatest getränk &quot; the greatest getränk &quot; the greatest getränk &quot; the greatest getränk &quot; the greatest getränk &quot; the greatest getränk &quot; the greatest getränk &quot; the greatest getränk &quot; the greatest getränk &quot;
so the idea is to show that the idea of life is a part of life , actually , to get them to fund the film ?
and we &apos;re actually showing the whole process of how it works .
the goal of the movie is transparency .
you &apos;ll see the whole thing in the movie of the movies .
so this is the whole concept of the movie , from beginning to end .
and i would wonder if that &apos;s ceg , to help this .
you know , it &apos;s funny because i &apos;ve first heard it first , it &apos;s the ultimate respect for the audience .
i don &apos;t know how to be people .
have you have a perspective -- i don &apos;t want to use &quot; feel &quot; feel &quot; feel &quot; that has a negative konnotation -- but you know how to do that ?
how much money is required to realize that ?
a hundred million .
i think it &apos;s hard to meet them , but i think it &apos;s definitely worth it on every case , some really , really brands .
who knows when the movie comes out of the movie then , we may see how a horde vollidioten .
what do you think about how the answer is ?
&quot; answer &quot; no &quot; no .
but it &apos;s a difficult thing about the movie , or a difficult thing about me ?
jk : both .
... means not so optimistic .
so , my lord , can you help me ? i need help .
i can help .
okay .
fantastic .
we have to think about what &apos;s called .
yes .
when you look at people with whom they have to do it .
there are some places we can take us .
so you ask the camera .
i thought , &quot; you ask the camera out of the dignity that we wanted to do a hintergrundgespräch .
it turned out that it was like , &quot; we want to have nothing to do with their movie . &quot;
and so , just so all of these companies , one after the other .
no wanted to do something with the movie .
i was amazed .
they wanted to do nothing with the project .
and i was confused , because i thought , all of the concept that idea how many people as many people as possible as many people as possible as possible many people like possible .
in the world at the world , at this intersection of new and old media and the zerstückelten media -- isn &apos;t the idea of new and the idea of media media -- isn &apos;t the idea that the massen is that the massen of these people are .
no , what i thought .
but you see , the problem was that my idea was that my idea was a fatalen mistake , and that was the case .
no , it wasn &apos;t the mistakes .
that would not have been a problem .
all right .
but that , which is a problem .
if you look at the same time , if you &apos;re seeing with the google-suche of the google-suche -- this is one of the first images that appears .
i really like to do this way , sergey brin .
that was the problem : transparency -- unencumbered from deception and tücke , simple and access to information , and especially information ; they immediately have information , especially , what was the last line is the biggest problem .
you know , we hear a lot of about transparency .
our politicians say it , our president says , even our ceos will say it .
but if it comes to that it &apos;s going to be implemented , changing anything .
but why ? well , transparency is fear -- like this strange bear , the immernoch brüllt .
it &apos;s unvorhersagbar -- like this strange landstraße .
and they also really riskant .
what else is a lot of ?
a whole lot of food .
that &apos;s very risky .
when i started to talk to the companies and tell them that we wanted to talk about this story , they said , &quot; no , we want to make a story .
we want to tell a story , but we want to do that you will tell our story . &quot;
so , you see , i was a kid and my dad , when i was a kid and i look at the lying -- and he looks at me with this view -- he &apos;s looking at me with this view -- he &apos;s looking at me with this view -- he said , &quot; my son , there are three versions of every story .
there &apos;s a little version of that , there is my version , and there &apos;s the true version .
so you can see , with this film , we wanted to tell the true version .
but there was a company , a agency was willing to help us -- and that &apos;s because i had john bond and richard kirshenbaum for years -- i realized i had to do the mittelsmann , and i had to go directly with my team .
so what they &apos;re starting to start -- or what i began to do was that when you start to speak with these companies , the idea of how your brand is understood , a difficult problem .
i have friends who big large , humongous hollywood-filme , and i have friends who are doing little independent-filme like me .
and my friends , the great , humongous hollywood-filme , say that the reason why they are so successful , why their movies are so successful , and the markenpartnern is that they have .
and then my friends who do little independent-filme , &quot; well , how do we want to address this big , gigantic hollywood-filmen ? &quot;
and the movie called &quot; the greatest movie sold sold . &quot;
how are we going to see the ban in the movie ?
whenever i do that if i do that when i do that when i open the medizinschrank , you &apos;ll see the ban deodorant .
and every time i can say , &quot; are they used enough for this interview ?
are you ? you see a little bit nervous .
i want to help you feel comfort .
maybe you should be able to make a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit . &quot;
and then we &apos;re offering a great düfte of this great düfte .
either &quot; floral &quot; or &quot; paradise &quot; , you &apos;ll have the choices .
we &apos;re both using both the way to be as a result for women -- is , roll-on , or a stick , whatever .
that &apos;s the kurzfassung .
now i can answer your questions and give them a ausfühliche .
we &apos;re a smaller brand .
so as you &apos;ve been talking about the smaller movies , we &apos;re considered a brand . .
so we don &apos;t have such a budget as other brands .
so these things are doing -- you know , remember people -- that &apos;s kind of like , why we &apos;re interested in .
with what you would describe for granted ?
ban is blank .
that &apos;s a great question .
woman : überlegene technology .
technology is not the way you want something that &apos;s going to do that underneath the achseln .
we &apos;re talking about biofuels , fresh .
i think , &quot; fresh , a great word that this is a great word , unlike the war smell and humidity . &quot;
it keeps you .
how can we keep them longer -- better fresh fresh , more fresh fresh .
these things have a positivere effect .
and that &apos;s a millionen-konzern .
what about me ? what is the druchschittstypen ?
i have to speak with the man that are like i , otto-normal-verbraucher .
you want to tell me about my brand .
how do you describe your brand ?
hmmm , my brand ?
i don &apos;t know .
i really like to really nice nice clothes .
it &apos;s 80er , on skaterpunk , except waschtag .
now , what is the brand ?
the unique .
i think the genre , the style i have , &quot; dark glamour . &quot;
i like a lot of black colors , lots of grautöne and so a stuff .
but i usually have a accessoire , like sonnenbrillen , or a jewelry and so one of the things .
in fact , if dan had a brand , he would probably be a classic cabrio .
a man : the brand i &apos;m like , i would say , lässige fly .
woman 2 : &quot; teils , i &apos;m making , like , &quot; oops , i don &apos;t know .
man : i &apos;m the schmusetyp .
i &apos;m actually sell schmusetiere in the world .
so i think that &apos;s my brand .
this is my brand in my little , verzerrten industry .
man four : my brand is fedex because i was ausliefere .
husband &apos;s five : brand gescheiteter alkoholsüchtiger .
do that ?
attorney : i &apos;m a anwaltsmarke .
i &apos;m tom .
now , we can &apos;t all be the tom-marke , but i &apos;m just seeing myself , often on the intersection of dark glamour and lässiger fly .
and what &apos;s realized , i was going to have a experts .
i needed somebody who could help me understand what you could help me what you could help .
and so i found a company called olson in pittsburg .
they have firms like nestle , febreze , hallmark , hallmark , these markenpersönlichkeit .
if you could do it for the thing , they could help me .
they brought your pictures , yes ?
i have this , the first picture is a picture of my family .
just tell me a little bit about how it &apos;s associated with their thoughts and feelings about them .
these are the people who shape my worldview .
tell me about this world .
md : this world ? i think the world &apos;s own world -- like humans , the friends , the family , the family , the family , the family , how to live in the way that you live in .
all of these things and start to a place , and for me , and start to start with my family in west virginia .
what &apos;s next to talk about them .
the next thing . this was the most beautiful day of my life .
in the context of what context is to the idea of you , and you know ?
it &apos;s like i &apos;d like to be .
i like things that are different .
i like things that are available . i like to make things .
tell me about why , &quot; what do you get you ?
what is the machete ? in the context of what they are doing is now ?
why is it important , what &apos;s the red ? &quot;
tell me a little bit about this part .
a little more about them , they &apos;re not .
what they did have been doing ?
... this has to be frightened . in which i &apos;ve got to be afraid ?
! ! no , thank you !
thank you very much for their patience .
yes . now . &quot;
yes , i don &apos;t know what it is going to be .
there were a lot of crazy things before .
the first thing i saw was that their markenpersönlichekti two animals , but sich sides -- the morgan spurlock-marke is a achtsame / verspielte .
very good .
and i think there &apos;s almost a contradiction .
and i think some companies are only to focus on a focus , rather than both of them .
many companies tend to do -- and that &apos;s the human nature -- things that are human nature -- things that are being sure you &apos;re not sure , you &apos;re afraid of yourself , and they turn them into something positive , and that &apos;s a geschickter polymer .
what other brands are doing ?
the first is a classic , apple .
and you can see it here , target , wii , mini , mini of mini coopers and jetblue .
now , there &apos;s verspielte brands and achtsame brands , these things that come and go , but a verspielte , achtsame brand is a pretty potent thing .
a achtsame , verspielte brand . how is your brand ?
if somebody would ask you to describe your markenidentität , your markenpersönlichkeit , how would you do ?
they do it ? are you something that blood flow in wallungen ?
or are you a down-attribut ?
are you something that &apos;s a little bit of a little bit , reservierter , conservative ?
up-attribute are things that are playful , fresh , fresh , ausgefallen prince , zeitgemäß , ausgefallen and agile , profan , wendig and agile , profan , profan , profan , profan , magisch , and mystisch like gandalf .
or are more like a down-attribut ?
are you going to be able to learn how 007 ?
are they etabliert , traditionell , pflegend , mitfühlend , how the controls ?
are you reliable , stable , familiär , secure , heilig , heilig , heilig , and wise like the dalai lama or yoda ?
in the course of the movie we had more than 500 companies that are the one and down-firmen and the &quot; no &quot; no &quot; no &quot; no &quot; no &quot; no &quot; no , because they weren &apos;t part of the project .
they wanted nothing to do anything with this film because they didn &apos;t have control of control , no control of the city product .
but it turns out 17 , 17 , the willing to be willing to be willing to get to the checks that could be done with somebody and then the stories that we normally don &apos;t tell you to tell stories that we can never tell stories that we never would support .
they tell us the story of the neuromarketing to tell the story of the neuromarketing , as we &apos;re using mris using mris , you used to be used to the story of the brain to make advertising as a building .
we were looking for sao paulo where außenwerbung verboten .
in the entire city , in the entire city , in the entire city , not a poster , nothing .
and we drove in jamaica , where firms evolved their way in comparable schools , in america .
the incredible thing for me is that the projects i &apos;ve got the most exciting feedback or where i &apos;ve got the greatest success , those are where i &apos;m with things right .
and that &apos;s what these brands did , they have this brands , you know , what this is doing is , you know , what this is doing is , which is what this brands did .
because they umgingen the mittelsmann , they umgingen the front , and they said that maybe not really what you may have ever been in .
i &apos;m going to negotiate with the artists .
i &apos;m going to work and something perfectly interesting different , something that people think that people think that our current network .
and how did it ? what do it successfully succeed ? &quot;
well , because the film has been festival , we can look at the time .
according to the minister of the year , and since then -- and that &apos;s not even the whole thing -- there was 900 million aufrufe of this film .
in fact , this is just a time of two 1 / 7 .
it &apos;s just online -- no press , no press .
the movie hasn &apos;t been ausgeliefert .
there &apos;s not even online . no streaming .
he &apos;s not yet in other countries .
now , finally , the film has a very large job .
and that &apos;s not bad for a project , in almost every werbeagentur , with the us , with the language that we talked about , with her clients , we can fire that fingers .
something that i believe is that if you &apos;re finding , if you &apos;re using his chance of risk that in these risks .
i think when you guys knew about it , you get closer to the failure .
i think if you wanted to avoid your staff , you get the whole company waiting for a profit .
i have the feeling that we need to do people in the way of doing risks .
we have to hire people , not afraid to the possibility that you may legitimize .
finally , we should welcome the fear of the day .
we should bear the cage .
and they &apos;re going to be scared . they &apos;re going to welcome the risk .
so , a big chunk , we &apos;re going to welcome the risk .
and finally , we should be transparency .
now , today , more than ever before , it brings us a little bit very much .
and that said , with honesty and transparency , my gesamter talk , &quot; i think my gesamter talk , &quot; i think , from my guten friends from emc who sold down to ebay in ebay .
big data are verwandelt for the entire world in large opportunities .
emc präsentiert &quot; heißen , &quot; i think they &apos;re transparency . &quot;
thank you .
well morgan , in the name of transparency , what is exactly the right now with the $ 7100 ?
that &apos;s a great question .
i have a check in my pocket , ausgestellt the oberorganisation , the sapling-stiftung -- a check in a höhe höhe of dollars in a nächsten of dollars in the next year .
my name is amit .
so , i did something else about google , and i rub some of the things that i was doing with a museums and art . i mean , you know , there was a green light .
and it took 18 months .
a lot of spaßiger negotiations and stories that i can tell you with 17 , very interesting , very interesting , very interesting .
but i &apos;m going to focus on the side .
there &apos;s a lot of stories about why we did this .
i think my personal vision is very simple with this slide and her access to her .
i grew up in india .
i got a great training school -- i didn &apos;t beschwere myself -- but i had a lot of museums , and that doesn &apos;t have a zugang .
when i was traveling , and i started to see this museums , i started a lot of learning .
and while i was working for me , i tried to make this desire -- art -- to make this -- with technology .
we then got a team , a great team , and we started .
i &apos;m going to start with the demonstration of the demonstration , and you &apos;ll tell some interesting things that have been doing since the launch .
so you can just go to the googleartproject.com. , so you can just get to googleartproject.com. googleartproject.com. .
you can see in all these museums .
there is the uffizi , which is the moma , the moma , the rijks , the rijks , the van gogh .
i even even in one of my favorite museum , the metropolitan of the art of new york .
you &apos;re on two ways -- very simple .
click , and wumms , you &apos;re in this museum .
it doesn &apos;t matter , where they are -- bombay , mexico , it doesn &apos;t make any difference .
you go and sit around .
they want to be orientieren ?
you open up the map , and you jump with a click .
in fact , you want to end up to the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the
only further . a lot of fun .
they want to do .
thanks , but the best part is .
so i &apos;m a meiner vor breugel breugel in the met breugel .
i see this pluszeichen .
when the museum museum has given us , you click on it .
this is one of the images .
these are all the metadata .
and those of you who are interested in art , you can click here -- but i &apos;m going to get this way .
this is one of the images that we &apos;ve been building with what &apos;s called gigapixel-technologie .
this picture , about 10 billion bildpunkte , i think .
and a lot of people ask me , &quot; what do you get for 10 billion ? &quot;
i &apos;m going to show you now , i &apos;m going to show you , you know , you know , i &apos;ll show you , you know , i &apos;ll show you .
you can go and rauszoomen .
you see something fun here .
i love this guy ; his expression is .
but then they really want to be able to be able to do in a deep .
and so i started to play around , and i realized that there are something that goes in .
and i thought , &quot; wait a minute , &quot; wait . &quot;
i went close to the other , and i slowly realized that this children actually had something .
i &apos;m a little bit of a few of famous , and he actually found it , it actually came out to a game called squail , where a gans am , where a gans am with a stick .
it &apos;s quite popular .
i don &apos;t know why they did it , but i learned something about it .
to go to the first stage , you can go to the prison .
just to give you the face , i &apos;m going to see that you see what you &apos;re going to get .
here we were , and this is the paintings .
the best part of the best one is a second .
so let &apos;s go quickly , again in new york .
another lieblingsbild of me , sternennacht .
in the king of the king , it was about finding the way that we did .
but what if you want to see the pinselstriche ?
and what do you do when you want to see what &apos;s the masterpiece for this tool ?
you can actually go in .
i &apos;m going to zoom in a gentleman of mine at this village , until i really am at the rissen .
that &apos;s sternennacht , probably never seen that .
now i &apos;m going to show you my favorite function .
there are many more interesting , but i &apos;m missing the time .
this is the really cool part , he &apos;s a collections .
each of you , everybody -- same -- same or poor , whether you a great house -- never really matter .
they can take up and online your own museum -- from all these images can take their own collection .
just simply , they go in -- and i &apos;ve created this , it &apos;s called the power of the zoom -- you can browse .
this is the gesandten &apos; , in the nationalgallerie .
they can do anything with all the rest of all , you have to send their friends , and so you start thinking about what they feel when they look at these masterpieces .
i think , finally , i think , the main thing that all the wonderful things here are not going to come from .
they come from my museums .
i should not say that .
they come from the artists .
and this was a experience in humility for me .
i mean , i hope that we &apos;ll be able to be able to be able to get a difference in the art medium .
so , the greatest question that i will have a lot of thought , &quot; did you do this to replicate the experience of a football ? &quot;
the answer is no .
it &apos;s supposed to be the experience .
that &apos;s what it &apos;s about . &quot;
thank you .
this is a plot of your brain , your brain can be unterteilt .
that &apos;s the left half that the logical side is , and then the right half that is the intuitive side .
if we had a scale of the scale to measure the aptitute of the world &apos;s heart of measuring each other , we could measure your brain .
for example , this is the one that &apos;s completely logical .
this would be the case of it completely intuitive .
now , where would you be on this scale ?
some of us have been interested in one of these extremes , but i think that most people in the audience , you may have something like this , you &apos;re like this -- with a high aptitute that simultaneously in two hemisphären .
it &apos;s not that as though you both are both exclusive or whatever .
you can get up and intuitive .
and so i see that i see as one of the people in common other experimental quantenphysikern , which contains a good need to be logic to get the complex ideas together .
but at the same time , we need a good intuition , the experiments actually makes you .
how do we do this intuition ? well , we love to play with things .
so we go out and play with it , and look like it &apos;s &quot; -- and then we start using our intuition .
basically , the same thing .
so one of the intuitions that they &apos;ve developed over the years , probably that a thing that is a thing that a thing that is just to be in a place .
i mean , it can sound sounds about that a thing that is a thing in two different places , but they didn &apos;t have a entwickelt with this idea , they developed them .
i remember a kid playing a bodenschwelle .
he was still a kleinkind and not very good at it and he was constantly doing all the time .
but i bet you play with the bodenschwelle of a very valuable lesson , which is the great thing you don &apos;t just get you all , and they &apos;re going to be on a point .
and this is a great konzeptionelles model of the world , so you don &apos;t have a teilchenphysiker .
it would be a furchtbares model for a teilchenphysiker , because they don &apos;t play with a bodenschwellen , but with these little strange particles .
and if you play with their particles , they all kinds of weird things -- as you can get straight through walls , or that they can be at the same time in two different places .
and so they wrote this together , and they called the theory of quantum mechanics .
that was the state of physics in front of years ago , you needed quantum mechanics to describe quantum tiny particles .
but you didn &apos;t really needed to describe the great everyday objects around us .
it didn &apos;t affect the intuition and perhaps that perhaps because i &apos;m not comfortable with particles .
well , i play with them , but not very often .
and i never saw them .
i mean nobody ever saw a particle ever .
but my logical page didn &apos;t have the world .
because if all of these things came from particles and all these particles of the quantum mechanics , not just anything to follow the rules ?
i don &apos;t see why not that should be so .
so i would have been working with all the things that we could actually show the rules of the mechanics .
so i made a few years ago , right now , right now .
i &apos;ll plug it .
this is the first object you can see , in the quantenmechanischen superposition .
so what we &apos;re looking at here is a tiny computer chip .
and you can see this green dot there in the middle there .
this is the piece of metal over the metal over the same .
this is a picture of the object .
so i do something . we look at this in the center here .
and here &apos;s a really big close-up of this little piece of metal .
so what we &apos;re looking at is , we &apos;re looking at a little bit of metal , it &apos;s like a springboard and it &apos;s about the edge of the edge .
so i made this thing in a similar way to make a computer .
i went a space of new siliziumscheiben , and rackerte for 100 hours of all the big ones at all those big .
for the last little bit , i had to build my own machine -- to be able to build this kind of swimming pool and the thing to be the thing .
this thing has got the capacity to do in the quantenmechanischen , but it needs a little bit of help to do it .
look , let me look at you a analogy .
you know how to be in a crowded elevator ?
i mean , if i &apos;m going to be alone in the elevator , i do all kinds of weird things , but then i &apos;m going to get to all kinds of things , because i don &apos;t want to do it , or frankly , you know , frankly , they &apos;re verschrecke .
so quantum mechanics , that unbewegliche objects are just about .
the mitfahrer für are not just humans , but the light that on them , and the wind that they &apos;re looking at them and wind , the heat of space and the heat of space .
and so we knew if we wanted this piece of metal acts of quantenmechanisch , we had to have the whole mitreisenden .
and that &apos;s what we did .
we have the lights in a vacuum and saugten all the air and kühlten it up until almost a few of them , in their own way , the piece was to behave in behavior .
so we measured its movement .
we realized that it was really important .
instead , there &apos;s just quiet , it &apos;s just vibrierte it . the way it was vibrierte like this -- like a sich and zusammen blasebalg .
in that we gave him a little push , we could take it out to the same time and not acceptable -- something that &apos;s just about quantum mechanics .
so what i &apos;m going to show you is what &apos;s called the suggestion .
what does it mean for a object to vibrate and not acceptable ?
let &apos;s think about the atoms .
so the first case : all the time , all the trillionen atoms from the metal is actually moving up and down the same time and down atoms and down .
it &apos;s just a präzisen voices .
the rest of the time they are misled .
that means that every time the first time , the first time , the first time is at two different places , which is what simultaneously means that all of the piece of metal is about two different places .
i think that &apos;s what &apos;s going on .
really .
it was worth me to all the space room , because , they &apos;re going to see that massstabsunterschied between a single atom and that piece of metal is about equivalently about the same metal and you .
so if a single atom can be at two different places , this piece of metal can be two different places , why not they even ?
i mean , this is just what my logical side says .
so , imagine if you were to the same time in places like that would feel like that ?
how would you take awareness that your body is in the room ?
there &apos;s a really different aspect of history .
when we aufwärmten , the light anschalteten and the box , we saw that the piece was still in a piece .
and so i had to develop this new intuition that it looks like this as if all the objects in the elevator are actually just quanten objects that are in a small space .
you hear a lot about how quantum mechanics says that everything is connected to everything .
now , that &apos;s not really , right .
there &apos;s more than it goes deeper .
it &apos;s so that these connections , their connections with all the things around them , literally define who they are , literally , literally define who they are . and that &apos;s the tiefsinnige and strange der .
thank you .
in 2007 , i decided we should have rekonzeptualisieren , we should have been thinking about economic development .
it should be our goal to that when families think about how they live and work , you want to be able to work between at least a full hand full of different cities that all of us in the u.k.
so right now we are far from that goal .
there &apos;s billions of people in the world , which is not a single city available to them , they &apos;re welcome .
but the amazing thing is that they are so much more value than it costs them .
we could actually make the world very simple with duzenden , maybe even hundreds of new new cities .
now , that sounds like this is absurd for you , you &apos;ve never had never been talking about new cities .
they simply trade , they simply know the construction of apartments against cities .
imagine , half of the people who want to live in the apartments of apartments , that they were already ; the other half of the other half of the other .
they may try to extend the capacity to extend existing apartments .
but you know , you know , you know , in this apartments , and their environment and their environment and the gesetze and the ausbau .
so it turns out to be very difficult to get all these tools .
but you could go to a very new place , a completely new thing , we can build a whole new plan to support and not dance .
so i &apos;ve suggested that governments have new surfaces , the enough space of a city , and they give them a name of a name of a name of a name .
later , i found that , about the same time , javier and octavio , about the challenge of a reform in honduras .
they knew that every year , about 75,000 honduraner , their country to go to the united states , and they wanted to know what they could do in their country and do to do to stay in their country and exactly the same thing in honduras .
at this point , javier , gesagt , &quot; what happens when we just get a part of our country ; a part of the canadian embassy , and then when we just want to work there , and can be able to do anything that we &apos;re going to work there , and can be able to do anything that we &apos;re going to work there , and can
summer has honduras under a heftigen verfassungskrise .
in the next century elections , won pepe lobo in a turnaround , a lot of both programm in a turnaround , as well as schlichtung .
he was octavio to be his stabschef .
in the meanwhile , i &apos;m preparing to go to tedglobal a talk .
by improvement , and through the investigation of the verbrauchern , i tried to reduce this complicated concept of charter city on the front elements .
the first point is the importance of laws , laws that you &apos;re not happy to be able to make a difference .
we really make a new technology , but for the progress need to create technologies and laws , and it &apos;s usually laws that we &apos;ve been going on .
in the autumn of the fall in the fall , i was sent to the tedtalk in guatemala , the link .
the u.s. showed him javier him .
the two riefen me .
and they said , &quot; let &apos;s the peace prize for our country ! &quot;
so we were in the middle of a hotels in a hotels in the sitzungssaal of a hotels .
i have to make clear how valuable cities are , how much they are cost when they cost .
and i &apos;ve been able to use this chart to show how valuable rohland is in a place like new york . remember , remember , that a area in some cases , per square meter thousands of dollars .
but it was a pretty abstract discussion at a point , he said , &quot; paul , &quot; paul , could we look at the tedtalk . &quot;
so the tedtalk in a very simple form of the very simple form that a charter city is a place that a charter city is a place that the laws of the laws are going to live there and people to live in their own rules .
so i was therefore , from the president of my honduras , who said that we need to do this project is that we need to do it , and that this is the way to get our country to the country .
i was asked to get asked to come and even at the fourth and the fifth of january of a talk .
so i &apos;ve got a lot of my gefüllten lecture that has a graph like this , which tries to be that if you want to create a lot value , it has to be a very large city .
this is a picture of the city , and the sketch of the new airport of the new airport of the new airport of the neuen built .
at this airport has a surface of 100 quadratkilometern .
so i tried to convince the honduraner of this , if you want to build a new city , you want to build a new city of at least 1,000 quadratkilometern .
they &apos;re more than 250,000 thousand .
you know , you &apos;ve got all applaudiert .
the faces of the audience were very seriously and the aufmerksam .
the leader of the sun came up in the stage and said , &quot; professor romer , thank you for your talk , but could we see the tedtalk .
i have it on my laptop here . &quot;
so i &apos;m very upset , and they did the tedtalk .
and i &apos;m the conclusion to the conclusion that a new city of people can provide people .
there was a chance to live in a city that has been in honduras , instead of miles hundreds of miles away .
and a new city includes to create new possibilities for leaders .
executives of the government in honduras is based on the aid of partnerländern , they could benefit from their partnerländern , they could benefit from their partnerländern , which is that all of that is actually trust that the charter is really going to be able to be able to be able to really have .
and the insight of präsident lobo was that the beginning of the durchsetzung of the arts about the best way i thought was a way to build the foreign investors to build and this city of building the building investors could all parties for all the parties in honduras that has been done for many years and mistrust .
we are in a zone .
this picture is written by this place .
sums it takes a thousand km .
and shortly afterwards , on the 19th century , they have experienced in the congress of a change in the constitution of the constitution to have a verfassungsgemäße , which is für zulässig .
in a country that &apos;s just a steady crisis , it was taken into this verfassungsänderung with 124 to a voice .
all the parties , all the fraktionen of society , just admitting this .
in order to be part of the constitution , it has to be a zweimal through congress .
february february , it was to be a voice of genehmigt , and 114 .
immediately after this choice , between the 21st and the 24. february , reiste , a delegation of about 30 places in the world of 30 places that most of the world most of the world most of the world &apos;s been einzusteigen in the store of the städtebaus .
the place is .
this is a picture of a great , new guinea , new guinea , new guinea , new guinea to großer großer , das großer großer .
all you can see on this picture , within four years , after having four years to get the one that .
the other place that was very interested in the very , is singapore .
it has already been two cities in china and the third one in preparation .
so if you &apos;re just thinking about it , it &apos;s what we are today .
they already have already a baugrundstück ; and they &apos;ve been able to take this area for the second city .
it &apos;s already going to make it a paper that managern makes the national , and it &apos;s also made up to a external paper .
a country has already offered to be offered to the disposal of the disposal as an gericht für system system system .
and -bauer are very interested in the world .
they even funding funding .
one thing you know , the schon is , there are many mieter .
there are many privileged to the united states , especially in a place with a freihandelszone , and there are many people who liked the other way .
over the world , there are 700 million people who are telling you like to live in a different place .
a million people rely on the united states , and it goes back to the united states .
many of you are fathers who are forced to be forced to suchen- their families , sometimes it &apos;s been able to have been able to have been able to have been able to have the enough money to get food and clothing .
unfortunately , sometimes , sometimes kids are trying to find their parents back to find their parents , they have been seen in some cases , since a decade ago .
so what about a idea of a living new city ?
or hundreds of these cities , or hundreds of thousands of people around the world ?
so what is a notion of an idea that every family has a choice between multiple familie and the u.k. in the u.k.
this is a idea that &apos;s worth spreading .
my friends have been asked me to say , thank you .
do you know how many decisions you do in a typical day ?
do you know how many decisions you &apos;re in a typical week ?
i was a poll with 2,000 american and the average number of choices that angabegemäß a typical american american : a typical american american amerikaner , die 70. , 70. 70. is 70. in a day , 70. 70. is 70. 70. .
in addition recently a trial with school in which they were going to take a week .
and that scientists have just given the various topics of the different topics of the different issues , and how much they do for doing it in the same decisions that are associated with topics .
and they found that a general durchschnittlicher ceo in the week with 139 tasks .
each of these topics of course , many smaller decisions .
fifty percent of their decisions were done within nine minutes or less .
only about 12 percent of their decisions , they get a half of their decisions or more of their time .
think about your own decisions .
you know how many decisions you have to meet in nine minutes of living in the eine ?
how good you think , they &apos;re the decisions of the decisions ?
today i want to talk about one of the most pressing economic economic issues of our modern time , the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem .
i want to talk about the problem and some of the solutions .
now , when i talk about this problem , i &apos;m going to give you some questions and i want to know their answers .
if i &apos;m a question of you , i &apos;m blind , you &apos;re blind , just the hand if you &apos;re going to make some calories .
and i do you , please , i &apos;m going to ask you a question , and your answer is yes , so my first question is : are you ready to hear about the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem ?
thank you .
when i was a abschlussstudent at stanford university , i was to actually take this very exklusiven , at least at least , he was really shocked .
it was a store that was draeger .
this business was almost like a vergnügungspark .
they had 250 species of mustard and essig and over 500 different species of fruits and vegetables and vegetables and vegetables and more than two dozen species of water -- and that was at a time when we actually leitungswasser leitungswasser .
i loved this business ; i asked myself , well , how do you get something that you &apos;re never going to do something ?
here is the olive gait .
they had über similar different varieties of olive olive oil , including the ones that have been embedded in the wild , the von came .
so i decided to go to the world , and i asked the leader , &quot; work on this model , that they really can do all these things , they really can offer all these things ? &quot;
and he showed up the busladungen of tourists that came up every day and they had their cameras .
we decided to do a experiment and we chose marmelade for our experiment .
here &apos;s her marmeladen gait .
they had 348 different kinds of marmelade .
we have a little verkostungsecke right straight straight straight straight straight straight straight right across the entrance .
we have six different flavors of marmelade or 24 different kinds of geschmacksrichtungen , and we have two things -- first , i &apos;m going to stay in case more people and marmelade ?
it &apos;s more people are more , if there were 24 percent , about 60 percent , as they were six , about 40 percent .
and after that , we saw that people tend to be a glass of marmelade .
now we saw the old effect .
and from the people who are the ones as it was 24 , bought only three percent of a glass .
from the people who are six , well , well , now we saw that 30 percent of them actually sleep .
now , if you calculate it , bought the people six times a glass of marmelade , who they had six choices , when they had to the choices of the choices .
now , not to buy a glass of marmelade , it &apos;s probably good for us -- at least it &apos;s good for our waist -- but it turns out that the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem also makes us also with very konsequenzreichen decisions .
we decide to decide if it &apos;s possible against our own best interests .
so , the theme of the day we save .
so i &apos;m going to share with you a survey that i &apos;m using gur huberman , emir kamenica , wei kamenica , wei jang , where we &apos;ve given the decisions about almost 650 americans , about about 650 plans in the entire united states .
and what we were told was whether the number of fondsangebote that were able to have a einem possible , the 401 plan that the odds of the likelihood of whether more for tomorrow .
and we found that there was a correlation .
so in this plans we had about 657 people that we had about two to the other to the other fund .
and what we found was that the more fonds was offered that , in fact , the participation was less .
now , if you look at the extremes of the extremes , the plans that the plans that two fund has been anboten , they had a teilnahmerate in the course -- still not as high as we want to do .
in the plans that almost fund , i noticed the teilnahmerate now on about the sechzigsten .
now , if you want to get to entschliessen , even if you can go to the choices , even it has negative consequences .
so the people who decided to be able to be able to do more choices , the more choices they were able to provide them , the more they provide and fonds .
the more people they were able to do , the more likely they put their money in pure money .
not that extreme decisions , finding the decisions that somebody were recommend , if you will well-being better than your future matters .
now , in the last 10 years , we &apos;ve been doing with people three basic fears that can offer over more and more choices .
they pick up the choice -- they get on , even when it comes to your own best .
they &apos;re making a lot of decisions -- and both of a financial and quiet decisions .
they decide for things that you can make yourself less , even if you make it make it .
the main reason is that we may have been able to do it so much about this huge regale , mustard and marmelade , but we &apos;re not taught to be able to pull the comparison and the context of the amazing offer .
so what i want to do today is four today , four simple techniques -- techniques that we have on various different kinds of getestet and different kinds of light -- they can use them in their business .
first , just one .
you &apos;ve heard it before , but it was never true as a today .
people are always when i say , &quot; oh , &quot; the one . &quot;
they always lose that they lose regalfläche .
but in truth , we see it &apos;s more and more that if you &apos;re ready to come to the fold , and the unwichtigen are going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be , &amp; amp ; &amp; amp ; and there &apos;s a improvement of improvement .
and as a proctor and gamble die of 26 species on 15 , they got a five-meter rise in a five-meter percent of the average .
when the golden cat was ihr in the worst verkauften , they were erlebten , they were having sie , they were having sie , that the gains was to grow up to the rise of the mass and the reduction of cost cost .
you know , the average supermakrt today , we can give them 45,000 .
a typical walmart , you &apos;re 100,000 products today .
but the neuntgrößte , who &apos;s neuntgrößte supermarkt supermarkt , who &apos;s neuntgrößte supermarkt , and they &apos;re just using them to the world -- a kind of tomato sauce in india .
now in the world of the world , i think of one of the best examples , i think one of the best examples that recently have been sehr , and how to come up with the best , which was something very strong , it &apos;s a program that &apos;s offered harvard .
every single person employees now is about a lebenszeitfond part .
by the way , the really wollen wants to fund , they &apos;re fonds , not 300 or more .
you know , how people often say , &quot; i don &apos;t know what i &apos;m supposed to be .
it &apos;s all important possibilities . &quot;
and the first thing i &apos;m saying is tell me how to tell me how the possibilities are different from each other .
and if your staff can &apos;t be able to do , it can also be able to fail . &quot;
now before we started today , i had a conversation with gary .
and gary said he ready to be ready to be in this audience , a all-inklusive bezahlten vacation , the most beautiful world of the world .
here &apos;s a description of the street .
and i want to share with you .
and now i &apos;m going to give you a couple of seconds to read them , and i &apos;m going to ask you to clap when they &apos;re ready to be the gary of the service .
okay . everybody who is , gary is anzunehmen .
are all the things ?
well , let me give you something more about it .
she knew it was a trick , or ?
now , who &apos;s ready for this journey .
i think i may have rowed any hands .
all right .
in fact , that &apos;s what you remember , the first time , when i first , as a second time , but i would dare it to be a dare that you would be able to get it .
because the pictures she did .
what &apos;s the second technique of the world &apos;s problems with the problem of the world &apos;s problem , it &apos;s the konkretisierung .
it &apos;s about that people have to understand the difference between ways to understand what consequences with the individual choices are associated with the individual choices and the same way .
why are people average 15 to 30 percent more than a ec-karte or a credit card , when you &apos;re 60 ?
because it doesn &apos;t make a bribe .
and it turns out that if you can think that if you think about something like , it &apos;s a very good tool , so you can get people to save more .
so we &apos;ve done in a survey that i did with shlomo benartzi and alessandro previtero , we did a study with the people in the ing -- -- that people were all in a meeting in the meeting in the meeting in the meeting in the meeting of their rentensparplan .
and during this gathering , we &apos;ve been taking this meeting as they just as they were just a small hinzugefügt .
the small things we have , we have a gefügt , we &apos;ve been able to have the people to think about all the positive things that would happen when they save money .
in that we did this simple thing , there was a five-meter increase of participation about 20 percent and there was a increase in the number of people who were willing to save or a five-meter level or four percent of the betrag , they were ready to pay for the sparkonto .
the third technique : kategorisierung .
we can better better than more of more things than we deal with more .
here &apos;s a study that we did in a zeitschriftengang gemacht .
it turns out that it &apos;s in the wegmans supermärkten and down at the northeast area , the number of thousands of thousands of thousands of performers have been zeitschriften to 664 .
but you know what ?
if i show you guys to get to the corner and you &apos;ll be able to do in 10 categories or i &apos;m showing you a little bit of the time , and that in 20 categories , you think i &apos;d have a little bit more , and i showed you the other one i have happened when i gave you the other .
because the categories tell me how i can hold them apart .
there are two different crustaceans .
one means &quot; jazz &quot; jazz &quot; and the other things called &quot; swing . &quot;
if you think that the left display is not display , and the display on the right now is , you clap , you clap .
okay , there &apos;s a couple .
if you think that the left is the left jazz and the ones on the right hand , you can see .
okay , a couple more .
well , it turns out that they &apos;re right .
the left is jazz jazz and the on the right is swing , but you know what ?
this is a hochgradig kategorisierungsschema kategorisierungsschema .
the categories don &apos;t have to say something that the selection would have been doing .
and this problem , you know , if you look at the long lists of all of those .
who do you want to do with it ?
my fourth technology : voraussetzung for complexity .
it turns out that we can deal with more information than we think we &apos;ve got to just simplify them .
we have to increase the complexity .
i &apos;ll show you a example of what i mean .
let &apos;s start a very , very complicated decision : the purchase of a car .
here &apos;s a german autohersteller , which is to give you the opportunity to konfigurieren your car .
they have to design a car to design your car .
now , this decisions are decisions about the number of choices that you can offer a choice .
autofarben , außenfarbe of cars -- i have 56 ways .
motors , we &apos;re going to see four .
what i &apos;m doing now is , i &apos;m able to tell myself the order .
half of customers is going to be about many ways of possibilities , 56 autofarben , to the low ways .
the other half of customers is about the low possibilities of the low possibilities of the low possibilities of the low possibilities , many ways , many ways .
what am i doing ?
how are you interested in .
if you &apos;re constantly using the standardauswahl of choice , that &apos;s the ones that you &apos;re overwhelmed , the heisste , i &apos;m going to do it .
what you find is that people who are dominated by many , and they &apos;re always the standardauswahl .
we lose them .
go from the little choice , you &apos;ll stay in the case .
it &apos;s the same amount of possibilities . it &apos;s the same amount of possibilities .
the only thing i did is actually the sequence of the information in this information .
if i start with the simple scale , i think , like i &apos;m auswähle .
even though , even though , even though , even though , even though , i say nothing about the idea of the innenausstattung says , i still remember the time .
it also reminded me in excitement about the big product that i &apos;m going to be able to do , and so i &apos;m ready to make it easier to be interested in .
let me wrap up .
i told you about four techniques that the problem of the entscheidungsüberlastung -- -- you &apos;ll go -- -- you &apos;ll be able to do better -- we can do better than we can start to think about more categories , less ways .
every one of these techniques i &apos;m going to tell you about today -- well , you can use them for yourself , they can use them for yourself , good for people who offer you .
because i think the key to the best way is that you &apos;re in the selection of the research .
and the more we &apos;re working on the age of the elderly , we will be able to learn the art of choice .
thank you .
hi . i &apos;m kevin allocca , trends-manager bei , i see , i see myself .
that &apos;s true .
today , we want to talk about how much videos are going to be , and that &apos;s why that &apos;s what &apos;s going on .
we &apos;re all going to be able to get to be berühmtheiten , singers , singers -- when i was young , so that &apos;s what we were going to make .
but webvideos , it &apos;s all that we all could be able to do all of our creative activities in a part of the culture of our culture .
every single one of you could be famous about the internet .
but when the youtube gets more than 48 video per minute .
it &apos;s only a tiny percentage ever viral and will thousands thousands of thousands of thousands and thousands of thousands of thousands and so on the cultural moment .
how does that work ?
three things : tastemaker , teilnahmecommunities and unexpected .
well , we want to start .
oh my god . oh my god .
oh my god ! &quot; oh my god !
hoo !
! !
last year bear vasquez this video that he was in the yosemite yosemite in the yosemite national park .
in 2010 , it was 23 million years .
this graph shows how it was , as the video of the first time was popular .
actually , not really bear , you know , they didn &apos;t want to make a joke video .
he just wanted to share one rainbow , just sharing , and he wanted to share one rainbow , just a rainbow .
because you can do that if you start yosemite mountain .
he had any amount of naturvideos .
and this video was actually been a gesendet .
what happened ?
and the third kimmel .
jimmy kimmel den , the video of the last one was so popular .
because , tastemaker , as jimmy kimmel and show us new things and show them a big crowd .
it &apos;s friday , friday , gotta get get to to , s forward forward to to to , weekend forward to to , weekend forward to to , weekend forward to to , weekend forward to to , weekend forward to , weekend forward to , weekend forward to , i hope to talk about this conversation , i hope .
rebecca blacks &quot; is one of the most important video of the year .
it was almost 200 million times a year .
so the graphics looked like .
just like &quot; &quot; the &quot; &quot; s can come from the nothingness .
what is happening to this day ?
well , it was true , that &apos;s true .
if you know , if you know , these other peaks are also freitage .
but what about this day , the particular friday ?
now , tosh.0 gabelte , it &apos;s a lot of blogs , and write about it .
michael j. nelson science theater was a joke in the first one that was flying about it a joke .
so important , that a video or a group of tastemakers , you need to have a point of tastemakers , with a big audience and that process .
then , these community of people who shared this big insiderwitz , and start talking about it and to do with it .
now there &apos;s 10,000 parodien of &quot; friday &quot; s .
already in the first seven days , there was a parody of every single day for every single day .
in other than bei entertainment , the participation of community is the participation of community our way to be part of this phenomenon -- either by using it and something new emerges .
&quot; nyan cat &quot; is animation and music in endlosschleife .
that &apos;s just simply .
this year , almost 50 million times .
and if you were having the case for the insane , you know , you know , there &apos;s a dreistundenversion , that four million times .
even cats look at this video .
cats look at cats , which looked at this video .
so important , the creativity that in the internetkultur of the techies and geeks .
there was a remixe .
somebody made a license version of it .
and then it was international .
a whole remix-gemeinde of the schoss from the ground that &apos;s been made by a pond of a kind of joke that we can all agree with .
today , we don &apos;t have a look at something we &apos;re doing with .
who could have been able to have all the things ?
who would have &quot; the rainbow &quot; or &quot; nyan &quot; predictions &quot; can predict predictions ?
what drehbücher is to write in which they can write ?
in a world where every minute two days video games can be hochgeladen , it can actually be unique and unexpected hervorstechen like the erwähnten .
i admit , i was very interested in the way , when i was interested in a friend , i said , this great video clips , about a guy who built in new york against fahrräder .
i got a ticket because i got a ticket because i was not on the radweg , but often there &apos;s a nicht to the radweg drive .
so that &apos;s the whole surprising and humorvoll , it was convicted of niestats , and his argument would be a million times .
this approach to everything new way we do creative .
and that &apos;s all of us to a big question .
what does that mean ?
ohhhh .
what does that mean ?
tastemaker , creative teilnehmergemeinden , completely unexpected , the most representative of a new form of media and culture , to everybody , and she &apos;s going to be able to bestimmt the audience .
like , like , as i said , one of the currently biggest is -- justin bieber -- graduated at the beginning of youtube .
nobody needs to be green ideas .
and we feel like we all of our culture , and we all are our popular culture .
and that &apos;s not the most important of the old media and they &apos;re interested in the media of today , but they will merge the conversation of the future .
thank you .
how can i talk to 10 minutes about the verbundenheit between women and how the amazing strengths of this connectedness is what the amazing strengths of this is a vierjährigen manifestierte , and how the amazing strengths of this connectedness is now -- this little girl , the erstaunliche and never returned to the amazing boat in san francisco , which is now fest , and i never had a
the story is still not .
it &apos;s a puzzle that &apos;s still going to be able to be able to add .
i want to tell you about some of the puzzlestückchen .
so , imagine the first piece : a man who was his lebenswerk .
he &apos;s a poet , a writer , a man whose life from the simple presence of oneness and freedom of his home .
they hold it in the einmarsch of the kommunisten in saigon , how he must acknowledge that his life was a single waste .
the words , so long , spotteten , seiner .
he moved into silence .
he died , he was broken with the story .
he &apos;s my grandfather .
i never met him .
but our lives are so much more than our memories .
my grandmother never forget me .
i had to worry that it was not free , and it was my job to learn that the story was trying to zerdrücken us , we were doing it .
the next generation shows how a boat in early morgenrot has been quiet in see .
my mom was 18 , as her father died -- in a arrangierten marriage , already with two little girls .
for them , they had the lives of their family and a new life in australia .
it was completely clear that they fail .
after a leader and filmreifen saga glitt ein a boat on the lake , as a fischerboot .
they were all the adults .
the biggest fear they had , rape and death .
as most adults of the boat was my mother a little giftflasche .
in a gefangennahme , i &apos;ve got my sister and i , you know , and my grandmother &apos;s from them .
my first memories are from this boat -- the stetige tuckern of the engine , which clap clap on the front of the bow and blank horizons .
i remember the pirates that many times came , but from the todesmut of the men of the men &apos;s marriage on our boat , or at the ausfall of the engine , the six hours of the engine of the engine of the engine of the engine of the engine .
but i remember the lights at the ölplattform coast of the malaysischen coast , and the young man who was broke up , and died that was the end of the journey was too much for him , and to the flavor of the first apfels , which i had to give me one of the guys in the platform .
not a apfel ever geschmeckt again .
after three months in a refugee camp in melbourne .
and the next generation of the handelt is about four women in three generations that are developing each other life .
we were dressed in footscray , one of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle
in other words , when in the alteingesessenen mittelklassevororten , whose existence , i had totally unknown , it wasn &apos;t in footscray .
the smells came out of the world &apos;s coming from the rest of the world .
and the fetzen gebrochenen gebrochenen wurden were among people to get one thing in common : they start reinventing .
my mother worked on farms , then in a autofabrik , six days , double schichten layers .
it &apos;s managed to find the time , and it-qualifikationen , english and it-qualifikationen .
we were poor .
every dollar was given , and it was taken into the more unequal education for english and mathematics , no matter what we had to do that . mostly the new things that came from the second hand .
two strümpfe for school , each other , to start the holes in the other .
a schuluniform approach to the knöcheln , because they had to go over six years .
and there were the rare but schmerzhaften von of &quot; schlitzauge &quot; and here and there &apos;s wandmalereien : &quot; &quot; look , go home . &quot;
home ?
something versteifte in me .
there was a meeting and a ruhige voice said , &quot; i &apos;ll go you out of the way . &quot;
my mom , my sister and i was going to sleep in the same bed .
my mother was every night , but we were able to get away from our day , and i heard the movement of our grandmother in the house .
my mom suffered from the boat .
and it was my job to stay every night , until her alpträume came to her so that i could aufwecken her .
she &apos;s a computergeschäft , machte , and then a kosmetikerausbildung and a half , a business .
and the women came with their stories about men who didn &apos;t ertrugen the change and unflexibel , and sorgenerfüllte children , trapped , between two worlds .
loans and sponsoren .
centers .
i lived in parallelwelten .
in a way i was student in a classical history of the classical anforderungen of the same time .
in other , i was in unsichere life , the tragic scars of violence , the drogenmissbrauchs and the isolierung .
but so many of these were hilfe aid .
and because of that aid , i was in my last year as a young australierin australierin of the year as the year .
and i was separated from a puzzlestück to the nearest , and the edges doesn &apos;t fit together .
tan le , von , war , was a tan , and social activist who never heard of the places that had never heard of , and in the homes of where they never imagined their own existence .
i was not familiar with the etikette .
i didn &apos;t know how to use the besteck .
i didn &apos;t know how to speak about wine .
i didn &apos;t know how to speak about anything .
i wanted to go into the routine and the bequemlichkeit of life &apos;s a unbekannten vororts -- a mom and two daughters , who are at least in their days -- by einander each other day , and they &apos;re einschliefen , we can save and einschliefen , we &apos;re still in the same bed .
i said , i wouldn &apos;t do that .
they reminded me that i was so old when you had the boat .
no one has never been .
&quot; do it simple , &quot; she said , &quot; and &quot; don &apos;t what you &apos;re not . &quot;
so i spoke about jugendarbeitslosigkeit and training , and the vernachlässigung of the marginalisierten and entrechteten .
and the more i was talking about , the more i should say .
i met people in all lebenslagen , so many of you , what they did , we lived in the limits of the possible .
and even though i had my degree , i realized that i couldn &apos;t be able to be able to be able to see in a career .
there was another puzzlestück puzzlestück .
and i realized at the same time that it &apos;s okay , a maverick , neu , neu , and not just ok , but something that you have to be grateful , but maybe a gift of the boots .
because dazuzugehören can make easily happen for the age , so easily , so easily that you can see the assumptions of the surroundings .
i &apos;ve been here to know enough my bequemlichkeitsbereich , that , yes , the world auseinanderbricht , but not like you befürchtet .
ways that weren &apos;t allowed to have been allowed to have been ermutigt .
there was a energy , a unerbittlichen optimism , a strange mixtur of humility and the wagnisses .
so i was i followed my gut .
i collected a little team of people to me , for the schublade , &quot; not &quot; a unwiderstehliche challenge .
one year we had no cents .
at the end of a piece of a piece , i &apos;m a huge amount of soup that we shared .
we worked down to the night .
most of our ideas were crazy , but it was a few of them , and we were having the breakthrough .
i met the decision in the u.s. , in the u.s. , and i met the decision in the u.s. , and i met the decision in the u.s. , and i met the decision in the u.s.
after just a trip .
my gut again .
three months later , i was clubs and the adventure on the adventure .
before i talk to the talk , i want to tell you about my grandmother .
they grew up to a time , in the konfuzianismus , the social norm and local mandarin was the most important person .
it had almost been nicht for centuries .
her father died of their birth .
they were pulled alone .
with 17 , you &apos;ve got the second woman of a mandarin whose mother was .
without her husband , they were bringing them for a sensation by gericht ihn and anklägerin in their own case , and a more bigger sensation , than she won .
&quot; not &quot; was changing as a unwahr .
i just duschte in a hotel in a hotel sydney than she died . 1,000 miles away in melbourne .
i looked through the duschtrennwand and seeing them on the other side .
i knew she was coming to be able to think about .
my mom called me a couple of minutes .
a few days later we went into a buddhist temple in footscray and sat around her .
we told her stories and versicherten , you know , we were still in her .
and so , in order to come back and said he &apos;d get the sarg .
my mother asked us to go to their hand .
she said the monk , &quot; why is your hand so warm and the rest of your own ? &quot;
&quot; because she &apos;s been doing for tomorrow , &quot; he said .
&quot; you don &apos;t whistle them . &quot;
if there is a tape there , you can see it through the women .
but you see who we were , and how life we can see , we can see that the guys might have been in our lives , we were going to have been alive .
the defeat would have been too simple .
now i should have my own children , and i think about the boat .
who would ever want to be a wish ?
yes , i have scared , i was afraid of privilege , before .
can i give you a bow in your life , the courageous of the wave of wave , the unbeirrte , stetige tuckern of the engine , the typical horizon , the nothing is ?
i don &apos;t know .
but if i could give this , and you could be able to durchbringen , i would do it .
and it &apos;s tans mutter in the fourth or five- row .
i &apos;m here to share my photography with you .
is it all about photography ?
because that &apos;s a picture that you can &apos;t deal with his camera .
nevertheless started when i was my first digital erhielt , at age 15 years .
i combined it with my former predilection for my former colleague , but it was a little bit of a little bit of a little bit , because she was able to use the process in the planning .
and if you &apos;re a picture of a picture with a camera , ends up when you &apos;re looking at the trigger .
so for me , it seemed to be more like to be asking at the right time .
i believed everybody could .
so i wanted to create something else , something that the process begins when the trigger will be .
and so like this : a viel road , and a much more befahrenen road .
but it has a unexpected wendung .
and behaltet , yet a realistic level .
or photographs like this -- dark and farbenfroh , but all of the shared purpose , a realistic level .
when i say reality , i &apos;m foto-realität .
because , of course , you can &apos;t really feel anything , but i want to look like this , but i want to look like if you could have that , you could have a photo .
and the photos that you have to think about a brief moment to figure out the trick .
so it &apos;s more like a idea of a idea when a really moment .
but what is the trick that it makes it look like ?
is it about the detail , or the color ?
is it about light ?
what do the illusion ?
sometimes the illusion are illusion .
but the last thing we do is about how we interpret the world , and how they can make a body .
it &apos;s not about what &apos;s realistic is , but what we think about .
so i think the essentials are very simple .
i see it as a puzzle of reality where you can take various pieces and can create a reality reality .
and let me give you a simple example .
we have three perfect physical objects that we can identify in a three-dimensional world .
but in a particular way , you can see something that &apos;s still more important than it could exist .
but at the same time we know that this is not possible .
so we &apos;re so appreciative of our brains because our brain may be simply not really meaning .
and i see the same process of the kombinieren of the photos .
it &apos;s really about different kinds of kombinieren .
so the things that &apos;s a picture is realistic , i think it &apos;s the things that we don &apos;t think about ourselves in our daily lives .
but if we &apos;re lying down , it &apos;s really important to think about , because you &apos;re just going to look like this .
so i would say , there &apos;s three simple rules to obey a realistisches .
as you can see , these are not three special images .
but , but you can see something special here .
so the first rule is that the first time of the same perspective have been doing the same perspective .
secondly , all of the second should have been dieselbe .
and these two pictures are these two places , and from the same height and the same beleuchtungsart .
third , it &apos;s possible to make it possible , where the individual pictures start to start and end , by using it seamlessly .
it &apos;s possible to say how the photo was actually made .
so you can color , contrast and contrast to the margins images , photographic mängel , like feldtiefe , entsättigte inks and dysfunction , we can look at the limits between the various images and let them see how a single photograph look at a single photograph , even a picture of the brain stem hundreds of thousands .
here &apos;s another example .
you know , you know , that &apos;s just a landscape , and the bottom part of the time .
but this picture is actually completely entirely , from photos of different places .
i personally have personally a lot of finde. that it &apos;s easier to create a place , when a place , you don &apos;t have to find your ideas in his head .
but it requires a lot of opportunity .
and when i had this idea in the winter , i knew i had a months to plan them to find the various places for the building of the puzzle .
for instance , the fish was on a anglerausflug .
so the bank is from a different place .
the unterwasser-teil &apos;s stammt is from a quarry .
and i &apos;ve even even the house on the island of the island to lassen it .
so to get a realistisches , it boils from me to look at planning .
i always start with a sketch , a idea .
after that , it &apos;s about the combination of the various images .
and here &apos;s a piece of a piece of paper .
and if you can make good power , the result can be pretty good , and also quite realistic .
so , so , so , so , the only thing we &apos;re telling us is our imagination .
thank you .
i &apos;d like to talk to you with them why so many electronic fuel energy .
and i think that the most important point is that we stopped , to talk to our patients .
and one of the things we introduced in the radboud-universität , was a haupt-zuhörer affair .
do you think they &apos;re not particularly wrong before -- they shares a cup of coffee , or tea , and asks the patient , families , relatives , &quot; how do you know ?
how can we help ? &quot;
and we think we want this one of the main reasons why all of the main reasons is -- may be all -- may be -- perhaps most of the electronic gesundheits-projekte of the electronic gesundheits-projekte of the electronic gesundheits-projekte : because we stopped .
this is my favorite wlan-waage . a very simple thing .
it has a button in a / .
and everybody &apos;s coming to .
and i have a task , as you may recognize .
i have my task at 95 pounds of mental illness .
it &apos;s just every time i just put on the phone , i put up the phone , i put my data on google .
and there are also about my allgemeinarzt abgerufen , so he can see where my favorite is , and that &apos;s not just the moment that i &apos;m going to see in kardiologische , or so , but also with a view of a view of a view .
but there &apos;s something else .
perhaps you may be familiar with , i &apos;ve been talking about 4,000 follower on twitter .
so , every morning i get to my wlan-waage and people talk about , before i sit down , &quot; for lunch , just a little salat today . &quot;
but this is the most obvious thing that happen because this is the gruppenzwang , gruppenzwang , gruppenzwang , because that could be against obesity , or it could be patients with the smoking .
but it could be used to get people from their chairs and they can make any kind of game game to control , creating their health selves .
it &apos;s the one that &apos;s going on the market .
it will be this little blutdruck-messgerät that you &apos;re going to be a iphone or so anschließt .
and it &apos;s going to enable people to measure their blood pressure , allowing him to send their doctor and it &apos;s starting to share it for a little bit more than 100 dollars .
at that point , patients in their own work , they can &apos;t just get over to the control , captain in the challenges that we &apos;re going to help us , and then the energy crisis , the kostenexplosion of health , and so on .
make it possible to be able to use the easy to use and start them with this one that patients in the team .
and that can be augmented by the whole way , but also through a nice .
and one of the things we did , i &apos;d done with you through a short video .
we all have the navigationssysteme in our cars .
perhaps even in our cell phones .
we know exactly where all the atm have been around around the front door .
we know , where all the stations are .
and we see , we can find fastfood-ketten .
but where would be the next aed to help this patients ?
we have herumgefragt , and nobody knew it .
nobody knew where the next artistic lebensrettende was in that moment .
so what do we do ? we have a crowdsourcing in the netherlands .
we have a website and a menschenmasse , &quot; if you can see a aed , you share a aed , you share with us , &quot; because sometimes he &apos;s a sometimes , &quot; because sometimes he &apos;s closed , of course , of course .
and over 10,000 aeds , in the netherlands , in the netherlands .
the next step was to find the apps for finding .
and we have a ipad-app keyboard .
we have a app for layar , extended reality to find these kinds of aeds .
and if you &apos;re in a city like maastricht and somebody &apos;s collapsing , you can use your iphone , and within the next few weeks , you can use your iphone to find the next finding , saving lives .
and the reason we &apos;d like to do this is not just as a aed4u , like the product , but as a aed4us .
and we want to do this on a global scale .
and we &apos;re looking at our colleagues around the world , from other universities , which is to help us how to help us how to help us how to help this aeds auf around the world .
and if you &apos;re in a vacation , and somebody &apos;s going to be able to get away , they can find their own relationships or anyone , you can find a aed .
the other thing we want to ask is that companies are helping us at the bestätigung of this classification .
now , this may be kurierdienste , or the engineer for instance , just to ensure that the gemeldete aed is still at his location .
help us feel and try them , not just raising health to improve health , but to take the hand .
thank you .
today i &apos;m going to tell you about unexpected discoveries .
i work in the solartechnologie-branche .
and my little bit of startup wants to make us feel what &apos;s going to do , by doing ...
... it &apos;s the experiment .
here &apos;s a quick video about what we do .
oh . &quot;
it may be , until it &apos;s a cause .
now we can just put the video -- i &apos;m just going to put the video in the video .
no .
that &apos;s not ...
okay .
... &quot;
oh , my time ?
okay . thanks .
so a couple of years ago i took a program to get the power to get a year in technology and design , and in a environment that &apos;s so pretty all the way that they actually hate us , we &apos;ve got them in the government .
the program is &quot; code &quot; and it &apos;s a bit like the friedenscorps for the geeks of the geeks .
we choose each year from a few thousand and we let them work with stadtverwaltungen .
instead of the third world , send them in rathäuser .
and it took them great apps , working with urban collaborators .
but what you really do is to show what &apos;s happening with technology .
so they meet al .
al is a hydrant in the city .
here &apos;s what he looks like , but what he &apos;s really looking for a date , but what he &apos;s really looking for is somebody who &apos;s when he knows , he &apos;s not very good at the brandbekämpfung when he &apos;s from a meter of a foot .
how did he feel that particular way ?
we had a team of fellows in boston in the same way that code for &quot; code . &quot;
they were there in february , and it has been a lot of geschneit .
and they realized that the city never frei these fire .
but a particular fellow named erik erik michaels-ober , and that was that the residents had something else , and that was that the residents had been frei , right in front of those parts .
so he did what any good was doing , he was writing a app .
it &apos;s a nice little app , where you can call fire .
you &apos;re free to him , if it &apos;s going to be a threshold .
if you do that , you can give him a name , and he called the first al .
if you don &apos;t do that , you can get you .
so , there &apos;s a nice little spieldynamik .
this is a humble app app .
it &apos;s probably the smallest of the 21 resources that the fellows has written over the last year .
but they do something , what do you do .
they &apos;re looking for yourself .
there is this guy in the middle of the city , the city in the city , who has seen that he could use this app , but for snow , but the citizens of tsunami-sirenen .
it &apos;s very important that these tsunami-sirenen work , but people steal the batteries .
so he got the citizen to check them .
and then finally , seattle , using the app to use the citizens to get the citizens to clean the verstopften .
and chicago , they just had just the eingeführt , so that people are the buergersteige freischaufeln , if it &apos;s going to be a threshold .
so we know 9 / cities that are driving to use these app .
and she &apos;s got a shower , organically , of course .
when you think about regierungstechnologie , you know , that it doesn &apos;t usually work .
the beschaffung of software takes a couple of years .
we had a team that was launched last year in boston , for the three people of their months .
it was a way to find a method with the parents that the most real public school for their children are .
and what we realized was that when there was a time of the normal canals of normal canals , it had two years ago , and it had two million dollars .
and that &apos;s not anything .
there &apos;s a project in the middle of the california that the taxpayer two billion dollars , and it doesn &apos;t work .
and there are projects like this , in every level .
so one app that &apos;s written in a couple of days is , and then from selbt , ausbreitet , is a kind of a little bit of a schuss before the institution .
it shows how the government would work better than the government could work -- no more like a personal companies like many people think they should .
and not even like a technik-unternehmen , but rather like the internet itself .
and that means free access to open up and productive .
that &apos;s important .
but more importantly , you know , a new generation , the problem of government anpackt -- not as the problem of a verknöcherten institution , but as a problem of collective .
and this is a very good news because it shows that we &apos;re very good at the collective action of digital technology .
now there are a large community of people who have the tools that we need to do about things , things that we need to have effective .
it &apos;s not just &quot; code for the same thing , &quot; there &apos;s hundreds of people in all the country that go up and regierungs-apps every day in their own communities .
they didn &apos;t want to go out .
they &apos;re very dreadful with her , but they don &apos;t complain about it .
and these guys know what we lost from the eyes .
and that &apos;s what if you think about politics and the snake in the schlange and all the other things that we &apos;re really upset with is governance , in the words of tim o &apos; &quot; what we have to do that we can &apos;t . &quot;
today , a lot of people who are at the government .
and if you &apos;re a second , i think you &apos;re about to think about it because things are going to change .
the politics changes not ; the government is in the change .
and because the government are getting out of us , the government will take us from the schöpft -- erinner of us , &quot; we &apos;re going to people ? &quot; -- how we think about it , it &apos;s how that change .
i didn &apos;t know very much about the government , when i started this program .
and as many people , i thought it &apos;s mainly in the government , i thought about the government , people are going to choose people in a office .
now , after two years , i &apos;ve been told that it was going to be able to go out of everything .
this is the more exciting for service and information .
there are you going out , if you were in your city .
if you ever have a chance to work in your städtisches , as our fellow scott , you know , that people have been all -- in fact , do you all -- in fact , you see that people have been all -- in the fact , that a beutelratte arrangement in your house .
scott , so , scott .
he &quot; beutelratte &quot; &quot; &quot; in the vertical database .
and he didn &apos;t really have a idea . he starts with the tierfänger .
and finally , he says , &quot; look , you can just take all the doors in your house and very loud music , and see if the livestock ? &quot;
and that worked . he was going to scott .
but it wasn &apos;t the end of the beutelratten .
boston boston has not just a call .
it has a app , a web- and handy-app , &quot; citizens connect . &quot;
we don &apos;t written that .
this is very smart people in the office of the new york city in boston .
one day -- this is a tatsächlicher report -- came up in my mülltonne . can &apos;t say , &quot; ob in my mülltonne . can &apos;t tell you whether it &apos;s dead .
how do i get them away ? &quot;
but what happens to &quot; citizens connect &quot; is different .
scott zu , human beings .
but in &quot; citizens , &quot; citizens , &quot; is that everybody can see it .
and in this case , it was a neighbor .
and the next post we got , &quot; i went to the house , i found the mülltonne behind the house .
beutelratte ? yes . &quot; yap .
and the mülltonne on the page . i went home .
good night , sweet beutelratte . &quot;
pretty simple .
that &apos;s great . this is the digital physical thing .
and it &apos;s also a good example of how the government is going to get the way .
but it &apos;s also a great example of the government as a platform .
and i don &apos;t mean by this kind of technological definition of the platform .
i &apos;m more like a platform for people to help themselves and to help others .
a citizen helped another citizen , but the government played a central role .
they picked up these two people .
and you could have them to have government with their own , if they were able to get , but a neighbor is a pervasive better and billigere of alternative .
if a neighbor of the other hand , we are actually concerned our communities .
we call the tierfänger , it costs a lot of money .
one of the most important things is that we have to think about government is not the same thing .
and most people understand , but most people understand that one was the input of the other .
that our contributions is to choose the system .
how often we often have a political leader -- and sometimes we have a lot of energy to choose a new political leaders -- and we expect a lot of energy to choose a new political leaders -- and then we expect a lot back and our needs , and then our values , hasn &apos;t changed ?
that &apos;s because the government is like a growing and politics , that &apos;s the same .
and what &apos;s below is what we call the bureaucracy .
and we &apos;re using this word , with such contempt .
but it &apos;s this that contempt that we have , and we pay to be something that we have , and we pay to be something that we have , and then we can ourselves ourselves .
people seem to think politics is sexy .
if we want these institution that these institution we need to make it more sexy .
because that &apos;s where the actual stattfindet is going to be .
we need to focus on the world &apos;s way .
so the occupythesec-bewegung occupythesec-bewegung did it .
do you saw these guys ?
it &apos;s a group of a besorgter citizen that has a very detailed report , who &apos;s written a very detailed thing , who &apos;s a sec-memo on the sec-memo of the gesetzesvorlage of the gesetzesvorlage .
it &apos;s not the most politically active that is bürokratisch .
now , for those of us who have the government , is that we think about the world that we want to leave our children .
you have to introduce you the question of how to ask yourself .
do we really think that we should do what we need to do , without the power of the brain stem cells , the most of us can be all about us ?
a government is absolutely necessary , but the need to be more efficient .
the good news is that technology makes it possible , the function of government is governed in a sense that can actually accomplish something about it .
and there &apos;s a generation that &apos;s mitdem internet , and the god knows that it &apos;s not so hard to do things , you have to build things properly .
the average of our fellows is 28 , so i &apos;m a way to get a generation than most of you .
this is a generation that &apos;s been shown to see her voice as a building .
they don &apos;t fight that battle , that we all fight , about who speak to you .
you can think of their mind in every channel , and they do it .
so if you &apos;re faced with the problem of government , they don &apos;t care about your voices .
they &apos;re using their hands .
they use their hands to write applications that the work of governance .
and that apps can be our hands to improve our communities .
this might be a fire freizuschaufeln , weed , weed , a trash with a beutelratte umzudrehen .
and sure , we would have this hydranten all the time , and many people do that .
but these apps are like small digital memories that we &apos;re not just consumers and we &apos;re not just the government of government , the taxes and services .
we are more than that , we &apos;re citizens .
and we &apos;re not going to improve the government to the law .
so the question i have all of you here : it &apos;s about the big , big things we need to do together , we &apos;re going to do a lot of voices that we &apos;re going to be a lot of voices , or will we have a lot of hands .
thank you .
normally , to try to explain how wonderful the new technologies , which is going to be , and i thought , because i really think , and also try to see what &apos;s going on here , i would tell you what i really think . and also try to understand what &apos;s going on here , i would tell you that , and i &apos;m going to try
i &apos;m going to start to show you a single thing , boring slide .
... then you could please show the slide .
this is a slide that i &apos;ve taken my ordner .
it &apos;s not about the detail of the slide , but rather than the generelle form .
this slide shows data a analysis of us about the performance of risc processors compared to the performance of a local .
so the interesting here is that this slide , how many times the other , which we &apos;re often deployed in our field , a kind of just a semi-logarithmischen curve .
in other words , everybody &apos;s lying from a potency in the leistungsskala .
and that &apos;s a neuheit that we have to use this guy scale in the technology of technology .
something very strange happens here .
this is basically what i &apos;m going to talk about .
so if you could take the light back again .
again , because i &apos;m going to draw some of the paper here .
now , why do we use a lot of graph in technology ?
the reason i &apos;m going to draw it on a normal curve , where we say that &apos;s the years , so the timeline of a species , and that &apos;s a whole lot of the technology that i want to do with a graph , that &apos;s the graph .
so seeing that way .
and that tells us not a lot .
if i want to get another technology to say , let &apos;s say a transporttechnologie , then it would be very unvernünftig in the semi-logarithmischen scale of very unvernünftig in a flat line .
but if something like this happening here , then changes the most basic .
so if the transporttechnologie transporttechnologie like the mikroprozessor-technologie , then we could take übermorgen in a taxi and we would be in the uk .
but that &apos;s not so fast .
there was never before in history of the technologie-entwicklung , this kind of rekursivem growth , which is all of the rekursivem growth , all the time , for all the time .
now the question i want you to do is if you look at this exponential curves , you can see them .
it &apos;s not possible that all of us can always be able to get all the way now , and it &apos;s just as fast as you now .
there are two ways to be : there are two ways to be : there are two ways .
either of it &apos;s a classic s-kurve like this , until something utterly new , or it &apos;ll be here .
it &apos;s about .
now i &apos;m a optimist , so i think , as i &apos;ll happen here .
it &apos;s really what you mean , we &apos;re in the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the middle of the time .
we &apos;re looking at this line , in a new world from the world &apos;s recent world of world .
so the question i want to do , and i &apos;m often like , often itself is how this new world are probably going to be comfortable ?
what is this new state that the world will take a slow ?
because the transition seems to be very , very verwirrend when you &apos;re in the middle of the tree .
when i was a kid , there was somewhere in the future somewhere and people were talking about what would be happening in the year 2000 .
now we now have a conference where people talk about the future and you realize that the future will still stay .
and when we don &apos;t do that .
in other words , the future of each year , in order to be a year since i &apos;m on this world .
i think that &apos;s the reason we can remember that everybody &apos;s going on in the ground .
the transition happens . we can all feel it .
and we know that it &apos;s simply not going to make sense of any sense of getting 30 years or 50 years into the future , because anything that is so different , that a simple wave of what we &apos;re doing now is not going to make sense right now .
i want to talk to you about what that could possibly be that we actually currently are now in the moment .
so to do this , i &apos;m going to talk to about some other things that really does nothing with technology or computer .
because i think this really , really , we need to take a step back and we look at the moma .
and that &apos;s what i want to look at this on the earth &apos;s life .
i think it &apos;s a picture of making sense when you put it into some milliarden-schritte .
so let &apos;s go back , and we &apos;ve got to a big deal of the earth was a big , steriler steinklumpen steinklumpen with a lot of darauf chemicals .
so if you look at the way that these chemicals are organized , then there are a pretty good picture about how they anstellten .
i think there are a lot of the theories that we have done with rna , but i &apos;m going to tell you a little bit of what &apos;s saying that the time of the time little öltröpfchen herumschwebten , which various kinds of rezepten für for chemicals .
some of these öltröpfchen came a special combination of chemicals that enable you to take some chemicals of the outside and so .
all the things were starting to do .
these little öltröpfchen were the primitivste zellenform .
but they weren &apos;t quite like this öltröpfchen , because every single one was just a little , zufälliges recipe of chemicals .
and every time it fails , they have the darin chemicals at the same level of the brain stem .
so every tröpfchen was different .
in fact , the tröpfchen , the tröpfchen , which is a convicted of optimalere composition of the schneller , and integrated more chemicals and shared and shared .
so this is what they can do , and they put into grösserem .
so that &apos;s just a very simple chemical form of life , but more interesting , it &apos;s going to trick a trick for a trick .
in any way , which we haven &apos;t really understanding this tröpfchen , this tröpfchen , the ability to address information .
they learned the recipe of cell to store cell as information , and that is in a certain chemical form that we call dna .
in other words , they have a way to make a way that you get to get them , niederzuschreiben , and so that this information is going to be creative and copied .
the amazing thing is that this kind of information about time of 2.5 billion years , where they &apos;re formed , is equal to the same .
in fact , the recipe for us , which is our genes , from the exact same code and the same .
and that &apos;s where every organism is exactly the same letters and geological code .
we &apos;re so far that we can only write to the vergnügungszweck , even in this code .
and i have 100 mikrogramm of a white pulvers , which i &apos;m going to keep in airports to keep in airports .
in addition , what i &apos;ve done is , i made this code -- the code is -- the code is made of normal letters , which we use for a symbolisieren -- and i have my visitenkarte on a piece of dna , and i &apos;ve got 10,000 22 22 22 .
so if somebody &apos;s 93 a million copies of my visitenkarte , i want to spend enough of this room and even for everyone in this world and even for everyone in this world and it &apos;s right here .
i would have been a egoist , i would have been put them in a virus and in the room .
so what &apos;s next step ?
the niederschreiben of dna was a very interesting thing .
and the veranlagten of these cells -- that made them happy for a more billion years .
but then , another one , very interesting , very interesting , where things were completely different , and so that these cells started to communicate and information that communities grow from cells .
i don &apos;t know if you know that , but actually , bacteria can actually transform their dna .
that &apos;s also the reason for example , the beständigkeit growing .
some bacteria have figured out how they have been able to come from penicillin and have this information together with other bacteria in the dna , and now we have a lot of bacteria , which is on penicillin , because the bacteria communicate .
now , this communication , the basis of communities , which in a certain sense of the same boat , they were synergetisch .
so they either survived together , they went together , or they went out under it , and that meant that if a community was , all the community was going to come all of the community and learn from evolution .
now the übergangsstelle is there , where these communities are so close to the entire community into a zeichenkette booth to write the dna .
and the next phase of a billion years , and they took about another billion years .
at that point , we &apos;ve been gemeinschaften communities , communities of many verschiedlichen zellentypen , which together as a human organism .
in fact , we also have a solche community .
we have a lot of cells that are not on itself alone .
they can actually get useless without heart disease , muscle cells , hirnzellen and so on .
so , these communities started out that the level was to stattfand the evolution , not the longer , but the whole zellengemeinschaft , which we call them .
the next step happened in this communities .
the zellengemeinschaften started to make information .
and they developed a structures of the other , which is nothing else , as information in the organism .
and this is the neural structures .
so the neurons are the informationsverarbeitungsapparat that zellengemeinschaften diese .
they started to the community within the community , special structures , which was responsible for learning , understanding and that &apos;s information .
and this was the brain and the nervous system of that communities .
this gave them a evolutionary advantage .
because , at that point , in that point , so that within the lifespan of the west organism , instead of doing that evolutionary .
so , for example , a organism , for example , we could learn a certain thing , because they were bad and he sick , the last time he ate her .
so within the world of a single organism within the planet of a single organism , whereas tens of thousands of years , the information has to be learned by the individuals that were not been there in this particular informationsverarbeitungsstrukturen .
the nervous system has made the evolutionsprozess of this particular informationsstrukturen because of evolution could be a position .
it could be able to take within a major lernrahmens .
what happened is that the individual organisms can be found with a way that individual organisms found .
as an example , the most dramatic language , we know , familiar with this kommunikationsart is the human language .
it &apos;s a rather intriguing invention when you think about it .
i have a very complicated , unordentliche and verwirrte my head .
i &apos;m sitting here and give it a similar verwirrte sounds of me , in hope that a similar response is an similar verwirrte idea of what &apos;s a similar resemblance to my original idea .
so we take something very complicated , it changes it into sound , a sequence of sound , and producing something very complicated in the mind of others .
so this allows us to function a unified organism .
and what we did , we &apos;re actually going to be humanity , we started to make sure .
we &apos;re in the same steps that have mehrzellerorganismen , which is the abstraktion of our methods , how we &apos;re presenting data , we &apos;re presenting to be able to get rid of the world .
the invention of language , a little bit of a little bit in this direction .
telefonie , computers , computer , cd-roms , cd-roms and so on , all our genetic mechanisms that we built in our community to build this information .
and it connects us all together together , that &apos;s much bigger , and also , is also able to build another than we were having it .
so , in this microseconds can happen in microseconds .
you also have a tys little evolutionsbeispiel where he was a little evolution in the &quot; convolution &quot; program , right before the eyes .
so we started the zeitskalen .
the first steps of history , which i told you about , dauerten billion years a piece .
the next steps , how the nervous system and the brain , several hundred million years .
then the nächstens steps , how language and so on , dauerten less than a million years .
and this next steps , how electronics , i could just have a few decades .
the process is , by itself itself and wird , i think , auto-katalytisch is the word -- if something has its änderungsgeschwindigkeit .
the more changes changes , the more changes changes .
and i think that &apos;s what we see here in this explosionsartigen curve .
we see the process that &apos;s going to be able to see itself .
i live in the building of computers and i know that i use the mechanism i use to build the computer , not using the most people in the economy .
so , my current thing is , objects with such a quantitative complexity that it &apos;s possible to design this in the traditional sense .
i don &apos;t know what every single person in the verbindungsmaschine .
it &apos;s billions of people .
what i do instead , and what the designers of making thinking are , we &apos;re looking at a certain abstraktionsebene , and it &apos;s actually going to make something that makes our skills , and faster , the skills of the skills are getting more , better and faster than we could ever do it .
and it makes it a partial containing part of which we don &apos;t even understand .
a way that particularly interesting is interesting , and what i &apos;ve been used in the last time , is the evolution itself .
we actually put a flaw in the machine , which is what the mikrosekunden-bereich horse is .
to call an example in the most extreme cases , we can create a program that emerges from random amounts of self .
we say , &quot; computers , please have to have a hundred million random sequenzen sequences .
now , please all of these random happened , they all the instruktionen , and the wähle , the wähle , the ones that my vorgaben are on the next . &quot;
so in other words , i want to start to first ever .
let &apos;s say i want to say numbers , that would be a simple example that i &apos;ve been using this for that .
so , what the ehesten can be able to do .
of course , the chance is very small at random time , the way that they were passionate about numbers of numbers , so you won &apos;t be able to actually do this .
but one of those who likes to do something about two numbers of people .
now i say , &quot; computers , you can take the 10 percent of the same amount of the number of the world which got to the next day .
they did this off , lösche the rest .
now , all the übriggebliebenen that the numbers of sortiert .
and that &apos;s a method of the rekombinierens , analog to the brain . &quot;
take two programs and they produce children through the exchange of their subroutinen , and the children vererben the manifestations of the two programs .
so i have a new generation of programs that have been through combinations of programs , which is something closer to the veterans that are starting to be happy than others .
&quot; tell that process . &quot;
wieder them .
maybe some mutations .
and it &apos;s going to be able to do with a different generation .
need all of these generations , and you have a few milliseconds , and that &apos;s just a few milliseconds .
and so i can do a evolution about millions of years in the computer within a decade within a decade or a few hours .
and finally , i have the programs that can be perfect .
and the fact is , these programs are so much more efficient than any program i could have ever been able to write about hand .
and if i then look at these programs , i can &apos;t say how they work .
i tried to understand them .
it &apos;s verworrene and strange programs .
but they do that .
i know , i know that they &apos;re going to do the job , because they come from a series of hunderttausenden programs which have the job done .
because your life is going to be the job right .
i sat in a 747 with marvin minsky with marvin minsky , he &apos;s a map of hervorholt and says , &quot; oh look . &quot;
there is , &quot; this airplane is made of hunderttausenden kleinteilen , which is working on their flight , &quot; don &apos;t do that ? &quot;
we know that a entwicklungsprozess don &apos;t be launched when he &apos;s too complicated .
so , we start focusing on computers , for a process which is the classical fraction of the classical system .
he allows us to make things with a much higher complexity than it would produce the normal way .
and yet , we don &apos;t understand the possibilities of it .
so gewissermassen überflügelt : the technology .
we &apos;re using these programs to make the computer a lot faster , so that we &apos;re able to build these processes .
so it &apos;s a rückkopplung .
it &apos;s going to be faster and faster and i think it &apos;s why it seems to be so verwirrend .
because all of these new technologies are actually expanding themselves .
we &apos;re going to get off .
we &apos;re at a point of view of the importance of time when they evolved to mehrzeller-organismen .
so we are the amöben and we can &apos;t quite even do quite a different , what to hell is actually the most advanced .
we are in the middle of that übergangpunkt .
but i really think that after us , something comes out .
i think it &apos;s very hochmütig about us that we are going to be the results of evolution .
and i think we all are part of the creation of what &apos;s going on .
well , the lunch is before , and i think here now , before i &apos;m going to go anywhere .
my story starts in the office , about two years ago .
i was under the sternenhimmel mukhtiar ali in the desert .
we talked about nothing has been changed since the time of the ancient indian epos . &quot;
if we wanted to go back to a car and schwirrten over the sky .
now we &apos;re going to do that with the airplanes .
at the time , when the great indian kriegerprinz was durst , he took a bow , a bow , a schoss in the floor and water .
now we &apos;re going to do this with bohrern and machines .
we came to the conclusion that magic magic and magic were replaced by machines .
and that was really sad .
i got something fear .
it was very afraid that i could lose the ability to lose the sunset , and without any guesses of my friends .
i thought that technology can make magic possible and not kill .
when i was a little girl , my grandfather sent me his little silberne taschenuhr .
this piece of a piece of 50 years was taken the magischste thing to me .
she became a goldener access to a world of pirates and verunglückter ships and to my imagination .
i came up with that , as though our commitment clocks clocks and i &apos;m laughing with dreaming .
they were going to be inspired by the rest of it .
and so i went to the world of technology to see how i could use to become magic .
with 16 , i started to illustrate books .
when i saw the ipad , i saw it as a device to storytelling , which is the reader of all around the world .
it can be , how we keep it .
it can know where we are .
it &apos;s very bilder and text and animation , sounds and touch .
they &apos;re still going to be more .
but what do we do with that ?
i &apos;m just going to go to khoya , a interactive app app .
here , &quot; the only thing your fingers is grounded in every light . &quot;
and so -- here is , &quot; this box belongs ... &quot; i write my name .
and a character in the book .
and again , a letter for me -- and i know , the ipad knows in gps , which i live in the middle of the world -- which is really a mich .
the child in me is about such a separate .
i &apos;ve talked about magic .
i don &apos;t mean , and kites , but the magic of childhood , the ideas that we all have children as children .
and i was always talking to you .
so you have to put the ipad down here and the fireflies .
and the approach to the world &apos;s book .
another idea that i &apos;m fascinated by a child , that a whole galaxy can be a whole galaxy .
and so , therefore , every book and every world , a little murmel that i &apos;m able to take here here in the device .
and this is a map .
fantasybücher fantasybücher had been maps , but these cards were static .
this map is growing and leuchtet and the orientierung of the book .
it also shows to other people .
i go to this .
it &apos;s also important to create something that is a very zeitgemäß , and also very zeitgemäß .
these are the apsaras .
we all have all of feen and nymphen , but how many people do outside india know their indian colleague , the apsaras ?
the poor apsaras were thousands of years in indras , in a old muffigen book .
and we bring them back in a daily history for children .
a story that looks with new affairs , like the umweltkrise .
for the subject , a big issue of the last 10 years is that children in their dorm , to their own computers , no , with no .
but now , with mobile technology , we can apply our children into the natural world .
in a interaction of the book , you get to a search , you have to go and learn with the camera of the brain of the brain of the brain of the brain .
as a kid i had collections of stöckern , stones , kieseln and muscheln .
they don &apos;t want to do that .
this is wird zurückgebracht . you have to go to a chapter a photo of a flower and to mark .
in a different chapter you have to have a piece of baumrinde fotographieren and markieren .
so , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you can actually put digital collection that you can put online .
a child in london shows a fuchses and says , &quot; oh , i have a fox . &quot;
a kid in india says , &quot; tonight i saw a beautiful . &quot;
this creates a kind of social network around a digital collection of photographs that you actually got .
there &apos;s a variety of opportunities to magic and technology to connect with each other .
in the next book , we &apos;re going to have a interaction with the video of the brain and through augmented reality , a animation of the things that &apos;s on a plant in front of the house .
at one point , the screen with the leaves .
you have to make the sound of the winds , they blow and the rest of the book .
we all move to a world where the technology of technology is coming in and technology and technology .
we use the energy of the sun .
we are going to teach our children and we create closer to the natural world and the magic and the love of our childhood medium , and the love of our childhood medium , of a story .
thank you .
this is really a außerordentliche honor for me .
i spend most of my time with people in untersuchungshaft , prisons or todeszellen .
i spend most of my time with the socially weakest in the sozialbausiedlungen and places that there are very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very ,
here &apos;s too ted and listening to hear what &apos;s a lot of power .
in the short time , there was one of one : ted has a identity .
you can say things that are the world &apos;s impact .
and sometimes , when something comes over ted , it gets a meaning and strength that wouldn &apos;t have otherwise .
i say that , because i think identity is very important .
we &apos;ve seen some amazing presentations .
i think we learned that the words of a neuron , but the words of a dedicated engagierten are meaningful .
and as a doctor , you can do good , but as a fürsorglicher doctor , but you can do more .
and so i want to talk about the power of identity .
i didn &apos;t have the way in my work as a lawyer .
i learned the grandmother from my grandmother .
i was in a family , a traditional afroamerikanischen household who was inspired by a matriarchin , and this matriarchin was my grandmother .
she was a taffe , strong woman , she had to know .
she had the last word in every familienstreit .
she was also the place of many of the world &apos;s great family .
she was the daughter of a sklavenfamilie .
their parents were born in virginia as slaves .
she was born to be born and the experience of slavery may look very strong .
my grandmother was strong , but she was also considered .
when i met her , i came up to me and umarmte me .
and they realized that i could breathe , i could barely breathe . then they come up .
one or two hours later , if i looked at her , she came to me and said , &quot; bryan , you know , my own ? &quot;
and if i said no , i said , &quot; umarmte , &quot; umarmte them . &quot; yes , &quot; i got a ließ .
she was something that was going to be in their own way .
the only problem was that she had 10 children .
my mom was the most recent children .
sometimes , if i wanted to spend time with her , it was difficult to try to get their attention .
my cousins was all around everywhere .
i remember , i have to have eight or nine or nine , i went to a morning and i went to living rooms . all my cousins was around .
my grandmother &apos;s sitting on the end of the zimmers and i felt like .
first i thought that was a game .
i looked at her and she was smiling , but they looked very seriously .
so , this went to me , 15 , 15 minutes . they were staring at and came up to me , and i said , &quot; come , &quot; come , &quot; come , &quot; come , &quot; come , &quot; come , &quot; come , &quot; come , &quot; come , &quot; come , &quot; come , &quot; come , &quot; come , and i &apos;m going to
i remember being a little yesterday .
i never forget it .
she took me to the outside and she said , &quot; i &apos;m going to tell you something , but you have to promise to promise you don &apos;t . &quot;
i said , &quot; well , grandma . &quot;
she said , &quot; ehrenwort ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
she sat down and looked at me . she said , &quot; i want you to see that i &apos;m going to see you . &quot;
she said , &quot; i guess you &apos;re a bit special . &quot;
she said , &quot; i guess you can do anything you want to do . &quot;
i &apos;ll never forget that .
then she said , &quot; you &apos;ve got to ask me three things , bryan . &quot;
i said , &quot; ok , grandma . &quot;
she said , &quot; first of the first thing i will ever stay on your mom . &quot;
she said , &quot; your mom is my baby and you have to promise with promise you care about them . &quot;
i was my mom , so i said , &quot; yes , i &apos;ll do that . &quot;
then she said , &quot; you know , &quot; i said , &quot; next , &quot; next to me , you &apos;re always going to do the right thing . &quot;
i thought , &quot; yes , yeah . i promise it . &quot;
finally , you said , &quot; the last thing you have to do , is that you never have to be able to get the alcohol . &quot;
well , i was nine years old and so i said , &quot; yes , yeah . &quot; i promise it . &quot;
i grew up on the country , in the old , rural south , rural south and i have a brother who &apos;s older and a year sister .
when i was about 14 or 15 , came home one day , and brought this sixpack beer with my sister and i went to us in the forest .
we just alberten there .
then he took a closed beer , and i got my sister one of a time , and she took me and then she &apos;d be able to see her one .
i said , &quot; no , no , no . &quot; ok . &quot; i don &apos;t want a beer . &quot;
my brother said , &quot; well , you know , &quot; well today we are doing this , you know , you know , all we do .
i had what i had , and you know , trink beer . &quot;
i said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to go . &quot;
my brother at me .
he said , &quot; what is going on with you ? well , trink . &quot;
then he looked at the face and said , &quot; oh no , you don &apos;t even know about you about the conversation of entertainment ? &quot;
i said , &quot; what are you talking about ? &quot;
he said , &quot; i &apos;ve been told to all which is that they are . &quot;
i was devastated .
i &apos;m going to give you something .
i should not do that .
this is perhaps perhaps öffentlich .
i &apos;m a 52 age , and i &apos;m gestehe that i never ever had a drop of alcohol .
i &apos;m not saying that because i think it &apos;s a tugendhaft , i say , because identity does .
when we create the right way of identity , we can create the people around us , they don &apos;t believe .
we can get them to do things that you thought they didn &apos;t .
of course , my grandmother would say , they &apos;re doing something special .
my grandfather was during the prison school teacher .
my uncle died of alkoholinduzierten diseases .
and they believed that this is the issues we care about .
i tried to say something about our justizsystem .
unlike 40 years ago .
were 300,000 people in haftanstalten and in prison .
today , it &apos;s 2.3 million .
the united states has the highest world today .
seven million people on the left or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
i think , after all , our world changed fundamentally changed .
in socially , and black parts of the population population population , despair and hopelessness , because of this changes .
one of three copies of three male zwischen between 18 and 30 , in a way , in the prison , in the prison , on the left or mit strafaussetzung .
in urban communities in the country -- from los angeles above a few , they &apos;re in the prison , in the prison , in the prison , in the prison , in the prison , in the same way , or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
our system is not just the energy by the issues that are doing with rassenzugehörigkeit , it &apos;s also defined by poverty .
we have a justizsystem , which they treated much better when they &apos;re rich and guilty are being unschuldig .
wealth , not beeinflusst the outcome .
but still we seem to be pleased with it .
one policy from fear and anger has taught us that these problems are not our problems .
we lost the contact .
i think that &apos;s interesting .
there &apos;s a couple of hochinteressante developments .
my home is actually dauerhaft the wahlrecht when they &apos;re going to get charged .
and today , in alabama , have been 34 percent of the male black population , lost their wahlrecht .
we prognostizieren that in 10 years , the quote of the edits of the brain stem cells , the verabschiedung of the brain stem , the verabschiedung of the wahlrechtsgesetzes .
silence is ohrenbetäubend .
i vertrete children .
many of my favorite new are very young .
the united states of america are the only country in the world , the dreizehnjährige children are convicted in prison .
in this country , there &apos;s a kinder haftstrafen haftstrafen haftstrafen haftstrafen haftstrafen haftstrafen .
we &apos;ve got a lot of a lot of things .
the only country of the world .
i vertrete people in todeszellen .
the question of death is a interesting question .
we believe that the real question is : it &apos;s got a human being deserve to die for a ihm crime ?
that &apos;s a very simplistic question .
you can also think about it , depending on how we see our identity .
the other is not , is , someone &apos;s a crime of death , but we have it deserves it ?
i think that &apos;s fascinating .
the death penalty in america is defined by error .
nine people we &apos;ve executed , we come from one that we have been unschuldig for innocent , the entlastet and the death rate .
a amazing fehlerquote . one of nine innocent .
i think that &apos;s fascinating .
we would never make somebody with a plane when 9 airplanes , the ones that went out .
but somehow we do it , from that problem .
it &apos;s not our issue .
it &apos;s not our burden .
not our fight .
i talk a lot about these questions .
i talk about race and the question whether we &apos;re right .
and it &apos;s exciting , because i &apos;m going to do my students now , i talk about slavery .
i talk about terrorism , the time against the end of the rekonstruktion , until the dawn of the year .
we don &apos;t really know much about it .
but for the sake of terror , it was a time of terror .
people were scared of vor in many areas , they have been afraid of vor , and they were afraid of vor , and they were afraid of vor , and they have had been afraid of vor , and they have had been afraid of vor , and they have had been afraid of vor , which is a lot of places like this .
or before bombs .
it was the fear of the terror that you live their lives .
these elderly people come to me and say , &quot; mr , &quot; mr , &quot; mr , stevenson , stevenson , stevenson , stevenson , sie , they talk about , we first to say that we first to do in history in history in history , after 9 / 11 . &quot;
they say , &quot; no , say , &quot; no -- you say , the people we grew up with that . &quot;
and after terrorism , of course , the rassentrennung and decades of the rassistisch and the jahrzehnte motivierten and apartheid .
and yet , there &apos;s a dynamic charge of the time we don &apos;t like to talk about our problems .
we &apos;re not like to talk about our story .
and that &apos;s why we don &apos;t really understand what meaning our actions were in the context of context .
we &apos;re all kinds of power .
we can create new kinds of tensions and conflict .
it &apos;s hard to talk about race , and i think that &apos;s what &apos;s we don &apos;t care about the truth and reconciliation .
in south africa , people understood that the aid community is not to overcome to overcome without the willingness to truth and reconciliation .
even after the genocide in rwanda , not in the world , but not in this country .
i have some talks in germany , at germany , the death .
it was fascinating because one of the scientists was looking at my talk , and she said , &quot; you know , it &apos;s profoundly profoundly so profoundly , you know , it &apos;s a little bit like that . &quot;
he said , &quot; in germany , there are no death .
and of course , they never have more . &quot;
it was silence . then , &quot; we said , &quot; well , &quot; we ever said , &quot; well , &quot; we ever have ever been able to kill the systematic killing people .
it would be gewissenlos us , consciously and gezielt people . &quot;
i thought about it .
how would it feel in a world where the german state of people hinrichten hinrichten , especially if there &apos;s a lot of jewish viele .
it would be unerträglich .
it would be gewissenlos .
and yet , here in this country , in this country , in the states of the old südens , we &apos;re going to see people -- here is the risk of the old age , and here is the risk of the old age , and here is the risk of the old black , the most famous black black and the victim -- in the same time ,
and yet there are these mental contagion .
i think our identity is threatened .
if we don &apos;t allow us to do with these heavy topics , they are the positives and wonderful things .
we love innovation .
we love technology and creativity .
we love entertainment .
but ultimately , these realities are leid of suffering , abuse , ausgrenzung .
i &apos;m interested in making it both .
because we &apos;re talking about it that we need more hope to more engagement , more commitment to be able to make a complex world .
for me , for me , for me , for me , for me , this is the time , and to talk about the poor , the ones that will never be at ted .
but also , thinking about a way that fits in our own lives .
we all have to do things that we can &apos;t see .
we do that . so we &apos;re also doing so much about the discovery .
innovation , creativity , creativity , and development , not just our heads .
they come from ideas that will be driven by the persuasion of our hearts .
it &apos;s this kopf-herz-verbindung , which i think it &apos;s not just open to be open to be open for all the bright and begeisternden and begeisternden and auch things , but also for dark and problematischen .
vaclav havel , who &apos;s great tschechische politicians once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot; once said , &quot;
&quot; when we were to the oppression , we wanted to do anything , we wanted to do anything , but what we needed most needed was hope , a mental illness that will be able to break out of the bereitschaft places , and to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to
and that &apos;s where that &apos;s an core of the core of what i believe is that the ted-gemeinschaften must have to get engaged .
there is no way to design technology and design that allows us to be able to be human , and we can &apos;t even have eyes and ears for poverty , and we injustice .
i want you to warn you . this kind of identity is very much more of us when we don &apos;t think about it .
it &apos;s going to touch them .
when a young lawyer , i hatt rosa parks , rosa parks , rosa parks , meeting , to meet , and gathering parks , and gathering , to meet the big privilege , and gathering , to meet the big privilege .
and the parks of the day came back to montgomery , where they were going back to montgomery , where they were two of their elders from the elders of their elders friends , johnnie carr , who had frauen diese , diese carr , who had frauen , a white , whose husband , clifford durr , dr. king vertrat .
so these women are just bored .
and then , in the rief , she said , &quot; bryan , woman &apos;s coming into the city .
do you see , and then listening ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; yes , very , really . &quot;
she said , &quot; and what are you doing when you are here ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m going to go back . &quot;
and i went to the only thing .
it was always so inspiring , so beflügelnd .
one day i was sitting there , and after a few hours to frau me to tell us , &quot; well , say , &quot; well , you say , &quot; well , say , &quot; well , say , &quot; well , say , &quot; well , say , &quot; well , say , &quot; well , say , &quot; well , say , &quot; well , say ,
what do they try to do ? &quot;
i started with my usual talk .
i said , &quot; we &apos;re trying to start injustice injustice .
wr people who help innocent innocent .
we want to fight the other and discrimination in the strafvollzugssystem combat .
we want to abschaffen without bedingte strafaussetzung for children .
we want to do something about the death rate .
we want to get the number of spiders .
we want to do masseninhaftierungen . &quot;
i thought my usual talk , and then she looked at me and said , &quot; mhmm . &quot; mhmm . &quot;
she said , &quot; it &apos;s going to be very , very tired . &quot;
then , lehnte carr came to me , he puts a finger on my face and said , &quot; and so they have to be very , very tapfer . &quot;
and that &apos;s why i should be tapferer .
we have to ask our daily challenges of asking : these problems , that &apos;s that .
because ultimately , our humanity , from our humanity humanity .
in my work , i learned things .
i learned a couple of simple things .
we all have more than the worst thing we ever did .
i think that &apos;s true people on the planet .
if somebody &apos;s lying , he &apos;s not just a liar .
if somebody assumes it , he doesn &apos;t hear it , he &apos;s not just a burglar .
even who kills someone , is not just a killer .
and because that &apos;s what it is a fundamental human dignity that has to respect the law .
i think also , in many parts of this country , and with safety of the earth , the opposite of poverty is unsustainable .
i don &apos;t think that .
i think that in many places , the opposite of poverty is .
and finally , i think , though it is so dramatic , and so beautiful and so forth , and so , we &apos;re not going to be on our technology so , not to things that we &apos;re developing , not to our intellect and mind .
finally , a society is not measured by how they were their rich and powerful and privilegierten , but it &apos;s about how they interact with the poor , the verurteilten , the inhaftierten .
because in this context , we start to grasp the very amazing things that makes us tick .
sometimes i am doing balance . a story for the end .
sometimes i &apos;m too too much .
i &apos;m going to go out , we all all .
sometimes these ideas are going to be able to be very important .
i vertrete these kids who are to very hard to be convicted .
i go into untersuchungsgefängnis and visits , who &apos;s 13 or 14 years old , and the other hand would be gericht .
then i ask myself , how could that happen ?
how can a judge somebody in something that he &apos;s not ?
the judge look at him as adults , but i see a kid .
so one night i stayed at a time and thought my kindness if a judge can turn us into something else , then he must have zauberkräfte .
right , bryan , the judge has zauberkräfte .
you should also be .
and because it was too late , and i couldn &apos;t really think i was , i started working on a pub .
i had a 14jährigen , poor black boys than just a police .
and i started to that one . the title said , &quot; my poor , 14jährigen black as a privilegierten , white topmanager , weißen topmanager . &quot;
in my 20s , i explained , the fehlverhalten and the police sowie .
there was a crazy line of that in this country is nothing more , more ovaries , that there are only no yet .
and the next morning , i woke up and i didn &apos;t know whether i was seeing this crazy thing about whether or he wrote that crazy or it was written .
and i didn &apos;t want him to say , but also the dish .
a few months , and i had just forget anything .
but i decided i chose my god , i have to go to the dismay and that crazy .
i stepped up , and she was really overwhelmed , katie .
so i was going to be .
and i thought that &apos;s so hard to see that painful .
finally , i went out of my car and i went to the dish .
when i was a staircase to court , the elderly was black man , the death of the dish .
when he looked at me , he came to me and said , &quot; who are you ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m a lawyer . &quot; he said , &quot; you &apos;re a lawyer ? &quot; you &apos;re a lawyer ? &quot; &quot; yes . &quot;
he came to me and umarmte me .
then he puts me to the ear .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m so proud of them . &quot;
and i have to say , there was a force .
it really meant something to me identity , identity , the ability to a community , a little bit of a community , to one of the hope .
well , i &apos;ll take a gerichtssaal .
once the judge saw , when the judge saw , the judge , as the judge , the judge , the judge me , as the judge saw , as the judge , the judge , the judge , the judge wonder , as the judge , the judge , the judge wonder , as the judge wonder me , as the judge , the judge wonder .
he said , &quot; mr. stevenson , &quot; mr. stevenson , &quot; in the world , &quot; « , &quot; mr. stevenson , &quot;
i said , &quot; yes . &quot; and then we started to discuss .
more people came in , just because they were angry , but they were angry , just because they were angry , just because they were angry , just because they were angry , just because they were angry , just because they were angry .
i wrote that crazy .
polizeibeamte kamen and büroangestellte and büroangestellte .
in the handumdrehen , the most famous of people who were angry , we talked about skin languages , talking about inequality .
i saw the janitors and down the janitors .
he &apos;d always seeing the window and could hear the whole tohuwabohu .
he went down and down .
and finally , this man came black man with a very besorgten gesichtsausruck in the gerichtssaal and sat straight behind me , almost on the verteidigungsbank .
and i announced the judge poses a break .
during the pause , a polizeibeamter , which was that the janitors was in the gerichtssaal .
this deputy ran on the elderly black hole .
he said , &quot; jimmy , what do you do in the gerichtssaal ? &quot;
the older black man stood up black , he looked at the deputy , he looked at me and he was saying , &quot; i &apos;m a plea to say , &quot; i &apos;m a plea to say , &quot; i lose the goal to say , &quot; i don &apos;t give them . &quot;
i &apos;m going to come to ted , because i believe that many of you have understood that the moral imperative of the universe is far more profitable , but that it &apos;s the justice .
we &apos;re not completely designed , unless we don &apos;t care about human rights and grundwerte .
that our survival survival has to survive every single matter .
we &apos;re using our visions of technology and design and design , entertainment and creativity , with humanity , for humanity , for humanity , for humanity , and justice .
and before , i want to see those of you who see the very , just say , lose you &apos;re the goal out of the eyes .
you &apos;ve got in this audience , this community has a obvious process of desire and a little bit about .
what can we do ?
bryan stevenson : well , there are ubiquitous everywhere .
if you live in california , there &apos;s a volksentscheid , where it &apos;s about to actually form a effort , which is from the geldstrom umzuleiten , who else in politics .
here , in california , for instance , you &apos;ll be able to get a billion dollars for the death cost billion dollars a billion dollars .
and yet , i didn &apos;t end up 46 percent of all tötungsdelikte nicht with a verhaftung .
there were no such aller of all vor .
there &apos;s a chance to do something .
this referendum will enable the money in more sicherheitskräfte and security .
i think all of you have been possibilities .
during the last three decades , the average community in america is immens .
this is actually a lot of the time , in a context of the u.s. inhaftierungszahlen .
what would you say someone ? &quot;
now , in fact , the number of gewaltverbrechen didn &apos;t really changed .
most of the masseninhaftierungen in this country didn &apos;t really found the class of the gewaltverbrechen .
it was the fehlgeleitete kreuzzug against drug .
so , therefore , the dramatic high pay for the gefängnisinsassen .
we have hinreißen from the rhetoric .
now we have to have &quot; drei-verstöße &quot; « , which people think always behind a fahrraddiebstahl , for theft of the theft , rather than the theft of the theft , rather than the theft of the victims , rather than the victims of the victims .
i think we need to do more to people who live victims of a straftat , not less .
and i think our current bestrafungsphilosophie are niemandem with that .
i think that &apos;s what we &apos;re going to do .
bryan , they &apos;ve actually got a saite for the schwingen .
they &apos;re a inspirational personality .
thank you to ted , thank you very much .
and the speaker : a death penalty mit with it .
there &apos;s two : famine 3 : spray in somalia , the police .
and four : mental kartelle : dangerous kreuzfahrtschiffe , sprecher .
there &apos;s six dead , right now .
same name : cyber-attacken 9 : cyber-attacken 9 : cyber-attacken 9 : cyber-attacken 9 : cyber-attacken 9 : cyber-attacken 9 : cyber-attacken , cyber-attacken .
different speakers : drogenkrieg .
recession . egypt .
crisis . death .
oh my god .
so , that &apos;s just a few of the clips i &apos;ve been doing over the past six months -- but it also had the last two days , or the last six years .
in fact , the media is prefer to show us seeing the negative topics because our mind is dealing with this topics .
and there &apos;s also a very good reason for that .
every second day every day , we &apos;ll start a lot more information than our brain ever .
and because we &apos;re doing nothing more important than our survival , the first one is the first thing to all the information for all the information that information is part of our temporallappens , the amygdala .
so the amygdala is our body , our gefahrendetektor .
it &apos;s actually , and the whole information information on the search for developing species in our environment .
so if we see the news , we prefer to try to think about the most important news .
and the old adage &quot; is very true , &quot; which is very true .
now , with all of our digital devices that we &apos;re going to see 24 days at all these negative news , it &apos;s not a miracle that we are pessimistic .
it &apos;s not a miracle that everybody thinks that it &apos;s going to be worse .
but perhaps this is not the case .
perhaps that &apos;s the reality .
perhaps the vast progress of progress that we &apos;ve been separated through a series of forces that we &apos;ve been able to do in the next three decades , a world of abundance .
now , i don &apos;t say we don &apos;t have a big problems -- the climate crisis , artensterben , wasser- and energieprobleme -- we &apos;ve been doing .
and as humans , we are much better to be able to get to the very long run , but they eventually .
let &apos;s see what we can do in the past century , so we can go to the development .
in the last 100 years , the average life expectancy than doubled that was in the inflation of the world &apos;s population .
child mortality has a tenth of a building .
and then , that the ernährungs- , elektrizitäts- transport- and kommunikationskosten around a ton of your brain .
steve pinker demonstrated that we currently have been living in a very peaceful time of life .
and according to charles kenny , the alphabetisierungsquote of 25 percent of 25 percent of 25 percent of the year of 80 percent .
we live in a really extraordinary time .
and many people forget this .
and we &apos;re changing our expectations of our expectations .
in fact , we &apos;re redefining poverty .
now , what they think is that a great deal of americans who live under the poverty of poverty , water , water , toilets , the refrigerators , the refrigerators , the , , mobiltelefonen , mobiltelefonen , mobiltelefonen , mobiltelefonen .
the richest capitalists of the last century , the imperatoren of the earth could never have to solche the luxusgüter .
the basis for a lot of it , and that grow expotentiell .
my dear friend ray kurzweil has shown us that every tool that &apos;s going to be based on the information that we &apos;re going to address information , and the preis-performance-quotient all 12 , 12 , 12 , 12 .
that costs the mobile phone in their bag about half a million times less than a supercomputer supercomputer from the &apos; 70s .
now look at this curve .
it &apos;s moore &apos;s law for the last hundred years .
you see two things on this curve .
first , how do you manage to be a way -- in good times like , krieg , and peace , recession , depression and hochkonjunktur .
this is the result of the mediterranean computers that are called the economies computers .
they tend to be slowed for the big problems .
and also , despite their logarithmic on the left side , they &apos;re going to get involved .
so the growth itself .
and on that curve , on the back of moore &apos;s law law , we find a number of extraordinary technologies that all have been available .
&quot; cloud-computing , &quot; something that &apos;s called &quot; infinite-computing &quot; nennen , sensors and networks , robots that enable the personal production on our planet , synthetic biology , synthetic biology , synthetic biology , synthetic biology , vaccination , vaccination , vaccination , vaccination and artificial intelligence .
how many of you have the victory of ibms supercomputer called &quot; risk ? &quot;
that was the same .
i have the newspaper , and i could find the best headlines i could find .
i love this : &quot; watson menschlichen human opponents . &quot;
&quot; risk , &quot; is not a simple game .
it &apos;s about the language of language .
imagine that this artificial intelligence could be provided every owner of a mobiltelefones .
four years ago , i started ray kurzweil and i &apos;m here at ted a new university called &quot; university university .
we bring our students all these technologies , with some focus on how these are used to solve the great challenges of humanity .
and every year we asked the students , businesses , products and services that could be able to live in a decade positive of people .
think about it that a group of students now is the lives of billions of people today .
thirty years ago this ridiculous .
today we can have dozens of thousands of businesses that we &apos;ve done this .
if i think it &apos;s a way of creating abundance , i mean , i don &apos;t mean a life of every single planet ; it &apos;s about to create a life of opportunities .
it &apos;s about creating knappen goods from small-scale goods .
it &apos;s actually kontextbezogen , and technology is a ressourcen kraft force .
here &apos;s a example .
this is the story of napoleon iii. in the middle of the 18th century .
he &apos;s the guy .
he has king of siam zum for dinner .
soldiers soldiers got silber-besteck soldiers himself , napoleon himself .
the king of siam , however , aluminium-besteck .
he was at that time that the most valuable nuclear weapons on the planet , more valuable than gold and platin .
this is the reason that the dome of the ocean has been described from aluminum &apos;s aluminum .
although aluminium percent of the erdmasse &apos;s mind , it doesn &apos;t get a purely metal .
it &apos;s becoming through oxygen and silikate .
but then the technology of the developed developed was developed and made machte so cheap , we use it with our bodies .
and then let &apos;s look at this analogy .
we think of energieknappheit today .
ladies and gentlemen , we live on a planet with more energy than we consume .
16 terawatt energy every year of all the time minutes on the ground .
it &apos;s not about the side of the problem .
there &apos;s good news .
in this year , you have to take the cost of india in india , for 50 percent of the diesel-stroms of diesel-stroms -- 8.8 rupees , rupien rupees in the world -- 8.8 rupees in the world .
the cost of solar energy in the last year is about 50 percent .
last month has been a study that shows that until the end of the brain was gegenden areas of the sunny areas of the sunny areas per million cents per kwh , compared to 15 cents in the national cents in the national century .
and if we have a 3d energieüberschuss , we &apos;ll be able to have water in the middle .
let &apos;s talk about wasser-kriege .
remember , as carl sagan , it was a voyager-raumfahrzeug of the most saturn , when it was most vorbeigezogen , back in the earth ?
he took a famous photo . &quot; how did it ?
&quot; a pale blue . &quot;
because we live on a wasserplaneten life .
we live on a planet that has been growing up to 70 percent .
yes , there are 97,5 percent , two percent are vereist , and we &apos;re fighting to be able to get a fight percent of the water on the planet , but there &apos;s also hope .
and there are new technologies , not in 10 or 20 years , but now .
it &apos;s new nanotechnologien on the way , nano-materialien .
and from a conversation with dean ornish with dean ornish , one of the innovatoren of the time i &apos;m going to share with you something with you -- he gave me the permission -- his technolgie , who was to share with you -- it was the size of a kühlschranks in the studentenheim .
it can take a thousand clean clean water every day from different sources -- whether it &apos;s saltwater , all -- and all the less than two cents a gallon .
the vorsitzende vorsitzende has just been a eingewilligt , a big test-projekt with a hundred units of hundert units in developing countries .
and if all of you can go and i &apos;m very hopeful , then , will be able to apply this technology in 206 countries on the planet .
this is technologieunterstützte innovation that are today .
and we also have this in the world .
you know , we &apos;re going to reach the 70 percent of the population of the population in the age of 2013 .
and what they think about is that a massai-krieger with a mobile phone in the middle of kenya has been a better reagan for president years ago .
and if you &apos;re looking at your smartphone on google , they have more access to know more access than president clinton lived .
they live in a world that information and communications has to be able to predict how nobody could ever have ever been able to predict .
and it &apos;s still better , the things that you and i have a thousand dollars on a thousand dollars and music , libraries for medical care -- and the technology to medical imaging -- are now literally entmaterialisiert and cheaper in their mobile phone .
and the best thing is , what is probably what we &apos;re doing in health care .
last month , i had the pleasure of the so-called genannten with the so-called genannten , &quot; $ 10 million qualcomm x prize . &quot;
we &apos;re all going to take teams around the world , all of these technologies in a cell phone , that you can talk with the device that it can talk with the device you can talk to the device you can get reinhusten or his blutwerte .
and to get to win , you have to get a better diagnosis of a team of physicians as a team of medical .
so , imagine this device . in the middle of a developing country , where there are no doctors , but 25 percent of the krankheitslast and 1.3 percent of staff in the health care of staff .
if this device is a rna- or dna-virus , who &apos;s not known to the fourth and verhindert in front of their local .
but now the biggest power that makes us a world of the product .
i call them &quot; the &quot; the &quot;
the whites lines .
we just released the 7-milliarden-marke .
and only by the way , the biggest absicherung against a population is a better upbringing and nutrition throughout the world .
in 2010 , we had just under two billion people online connected .
so we &apos;ve got voraussichtlich from two billion internetnutzer .
three billion new minds of which we &apos;ve never heard before , are global communications .
what do these people ?
what are they going to do ? what will you desire ?
and instead of the creative mode , i &apos;m seeing a great economic economic history of history .
these people represent two million dollars that are going to be in the global economy .
and they &apos;ll be able to be able to get through the use of the tricoders , and they will save better to the opportunity to be able to get 3d printers and &quot; and thereby , they &apos;re going to be able to make the opportunity to be able to make 3d printers and more productive than ever before .
so , three billion growing , healthy , gesunde , productive members of the menschengemeinde ?
how would it be with a sentence of new , never stimmen .
how about it to the oppressed , wherever they are , a voice to make a voice to make things and change , for the first time ?
what are these three billion people ?
how about beiträgen that we can &apos;t see the world .
one of the things i learned from the x prize is that small teams are being inspired by passion and focus , extraordinary things that could be able to come through businesses and governments only governments in the past .
i want to talk to a story that i really enthusiastic me .
there &apos;s a program that &apos;s probably already known .
it &apos;s a game that &apos;s the monster .
it was taken in seattle .
and it &apos;s a game where people can take a sequence of amino acids in order to study how the protein is going to evolve .
the first thing about the behavior we can predict the structure and function .
and this is very important in the medizinforschung .
so far , this was a problem for supercomputers .
and this game was inspired by playing .
and it &apos;s hundreds of thousands of thousands of people who play the game online .
and it showed that today is the human financial pattern that protein protein is the protein .
and when they came up and looked at the best part of the world , not a mit-professor , it was not a mit-professor , it was a woman who was a assistentin in a reha-klinik and night at night the best one in the world .
ladies and gentlemen , what i trust me about is the worst of trust in our future , is the fact that we have more than individuals today to ask us the big challenges of our planet .
we &apos;ve access to exponential technology .
we have the passion of a diy-innovatoren .
we have the capital of the techno-philanthropen .
and we have three billion new minds that we can work online , to do the new challenges , and to do that , what &apos;s required .
we expect a few extraordinary .
thank you .
i think we have to have a verändernswertes blade of medical culture .
and i think it &apos;s a medical bird and i &apos;m a medical person .
and maybe i &apos;ve been long enough in the business than that i could take a piece of my own falschen aufzugeben to this .
but before i get to the point of my talk , let &apos;s start with a little bit of baseball .
hey , why not ?
we are the saisonende near and move on the world .
we all love baseball , right ?
baseball is full of great statistics .
and there are hundreds of you .
&quot; moneyball &quot; s soon and it &apos;s about statistics and to use these kinds of baseball baseball aufzustellen .
i &apos;m going to focus on a statistics from the future i hope you &apos;ve heard about .
it &apos;s the durchschnittsleistung of the schlägers .
we &apos;re talking about a 300 300 , when a bat was going to fix the entire 300 300 .
that means that the player is safely about 10 from 10 .
it does the ball of the außenfeld beat , he &apos;s coming up , he &apos;s not going to be able to get caught , and who has tried to throw the ball to the first base , it hasn &apos;t done in safety , and the läufer was in safety .
10th 10 to the 10th of 10 dollars .
do you know how to do a 300ter in major league baseball ?
well , really good , maybe a all-star .
do you know how to call a 400ter ?
this is somebody who &apos;s been sicher in the rest of 10 .
legendär -- how ted williams legendär -- the last major league baseball baseball baseball baseball baseball baseball baseball baseball baseball baseball baseball baseball of his während at the last time .
let &apos;s go back to my own world , i think i &apos;m a lot of a lot of feeling or maybe a little less probably , after you .
they assumed you have a blinddarmentzündung and you &apos;ll be able to a operateur überwiesen , whose durchschnittsleistung &apos;s 400 400 .
does not work , right ?
assuming they live in a certain remote area , and they have a geliebten herzkranzgefäßen and her geliebten überweist of their hausarzt diesen that dessen diesen of this zu , whose durchschnittsleistung diesen diesen this zu dessen diesen .
but you know what ?
it &apos;s a lot better . it &apos;s on the most part .
and they proposes a 257 257 .
somehow .
but i &apos;m going to give you a question .
what do you think about as a kardiologen or a nurse or a nurse , a geburtshelfer , a rettungsassistenten .
1,000 , very good .
the truth is that nobody can see anything in the medicine , which is a good surgeon or a catcher .
what we do is we &apos;re going to be able to make me including a eingeschlossen , in the world with the claim .
never make a mistake , nobody does not make it on the details of how this might be done .
and that &apos;s the message i have in the community .
i was a zwanghaft student student .
in high school , once a mitschüler , i would learn that brian was goldmann for a bluttest .
and it was also that .
and i learned in my little dachstube at the end of the most general general hospital hospital , unweit of here .
i learned everything .
in my anatomievorlesung , i learned the origins and ausläufer every muskels , every zweig branch of every every every every every every every single arterie , obskure and ordinary differentialdiagnosen .
i actually knew the differentialdiagnose um azidose azidose azidose azidose .
and the very time i could get more and more knowledge .
and i was good to go with cum laude .
and i left the point of the world i &apos;m going to know all the time i knew all of you knew , or at least as much as as as as as as i could as close as much as close as much as i &apos;m making the senses for the mistakes .
and it &apos;s going to be a time , until i met the printers .
i residierte in a toronto hier in toronto than i was in the notfallabteilung of the hospital .
at that point , i was the kardiologischen state of dienst service .
and it was my mission when the notfallpersonal kardiologischen calls advice was sought to study the notfallpatienten .
and feedback of my favorite oberarzt .
i was going to be mentally and was in atemnot .
and when i was her , you sounds sounds .
and when i chest her chest with the stethoskope abhörte , i could make a knackendes sound on two pages , which told me that they suffered herzinsuffizienz .
this is a state in the heart of the heart , rather than all the blood flow , puts a part of the cycle of light , and then , this particular happens , that &apos;s where the kurzatmigkeit .
and that was not difficult to stellenden .
i hired them , and i made me the treatment .
i gave her aspirin . i was her medicine to take the pressure from heart .
i gave her medicine , we call diuretics water , water , so that they were liquid liquid .
and over a five- of one year , you know , they started to feel better .
i felt good .
and i made my first mistake ; i sent them home .
actually , i made two mistakes .
i sent them home with my lunch .
i didn &apos;t remember the writings , and i was what i should have had to have had to have my oberarzt with him , so that he &apos;d been in my oberarzt so that he had a chance to make a own picture .
and he knew he would be able to get the zusätzliche information .
i may actually do it with a lot of reason .
maybe i wanted to be the most pessimistic doctor .
perhaps i wanted to take successful and so much as a responsibility that i was so handelte and so i could make my patients without having to worry about it without having to worry about it without having to worry about it without having to worry about it without having to worry about it without having to worry about it without having to worry about it without having to worry
my second mistake was worse .
and so i &apos;d sent them home , i was going to go to a sanitary pad in me trying to say , &quot; oh , no good idea . &quot;
in fact , it was so much to me so much that i asked the nurse to go to the women &apos;s printer , &quot; believe that if you go home , &quot; believe that &apos;s home . &quot;
and the nurse was going to do it , &quot; yeah , i think it &apos;s going to go well . &quot;
i remember being yesterday .
so i went to the entlassungspapiere and a krankenwagen and rettungsassistenten and brought them home .
and i went back to work .
the rest of day , i had this nagende feeling in my stomach .
but i worked working on .
and at the end of the day i grabbed my stuff and went to the parking lot of the day to drive home with the car home , when i did something i did .
i went through the notfallabteilung on my way home .
and there was another nurse , not the sister , who had seen the same , but one three words to me , and i got to give up those three words , most of the most notfallärzte that i know .
other people , they were terrified of that , but the most fundamental theory is very , because we see the patients just so close .
the three words : remember ?
&quot; remember the patient , the patient you &apos;re doing for home ? &quot;
the nurse was driving .
&quot; so she &apos;s back , &quot; she said to that particular tonlage .
so she was so back .
she was back and die .
about a hour after you , after i was able to take home and the family rief , and they brought back to the family with a blood pressure of 50 , which is a dangerous schockzustand .
she didn &apos;t grow up and was blue .
the notfallpersonal of all had the strands .
they gave her blutdruckerhöher .
they start putting them at the beatmungsmaschine .
i was shocked to the insides of zerrüttet .
and i was making this rollercoaster because they came up to the intensivstation , and i hoped that she would recover .
and after two , three days , three days , she was never going to fall again .
she had a nicht gehirnschaden erlitten .
her family .
and the course of the next eight or nine days , they go out the geschehenen .
they go to the neuten , they go to the neuten , woman , a woman , a mother and grandmother .
you say , you know , you never want to get the name of the names of the versterben .
and that was the first time i learned this .
i made the next few weeks , and i learned the first time i &apos;ve been studying the first time , the ungesunde shame that have been taught -- i felt alone , i was alone , but the kind of gesunder shame that you &apos;re going to talk to the colleague about the colleague .
you know all the things that you have to do when you get a secret of the best friend , though that one is a auf einschwor and you can put a terrible discussion , if you get caught and you can do a terrible discussion , if you can never get the bad and you &apos;re schwört that you never want to do a mistake .
if you go to wiedergutmachung and the mistakes again .
this is the kind of lehrreicher shame .
the other way i &apos;m talking about is the one that has a innersten sick .
it &apos;s the one that doesn &apos;t do what you &apos;ve done is , but you know , you &apos;re bad .
and that was what i felt .
and it wasn &apos;t on my oberarztes , he was very gentle .
he was talking about the family and i &apos;m sure that he was able to be able to be able to go to a doctor .
but i posed this questions .
why i didn &apos;t ask the oberarzt ? why do i get them home ? why did i get home ?
and then i think of my worst moments , how could i make a dumb mistakes ?
why am i doing medicine ?
slowly slowly , but certainly it &apos;s been expanding .
i started to feel better .
and then on a bewölkten day , there was a hole in the clouds and the sun broke down and i can feel better again .
and i was with me that if i was my efforts to perfection and never again a mistake that the voice could be verstummen .
and they did .
and i worked working on .
and then it happened again .
two years later , i had to service in a kommunalen hospital , and i had a 25 year-old hospital , and i was begutachtete a 25 year-old man with gereiztem rachen .
it was a lot of the time and i was in .
he &apos;s got to go there .
i looked down in the rachen and it was a little bit of a little bit .
and i gave him a prescription for penicillin and sent him .
and even when he went out of the door he showed up his rachen .
two days later came to my next notfalldienst and my chefärztin asked me to her in her office .
and she said the three words you do ?
&quot; do you do that you go to the patient with the gereizten ? &quot;
it turned out he was a streptokokken-infektion .
he had a potentially disease called epiglottitis disease .
you can see that , but it &apos;s not a complete loss of the rachens , but it &apos;s not a fantastic atemwege and causes the most atemwege .
and fortunately , he died .
he got intravenöse antibotica and a half later .
and i went through the same tortur of shame and self-doubt , and i went through the same proportions to the work and again and again .
in a notfallschicht notfallschicht , i overlook a blinddarmentzündung übersehen .
there &apos;s a lot of a lot of what you have a lot of things to be particularly if you think that you &apos;re in a hospital that &apos;s going to take 14 patients per night .
in both cases i sent them home , and there was no imperfections in their treatment .
in a thought i &apos;d have nierensteine .
i ordnete the x-rays of the kidneys of the kidneys , when it was without a befund , my colleague at the wiedervorstellung of the patient &apos;s wiedervorstellung in the lower air and rief rief .
the other had strong diarrhea .
i ordnete fluide to him and asked him to be my colleague .
and he did that he was walking up with a verhärtung in the lower lower lower lower lower , he phoned the operateure .
in both cases , and it was going to be fine .
both cases , i &apos;m looking at me .
and i would tell you that my worst thing is to say that my worst mistakes only in the first five years , what many of my colleagues is decreasing , but total unsinn .
now , in my last five years .
same , stop and no .
here is the problem : if i don &apos;t talk to my mistakes and talk about them , if i can talk to the silent voice , which is really not , how can i share it with my colleague ?
how can i teach you my mistakes so that they don &apos;t actually see the same .
if i was in a room -- like now , i have no idea what you think about me .
when last time you heard about someone who owns the von of fehlschlag via fehlschlag ?
oh yes , you &apos;re going to go to a cocktail party and there may be a little bit of other people , but you &apos;re not going to talk to you about your mistakes .
if i filled into a room full of colleagues with colleague , and to tell you what i &apos;d told you about , i &apos;d be very likely to be able to tell you the end of the second story before you would take a joke , and they would forget a joke , they would change the subject .
and in fact , if i knew , or my colleague , that a orthopäde in my hospital would have been able to have the wrong leg , i think i had to see the eyes .
this is the system that we live in .
it &apos;s a totally verleugnung of mistakes .
it &apos;s a system in which there are two basic spots in the world -- the ones that make mistakes , and those of those people who don &apos;t have the limitation that with the worse and the ohne results .
it &apos;s almost a magic response as the antibodies that has a human connection .
and there is the idea that if we are seeing the ones that make mistakes out of medicine that we &apos;ve been a safe system .
but there are two problems .
in my first about 20 years , i met a personal medical study of medical error and wrong treatments to one of my first article i loved for the toronto star to my email , i was able to learn to my email , black kinds of life , &quot; writing .
and what i learned is that mistakes are absolutely unumgänglich .
we &apos;re working in a system where every day , you &apos;re either a false error in which a number of 10 medikationen either of a false medikationen or wrong dosiert , in the krankenhausinfektionen and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and more and
in this state of etwa mistakes , right ?
in the united states , the number of medicine has been 100,000 .
both are very strong , because we should not look at the problem , how we should .
and it &apos;s the crux .
in a krankenhaussystem krankenhaussystem in a krankenhaussystem , two three years , we can &apos;t keep up .
schlafmangel is ubiquitous .
we can &apos;t get rid of it .
we have a cognitive mistake that we can make a perfect krankheitsverlauf for a patient .
then i take the same patient with brustschmerz , and they take it easy to a slightly alkoholisierten breath of sharing and suddenly .
i don &apos;t take the same course .
i &apos;m not a robot ; i don &apos;t always do things .
and my patients are not cars ; they don &apos;t always tell me their symptoms to the same way .
all of these are the ones that are error .
so if you like this system , i was able to get the trouble , and all the fehlerbehafteten gesundheitsexperten , then you can &apos;t have left anymore .
and i know the most leier people who want to talk about their worst cases ?
in my van , &quot; white coat , &quot; black &quot; -- i said to say the habit to say , &quot; this is my worst mistake , &quot; i would like to say , &quot; this is my worst mistake , &quot; this is my worst mistake , &quot; which is , &quot; what about your mind , &quot; and then i &apos;ll show the microphone .
and then they extend their pupils , they &apos;re in front of the head , they look down and poke them , and start to tell you to their stories .
they want to tell their stories , they want to share their stories .
you want to be able to say , &quot; look , &quot; don &apos;t do not the same mistakes that i fabrizierte . &quot;
what you need is a environment that you can see .
what you need is a new medical culture .
and it starts with a doctor .
the new air is a human , knows to his humanity , they feel not proud of the humanity , but that &apos;s all of that all of this applies to learn that they can get .
she divides their experiences with others .
they &apos;re going to talk to the other one .
and they show other their mistakes on the way , not to bloßzustellen , but in a way , the way that all of us all benefit .
and they &apos;re working in a medical culture that recognizes that people are working with life with life , and if that &apos;s what happens , then you can also be used for time .
so that the system evolved to create a backups , which is actually making some mistakes to make it easier to create , and that &apos;s what makes me need to make the health care , to actually create the health , to create the health , to create the health , to create the health , to create the people like me , the mistakes and for people like
my name is brian .
i &apos;m a new definierte .
i am a human . i do mistakes .
i &apos;m das. das. , but i try to learn how to learn to others .
i don &apos;t know what she &apos;s going to do , but i can live .
so let me conclude with three of my own words , i remember .
i &apos;m going to talk about a tiny , little idea .
it &apos;s about veränderbare normwerte .
and because you can explain this idea in a minute , i &apos;m going to tell you about three stories , to use the time .
the first story of charles darwin , one of my heroes .
you know , he was 1835 here .
you might think that he &apos;s finken , but that &apos;s not true .
he actually knows the fish .
he described a very , very &quot; commonplace . &quot;
it was a zackenbarsch .
until the &apos; 80s , he was in great style .
now he &apos;s looking at the red list of the list of species .
so this story we have many times from the galapagos or from other places , it &apos;s not very special .
still , we &apos;ll still get the galapagos .
we still think they &apos;re originally .
the broschüren describe them still as a result .
what happened ?
the second story is another concept , the veränderbare taillenweite , verdeutlichen .
because i experienced it when i was growing up a lagoon in west-afrika .
i went to the world , because i grew up in europe and wanted to work in africa .
i thought , i could integrate .
and i got a bad job and i was convinced that i really didn &apos;t want me to be there .
it was my first sonnenbrand .
as you can see , the lagoon of palmen and a few bars .
there was buntbarsche from about 20 power , schwarzkinnmaulbrüter , a unterart of buntbarsche .
the fischgründe of these buntbarsche were very ertragreich and the fishermen lived good and it was very good at ghana .
when i was a year later , the fish was on the side of his height .
five centimeters .
they were genetically modified .
they were still fishes .
people still were happy .
and the fish also had been fortunate to be there .
so it has changed , and yet everything changed everything .
my third story of mine in the introduction of the einführung in southeast asia .
in the &apos; 70s -- more than the beginning of the 1960s -- förderte europe has been a lot of entwicklungsprojekte europe .
bedeutete countries that already already have 100 fish of this relatively relatively sense of time , the economic fishing ship , which is quite mutiara fuel , which is quite mutiara fuel , which is called mutiara fuel , heißt 4. .
and i drove that , and we made this erhebungen sea and particularly in the javasee .
we didn &apos;t have words for what we were there .
i know it was the reason of the ocean .
90 percent of our fangs were sponges , other animals that are connected to the bottom .
the biggest part of the fish , little dots go there on the rubble , the trümmerhaufen , korallenriff-fische .
basically , the reason of the sea and then became zurückgeworfen .
these pictures are extraordinary because the transition goes very quickly .
within one year , you go through a year , and then start with the commercial fishing .
the reason is changing . from this case -- a hard reason -- in this case -- a lot of the other reason or soft corals will be matschiger .
this is a dead .
they didn &apos;t eat , you &apos;d go away because they were dead .
once again , we started a leader .
she was not ertrunken .
then they wanted them , because you could eat them .
in fact , this mountain is about every time of fishermen , when they &apos;re in spaces , in which i never got to the other .
but it &apos;s not going to be dokumentiert .
we change the world , but we don &apos;t remember it .
we adapt our normwerte of new level and we call ourselves in the memory , which was there .
if you zoom it verallgemeinert , it &apos;s happening .
and on the y-axis , some good things : biodiversity , biodiversity , number of orca , the green , , the grün , the wasservorrat .
it &apos;s changing . it changes because of humans are the actions of their actions .
every generation look at the images that they were to be able to live their lives , and it &apos;s all of it .
the difference is called the loss .
but they don &apos;t take the previous losses .
it can be a sequence of changes .
and at the end of the end of the end of the end of the end of the end .
right now , now , the goal .
we want to get things that are gone or things that are not like you .
you could think that the problem is that the problem of people , as they lived in räuberischen societies , animals and they just finished a few generations , and they just had a generationen aware of what they had done .
because obviously , a animal that has a tier , first of all , once rarely , before it ausstirbt .
so you don &apos;t lose any more sophisticated .
you can always lose rare animals .
and so it &apos;s not as big loss .
we focus on the large animals and the sea are the big fish .
it &apos;s going to be rarer , because we &apos;re catching them .
with the time , little and we think that &apos;s the normwert .
the question is , why people will accept the symptoms .
now , because they don &apos;t know that it was once different .
of course , many people , scientists , confirm that it was really different .
it &apos;s going to confirm it because the evidence of how you can be vorlagen in a previous form , not as you would like to be able to get the evidence .
there is a little bit of the anecdote that the report of a kapitäns soundso , who &apos;s in that area of large fischvorkommen , not used , or not gewertet , not gewertet , because he &apos;s not &quot; scientific . &quot;
so we have the situation that people don &apos;t know the past , although we &apos;re living in love societies , because they don &apos;t want to be the sources of the past .
this shows the enormously big role that can play a marine game .
because through this , we basically come back to this past .
we can take the past , which is not understanding people , because the normwerte are haben and very low .
so , with that people who see a marine marine and the insight of the insight , that it allowed to allow their normwerte .
what about people who don &apos;t do that is because they don &apos;t have access to the people in the middle of the midwest ?
and i think the art and the movie and the movie things have been expected .
this is the simulation of the development bay .
a long time ago , 500 years ago .
and the farbtöne may remind you to &quot; get &quot;
if you think about &quot; when you think about why people were so touched by the number of so , so that &apos;s why people were so touched by the pocahontas-geschichte , why were you so berührt from the bilderwelt ?
because it &apos;s lost something that in a way that &apos;s lost in a way .
so my recommendation , the only one i &apos;m going to give you , &quot; i &apos;m going to get cameron , &quot; under water . &quot;
thank you .
in the &apos; 80s , in communist communist , you had to have to have a typewriter , that &apos;s the government .
they had to be a blatt with beispieltext from that typewriter .
the reason for this : the government could go back to where a text .
they found a paper with falschem gedankengut , they could be able to get the moon of this thought .
and we couldn &apos;t understand how to understand how someone could do something like this , and how much the nature of the nature would be .
in our own countries , we would never do something .
but if you &apos;re a new farblaserdrucker of the führenden of the führenden von of the führenden von and a page , then this page gelbe yellow gelbe on every page , in a pattern that can be the side of the page and her desktop .
this is what happens right now .
and that seems to be no one .
and this was a case in which way our own governments can make the technology , the citizens , the citizens .
and that &apos;s one of the three hauptquellen of the 1960s today .
let &apos;s see what &apos;s really happening on the world : we can split the attacks of categories .
we have three hauptgruppen .
there are online-kriminelle .
for example , this is mr. dimitry aus from kiew in the der .
and the more of online-kriminellen are very easy to understand .
these guys deserve money .
they use online-angriffe , to make a lot of money , a huge amount of money .
there are several known cases of online-millionären , multimillionären , who had their money through attacks .
this is wladimir tsastsin from tartu in .
that &apos;s alfred gonzalez .
stephen watts .
björn sundin .
they are matthew anderson , tariq al-daour and so on and so forth .
these people are too diverse , but they didn &apos;t have a erworben , by using money from our bankkonten , while we &apos;re also keylogger , or also keylogger , who have been collected in order to kill money from our bankkonten , while we have a infected computer online .
the u.s. intelligence agency vor vor , swiss schweizer the swiss konto of mr. jain , and on this one , waren million dollars when it was inverted .
mr. jain himself is unknown , the aufenthaltsort is unknown .
and i claim that there &apos;s no more likely to be victims of a online-verbrechens , as a matter of the real-world system .
and it &apos;s very obvious that this is just worse .
in the future , most of the crime are online .
the second-largest rate of the world we can see today are not through the money .
they &apos;re sort of something else , just about to a mind , or through your audience .
groups like anonymous are over the past 12 months and the sind on the field of online-angriffe .
so these are the three hauptangriffsgruppen : criminals that makes it the money because of the money of the money because of the money of the money because of the money of doing , like , the last group of nations are the governments that are the attacks .
there &apos;s been around as the von of diginotar .
it shows what happens when governments have their own citizens .
diginotar is a vollmachtszertifikat from the netherlands -- the one was that .
in the last autumn , it had been hacked .
somebody was done and had the system .
and last week , in a meeting with dutch regierungsvertretern , i was one of the senior looking at this group of the question , whether it possible for possible , that because of the people were died .
and his response was &quot; yes . &quot;
now , how die people in the age of a tool ?
diginotar is a zertifizierungsstelle .
they sell it .
what do you do with zertifikaten ?
well , a certificate needs , if you need a website to https , with ssl-verschlüsselten , for example .
now we all use them , or many of us , or many of us , or many of us , or a lot of us , or a lot of us , or a lot of us , or a lot of us , gmail ausländische in totalitären states like iran , where the local government can &apos;t trust us as local anbietern , and so that the local
can you yet , if you &apos;re in a foreign school in a foreign school , but when you &apos;re in a foreign school in the foreign direction .
zertifizierungsbehörde hacken and gefälschte ausstellen .
and that &apos;s exactly what happens in the case of diginotar .
how do it look like the arab spring and the things that are for instance ?
now , in egypt , the aufständischen in april 2011 , the headquarters of egyptian , and they found a lot of akten .
in these akten akten , a ordner .
and in this folder , notes in the u.s. service , company , the egyptian government had a few programs , which they were selling -- but in very common sense -- but he &apos;s got to be able to sell a few communication of the egyptian .
they had this program for the egyptian government for the egyptian government .
the firmenhauptquartier is right here .
so western governments are governments with hilfsmitteln governments with hilfsmitteln governments with hilfsmitteln governments , so that can make the gegen possible .
but western governments also governments itself .
for example , in germany , a couple of weeks ago , a few weeks ago , that was a trojaner , which was used by german regierungsvertretern to bespitzeln their own citizens .
if you &apos;re going to become a kriminalfall verdächtigt , it will be associated with security .
but today we are far beyond the world .
they start sending your internet connection .
they use how the staatstrojaner , to bespielen your computer with a trojaner , allowing them allowed to monitor their entire communication , their online-diskussionen abzuhören , their passwörter .
so if we think about things like this stuff , the obvious answer is the people &apos;s obvious answer is the people &apos;s bad , but it doesn &apos;t seem me because i &apos;m a braver citizen .
i don &apos;t have to worry about it ! &quot;
i have nothing to hide . &quot;
and that argument makes no sense .
privacy must be .
privacy is not going to debate .
it &apos;s not a choice between privacy and security .
it &apos;s a choice between freedom and control .
and as we now , in 2011 , our governments are like , our governments are , but every right that we &apos;re doing is , for all of them .
and we &apos;re going to redesign , we &apos;re going to start to rethink , we &apos;re going to have a government , an government that we may have been able to have in 50 years ?
these are the questions that we have to employ the next 50 years .
it may seem to be a bit of odd , but i &apos;m a big fan of betonblocksteinen .
the first betonblocksteine were made 1868 and entstammten an easy idea : module from cement with festgelegten , the engineering .
betonbausteine were very quickly , the most famous baueinheit in the world .
they brought us into the position , things that were larger than we were , building bridges , the brücken , a pebble after another .
basically , the most fundamental community was to become the building of our time .
almost a hundred years later , in 1947 , lego came out .
it was called &quot; the &quot; automatically stone stone . &quot;
and within a few years , zog lego in every household .
it &apos;s estimated that over 400 billion stones were produced -- or 75 rocks for every person on this planet .
they have to build beautiful houses , beautiful bridges or beautiful buildings .
lego it made it for everyone .
lego has been essentially the betonbaustein , the building the building the world , and it made a building block for our imagination .
in the meanwhile , in the same public &apos;s the same public health clinic , the next building .
the transistor was a small plastikeinheit of a world that led us from a world of the project , aufeinandergestapelten building blocks in the everything was going to be able to get rid of the whole .
like the betonblock , allows us to build the transistor , more productive , a pebble after another .
but there &apos;s a hauptunterschied : the transistor was just for experts .
i personally don &apos;t think that the building of our time is experts , and so i decided to change that .
eight years ago , i was at the media lab and i started to study this idea how to see the power of artists in artists and designers .
some years ago i started to develop a littlebits .
so let me show you how they work .
littlebits are electronic module who have a specific function .
they are vorgefertigt , light , clay , engine and sensor .
and the best thing is , they connect with magnets together .
so they can &apos;t do it wrong .
rocks are farbcodiert .
green is a ausgabe , blue is a stream , pink .
so all you have to do is a blue and a green whisper , and you can build very größere .
they add a blue one , and you can make light .
you can see a light switch , and so they have a little dimmer .
take the switch out of a pulsmodul , which is , and you have a little blinker of blinker .
so they put this buzzer for a zusätzlichen effect , and they have a lärmmaschine .
i &apos;m going to stop that .
about the simple play , actually quite a leistungsstark .
instead of making a program , you &apos;re going to get verdrahten or löten , allows them to program intuitive gestures .
so to slow down to the speed of the speed of the speed of the speed of the speed , just turn it up to this button and it makes the impulse or slow .
the idea behind is that it &apos;s a growing library .
we want to get any individual interaction in this world in a gebrauchsfertigen stone .
lights , pitches , solarelemente , motors , sollte .
we have littlebits an and you can see with them .
and it was an incredible experience .
the most part is , how do you start to understand the electronics that they &apos;re in understanding in the everyday state and they don &apos;t learn in school .
like a nachtlicht , it works , or why the doors were offenbleiben , or like a ipod on touch .
we &apos;ve also trained littlebits .
so we had no keinerlei with no such experience in electronic ways , the veterans began to play with littlebits .
here we see , with filz , paper and wasserflaschen , how geordie ...
a few weeks ago we had littlebits littlebits , and they commissioned a few designers who had no longer experience -- and they said , wood and paper -- and they said , &quot; do you do . &quot;
here &apos;s a example of a project that they made , a bewegungsgesteuerte konfetti-kanone .
but wait , this is really my favorite lieblings-projekt .
it &apos;s a hummer from play-doh , who &apos;s fear in the darkness .
for this nicht-ingenieure , it became a weiteres material , electronics , just a more material .
and we want to do this material for everyone available .
so littlebits open source .
you can go to the website , all the designvorlagen and you can make yourself .
we want to take the world of the creators , the inventor , the mitwirkenden , because this world , in which we live , these interactive world , we heard that interactive world .
so , pull up and start them to you .
thank you .
