GOEWERMENTSKENNISGEWING



DEPARTEMENT VAN HANDEL EN NYWERHEID



No. 								           ……………… 2009 



WET OP DIE NIE-PROLIFERASIE VAN WAPENS VAN GROOTSKAALSE VERNIETIGING, 1993 (WET NO. 87 VAN 1993) 





VERKLARING VAN SEKERE MISSIELTEGNOLOGIE EN VERWANTE ITEMS TOT BEHEERDE GOEDERE EN BEHEERMAATREËLS WAT OP SODANIGE GOEDERE VAN TOEPASSING IS 



Verklaring 

1.	Ek, Rob Davies, Minister van Handel en Nywerheid, kragtens artikel 13(1) van die Wet op die Nie-proliferasie van Wapens van Grootskaalse Vernietiging, 1993 (Wet No. 87 van 1993), en op aanbeveling van die Suid-Afrikaanse Raad vir die Nie-proliferasie van Wapens van Grootskaalse Vernietiging, verklaar hierby—



(a)	die goedere gelys in die Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) Equipment and Technology Annex, wat op 5 November 2008 bygewerk is, soos in die aanhangsel by hierdie kennisgewing in Engels aangehaal, tot beheerde goedere; 



(b)	die dienste met betrekking tot goedere vermeld in paragraaf 2(d) van hierdie kennisgewing tot beheerde goedere; en 



(c)	die onderdele tot beheerde goedere.



2.	Voorts—



(a)	verbied ek, ingevolge artikel 13(2)(a) van die Wet, die oordrag van Kategorie 1-produksiefasiliteite gelys in die aanhangsel by hierdie kennisgewing;



(b)	bepaal ek, ingevolge artikel 13(2)(b) van die Wet, dat die invoer, uitvoer, heruitvoer of deurvoer (ook oorlaai) van die beheerde goedere gelys in die aanhangsel by hierdie kennisgewing, slegs mag plaasvind kragtens 'n permit wat deur die Raad uitgereik is; 



(c)	bepaal ek, ingevolge artikel 13(2)(c) van die Wet, dat die Raad 'n eindgebruiker- of eindgebruiksertifikaat kan vereis vir die uitvoer of heruitvoer van die beheerde goedere gelys in die aanhangsel by hierdie kennisgewing; en 



(d)	bepaal ek, ingevolge artikel 13(2)(f) van die Wet, dat die vervaardiging van, en verskaffing van dienste met betrekking tot, die beheerde goedere gelys in paragrawe 1, 2, 19 en 20 van die aanhangsel by hierdie kennisgewing, slegs mag plaasvind kragtens 'n permit wat deur die Raad uitgereik is.



Woordomskrywing

3.	In hierdie kennisgewing het 'n uitdrukking waaraan die Wet 'n betekenis heg, daardie betekenis en, tensy uit die samehang anders blyk, beteken—



"dienste" ook vragversending, -berging en -opberging (indien nie deel van die vervaardigings- en oordragprosesse nie), vervoer, onderhoud (herstel, opknapping, heropknapping), handel, oorlegpleging, beskikking en tegniese bystand;



"die Wet" die Wet op die Nie-proliferasie van Wapens van Grootskaalse Vernietiging, 1993 (Wet No. 87 van 1993);



"fabrikasie" ook die produksie, prototipering, installering, ingebruikneming en kontraktuele naverkoopsdiens;



"onderdele" 'n integrerende deel van aanlegte, stelsels, opstellings of toerusting waarsonder die aanleg, stelsel, opstellings of toerusting nie die beoogde werksaamheid sal verrig of die eienskappe sal vertoon of die werkverrigtingsvlak sal bereik nie wat maak dat die aanlegte, stelsels, opstellings of toerusting beheerde goedere is;



"oordrag" die verandering van besit of bewaring, of 'n verandering in die plasing, van goedere, dienste en tegnologie wat verwant is aan die beheerde goedere, of sodanige goedere, dienste en tegnologie 'n internasionale grens kruis al dan nie;



"produksiefasiliteite" produksietoerusting en spesiaal ontwerpte sagteware wat in installasies vir ontwikkeling of vir een of meer fases van produksie gebruik word of gebruik kan word;



"vervaardiging" ook navorsing, ontwikkeling en fabrikasie. 



'transit' is defined in the Act and should not be redefined here.  Ed.





Beheerde goedere

4.	Die lys van missielverwante beheerde goedere en verwante tegnologie is vervat in die Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) Equipment, Software and Technology Annex, wat op 5 November 2008 bygewerk en in sy geheel in Engels aangehaal word in die aanhangsel by hierdie kennisgewing.





Aansoekvorms

5.	Aansoekvorms vir permitte bedoel in paragraaf 2 van hierdie kennisgewing is verkrygbaar by enige van die volgende adresse:



Posadres:

Die Sekretariaat

Suid-Afrikaanse Raad vir die Nie-proliferasie van Wapens van Grootskaalse Vernietiging 

Privaat Sak X84

PRETORIA

0001; of



fisiese adres:

Die Sekretariaat

Suid-Afrikaanse Raad vir die Nie-proliferasie van Wapens van Grootskaalse Vernietiging 

Meintjiesstraat 77

Sunnyside

PRETORIA.



Herroeping

6.	Goewermentskennisgewing No. 311 van 11 April 2007 word hierby herroep. 







DR ROB DAVIES 

MINISTER VAN HANDEL EN NYWERHEID 























































AANHANGSEL

AANHALING

INTRODUCTION, DEFINITIONS, TERMINOLOGY



1.	INTRODUCTION



This Annex consists of two categories of items, which term includes equipment, materials, "software" or "technology". Category I items, all of which are in Annex Items 1 and 2, are those items of greatest sensitivity.  If a Category I item is included in a system, that system will also be considered as Category I, except when the incorporated item cannot be separated, removed or duplicated.  Category II items are those items in the Annex not designated Category I.



In reviewing the proposed applications for transfers of complete rocket and unmanned aerial vehicle systems described in Items 1 and 19, and of equipment, materials, "software" or "technology" which is listed in the Technical Annex, for potential use in such systems, the Government will take account of the ability to trade off "range" and "payload".



General Technology Note:

The transfer of "technology" directly associated with any goods controlled in the Annex is controlled according to the provisions in each Item to the extent permitted by national legislation. The approval of any Annex item for export also authorizes the export to the same end-user of the minimum "technology" required for the installation, operation, maintenance, and repair of the item.



Note:



Controls do not apply to "technology" "in the public domain" or to "basic scientific research".



General Software Note:

The Annex does not control "software" which is either:

Generally available to the public by being:

Sold from stock at retail selling points without restriction, by means of:

Over-the-counter transactions;

Mail order transactions; or

Telephone call transactions; and

Designed for installation by the user without further substantial support by the supplier; or

"In the public domain".



Note:



The General Software Note only applies to general purpose, mass market "software".



(e)	Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) Numbers:



In some instances chemicals are listed by name and CAS number.  Chemicals of the same structural formula (including hydrates) are controlled regardless of name or CAS number.  CAS numbers are shown to assist in identifying whether a particular chemical or mixture is controlled, irrespective of nomenclature.  CAS numbers cannot be used as unique identifiers because some forms of the listed chemical have different CAS numbers, and mixtures containing a listed chemical may also have different CAS numbers.



DEFINITIONS



For the purpose of this Annex, the following definitions apply:

	

	"Accuracy"

Usually measured in terms of inaccuracy, means the maximum deviation, positive or negative, of an indicated value from an accepted standard or true value.



"Basic scientific research"

Experimental or theoretical work undertaken principally to acquire new knowledge of the fundamental principles of phenomena or observable facts, not primarily directed towards a specific practical aim or objective. 



"Development"

Is related to all phases prior to "production" such as:

design

design research

design analysis

design concepts

assembly and testing of prototypes

pilot production schemes

design data

process of transforming design data into a product

configuration design

integration design

layouts



"In the public domain"

This means "software" or "technology" which has been made available without restrictions upon its further dissemination. (Copyright restrictions do not remove "software" or "technology" from being "in the public domain".)



"Microcircuit"

A device in which a number of passive and/or active elements are considered as indivisibly associated on or within a continuous structure to perform the function of a circuit.



"Microprogrammes"

A sequence of elementary instructions maintained in a special storage, the execution of which is initiated by the introduction of its reference instruction register.



"Payload"

The total mass that can be carried or delivered by the specified rocket system or unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) system that is not used to maintain flight.

Note:



The particular equipment, subsystems, or components to be included in the "payload" depends on the type and configuration of the vehicle under consideration.



Technical Notes:



Ballistic Missiles

a.	"Payload" for systems with separating re-entry vehicles (RVs) includes:

The RVs, including:

Dedicated guidance, navigation, and control equipment;

Dedicated countermeasures equipment;

Munitions of any type (e.g. explosive or non-explosive);

Supporting structures and deployment mechanisms for the munitions (e.g. hardware used to attach to, or separate the RV from, the bus/post-boost vehicle) that can be removed without violating the structural integrity of the vehicle;

Mechanisms and devices for safing, arming, fuzing or firing;

Any other countermeasures equipment (e.g. decoys, jammers or chaff dispensers) that separate from the RV bus/post-boost vehicle;

The bus/post-boost vehicle or attitude control/velocity trim module not including systems/subsystems essential to the operation of the other stages.



"Payload" for systems with non-separating re-entry vehicles includes:

Munitions of any type (e.g. explosive or non-explosive);

Supporting structures and deployment mechanisms for the munitions that can be removed without violating the structural integrity of the vehicle;

Mechanisms and devices for safing, arming, fuzing or firing;

Any countermeasures equipment (e.g. decoys, jammers or chaff dispensers) that can be removed without violating the structural integrity of the vehicle.



Space Launch Vehicles

"Payload" includes:

Satellites (single or multiple);

Satellite-to-launch vehicle adapters including, if applicable, apogee/perigee kick motors or similar manoeuvering systems.



Sounding Rockets

"Payload" includes:

Equipment required for a mission, such as data gathering, recording or transmitting devices for mission-specific data;

Recovery equipment (e.g. parachutes) that can be removed without violating the structural integrity of the vehicle.



Cruise Missiles

"Payload" includes:

Munitions of any type (e.g. explosive or non-explosive);

Supporting structures and deployment mechanisms for the munitions that can be removed without violating the structural integrity of the vehicle;

Mechanisms and devices for safing, arming, fuzing or firing;

Countermeasures equipment (e.g. decoys, jammers or chaff dispensers) that can be removed without violating the structural integrity of the vehicle;

Signature alteration equipment that can be removed without violating the structural integrity of the vehicle.



Other UAVs

"Payload" includes:

Munitions of any type (e.g. explosive or non-explosive);

Mechanisms and devices for safing, arming, fuzing or firing;

Countermeasures equipment (e.g. decoys, jammers or chaff dispensers) that can be removed without violating the structural integrity of the vehicle;

Signature alteration equipment that can be removed without violating the structural integrity of the vehicle;

Equipment required for a mission such as data gathering, recording or transmitting devices for mission-specific data and supporting structures that can be removed without violating the structural integrity of the vehicle;

Recovery equipment (e.g. parachutes) that can be removed without violating the structural integrity of the vehicle.

Munitions supporting structures and deployment mechanisms that can be removed without violating the structural integrity of the vehicle.



"Production"

Means all production phases such as: 

production engineering

manufacture

integration

assembly (mounting)

inspection

testing

quality assurance



"Production equipment"

Means tooling, templates, jigs, mandrels, moulds, dies, fixtures, alignment mechanisms, test equipment, other machinery and components therefor, limited to those specially designed or modified for "development" or for one or more phases of "production". 



"Production facilities"

Means equipment and specially designed "software" therefor integrated into installations for "development" or for one or more phases of "production".



"Programmes"

A sequence of instructions to carry out a process in, or convertible into, a form executable by an electronic computer.



"Radiation hardened"

Means that the component or equipment is designed or rated to withstand radiation levels which meet or exceed a total irradiation dose of 5 x 105 rads (Si).









"Range"

The maximum distance that the specified rocket system or unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) system is capable of travelling in the mode of stable flight as measured by the projection of its trajectory over the surface of the Earth. 



Technical Notes:



1.	The maximum capability based on the design characteristics of the system, when fully loaded with fuel or propellant, will be taken into consideration in determining "range".



2.	The "range" for both rocket systems and UAV systems will be determined independently of any external factors such as operational restrictions, limitations imposed by telemetry, data links or other external constraints.



3.	For rocket systems, the "range" will be determined using the trajectory that maximises "range", assuming ICAO standard atmosphere with zero wind.



4.	For UAV systems, the "range" will be determined for a one-way distance using the most fuel-efficient flight profile (e.g. cruise speed and altitude), assuming ICAO standard atmosphere with zero wind.



"Software"

A collection of one or more "programmes", or "micro-programmes", fixed in any tangible medium of expression. 



"Technology"

Means specific information which is required for the "development", "production" or "use" of a product.  The information may take the form of "technical data" or "technical assistance".



"Technical assistance"

May take forms such as:

instruction

skills

training

working knowledge

consulting services



"Technical data"

May take forms such as:

blueprints

plans

diagrams

models

formulae

engineering designs and specifications

manuals and instructions written or recorded on other media or devices such as:

disk

tape

read-only memories



"Use"

Means:

operation

installation (including on-site installation)

maintenance

repair

overhaul

refurbishing





3.	TERMINOLOGY



Where the following terms appear in the text, they are to be understood according to the explanations below:



"Specially designed" describes equipment, parts, components or "software" which, as a result of "development", have unique properties that distinguish them for certain predetermined purposes. For example, a piece of equipment that is "specially designed" for use in a missile will only be considered so if it has no other function or use.  Similarly, a piece of manufacturing equipment that is "specially designed" to produce a certain type of component will only be considered such if it is not capable of producing other types of components.



"Designed or modified" describes equipment, parts or components which, as a result of "development," or modification, have specified properties that make them fit for a particular application. "Designed or modified" equipment, parts, components or "software" can be used for other applications. For example, a titanium coated pump designed for a missile may be used with corrosive fluids other than propellants.



"Usable in", "usable for", "usable as" or "capable of" describes equipment, parts, components, materials or "software" which are suitable for a particular purpose. There is no need for the equipment, parts, components or "software" to have been configured, modified or specified for the particular purpose.  For example, any military specification memory circuit would be "capable of" operation in a guidance system.



"Modified" in the context of "software" describes "software" which has been intentionally changed such that it has properties that make it fit for specified purposes or applications. Its properties may also make it suitable for purposes or applications other than those for which it was "modified".





CATEGORY I; ITEM 1



CATEGORY I



ITEM 1	COMPLETE DELIVERY SYSTEMS



1.A.		EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



1.A.1.	Complete rocket systems (including ballistic missile systems, space launch vehicles, and sounding rockets) capable of delivering at least a 500 kg "payload" to a "range" of at least 300 km. 



1.A.2.	Complete unmanned aerial vehicle systems (including cruise missile systems, target drones and reconnaissance drones) capable of delivering at least a 500 kg "payload" to a "range" of at least 300 km.



1.B.		TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



1.B.1.	"Production facilities" specially designed for the systems specified in 1.A.



1.C.		MATERIALS



None.



1.D.		SOFTWARE



1.D.1.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of "production facilities" specified in 1.B.



1.D.2.	"Software" which coordinates the function of more than one subsystem, specially designed or modified for "use" in systems specified in 1.A.



1.E.		TECHNOLOGY



1.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment or "software" specified in 1.A., 1.B., or 1.D.





CATEGORY I; ITEM 2



ITEM 2	COMPLETE SUBSYSTEMS USABLE FOR COMPLETE DELIVERY SYSTEMS



2.A.		EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



2.A.1.	Complete subsystems usable in the systems specified in 1.A., as follows:



Individual rocket stages usable in the systems specified in 1.A.;



Re-entry vehicles, and equipment designed or modified therefor, usable in the systems specified in 1.A., as follows, except as provided in the Note below 2.A.1. for those designed for non-weapon payloads:

Heat shields, and components therefor, fabricated of ceramic or ablative materials; 

Heat sinks and components therefor, fabricated of light-weight, high heat capacity materials; 

Electronic equipment specially designed for re-entry vehicles; 



Solid propellant rocket motors or liquid propellant rocket engines, usable in the systems specified in 1.A., having a total impulse capacity equal to or greater than 1.1 x 106 Ns; 



Note:

Liquid propellant apogee engines and station-keeping engines specified in 2.A.1.c., designed or modified for use on satellites, may be treated as Category II, if the subsystem is exported subject to end-use statements and quantity limits appropriate for the excepted end-use stated above, when having a vacuum thrust not greater than 1kN.



'Guidance sets', usable in the systems specified in 1.A., capable of achieving system accuracy of 3.33% or less of the "range" (e.g. a 'CEP' of 10 km or less at a "range" of 300 km), except as provided in the Note below 2.A.1. for those designed for missiles with a "range" under 300 km or manned aircraft; 


Technical Notes: 



A ´guidance set´ integrates the process of measuring and computing a vehicle's position and velocity (i.e. navigation) with that of computing and sending commands to the vehicle's flight control systems to correct the trajectory.



´CEP´ (circle of equal probability) is a measure of accuracy, defined as the radius of the circle centred at the target, at a specific range, in which 50% of the payloads impact. 



Thrust vector control sub-systems, usable in the systems specified in 1.A., except as provided in the Note below 2.A.1. for those designed for rocket systems that do not exceed the "range"/"payload" capability of systems specified in 1.A.;



Technical Note: 



2.A.1.e. includes the following methods of achieving thrust vector control: 

Flexible nozzle; 

Fluid or secondary gas injection; 

Movable engine or nozzle; 

Deflection of exhaust gas stream (jet vanes or probes); 

Use of thrust tabs. 



Weapon or warhead safing, arming, fuzing, and firing mechanisms, usable in the systems specified in 1.A., except as provided in the Note below 2.A.1. for those designed for systems other than those specified in 1.A. 



Note:



The exceptions in 2.A.1.b., 2.A.1.d., 2.A.1.e. and 2.A.1.f. above may be treated as Category II if the subsystem is exported subject to end-use statements and quantity limits appropriate for the excepted end-use stated above.



2.B.		TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



2.B.1.	"Production facilities" specially designed for the subsystems specified in 2.A.



2.B.2.	"Production equipment" specially designed for the subsystems specified in 2.A.



2.C.		MATERIALS



None.



2.D.		SOFTWARE



2.D.1.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of "production facilities" specified in 2.B.1.



2.D.2.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of rocket motors or engines specified in 2.A.1.c.



2.D.3.	"Software", specially designed or modified for the "use" of 'guidance sets' specified in 2.A.1.d.



Note:



2.D.3. includes "software", specially designed or modified  to enhance the performance of ´guidance sets´ to achieve or exceed the accuracy specified in 2.A.1.d.



2.D.4.		"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of subsystems or equipment specified in 2.A.1.b.3.



2.D.5.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of systems in 2.A.1.e.



2.D.6.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of systems in 2.A.1.f.



Note:



Subject to end-use statements appropriate for the excepted end-use, "software" controlled by 2.D.2. - 2.D.6. may be treated as Category II as follows:



Under 2.D.2. if specially designed or modified for liquid propellant apogee engines, designed or modified for satellite applications as specified in the Note to 2.A.1.c.;



Under 2.D.3. if designed for missiles with a "range" of under 300 km or manned aircraft;



Under 2.D.4. if specially designed or modified for re-entry vehicles designed for non-weapon payloads;



Under 2.D.5. if designed for rocket systems that do not exceed the "range" "payload" capability of systems specified in 1.A.;



Under 2.D.6. if designed for systems other than those specified in 1.A.



2.E.		TECHNOLOGY



2.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment or "software" specified in 2.A., 2.B. or 2.D.





CATEGORY II, ITEM 3



CATEGORY II



ITEM 3	PROPULSION COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT



3.A.		EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



3.A.1.	Turbojet and turbofan engines (including turbocompound engines), as follows: 



Engines having both of the following characteristics:

Maximum thrust value greater than 400 N (achieved un-installed) excluding civil certified engines with a maximum thrust value greater than 8.89 kN (achieved un-installed); and

Specific fuel consumption of 0.15 kg N-1 h-1 or less (at maximum continuous power at sea level static and standard conditions);



Engines designed or modified for systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.2., regardless of thrust or specific fuel consumption.







Note:



Engines specified in 3.A.1. may be exported as part of a manned aircraft or in quantities appropriate for replacement parts for a manned aircraft.



3.A.2.	Ramjet/scramjet/pulse jet/combined cycle engines, including devices to regulate combustion, and specially designed components therefor, usable in the systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.2.



3.A.3.	Rocket motor cases, 'insulation' components and nozzles therefor, usable in the systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.1.



Technical Note:



In 3.A.3. ´insulation´ intended to be applied to the components of a rocket motor, i.e. the case, nozzle inlets, case closures, includes cured or semi-cured compounded rubber components comprising sheet stock containing an insulating or refractory material.  It may also be incorporated as stress relief boots or flaps.

Note:



Refer to 3.C.2. for ´insulation´ material in bulk or sheet form.



3.A.4.	Staging mechanisms, separation mechanisms, and interstages therefor, usable in the systems specified in 1.A.



3.A.5.	Liquid and slurry propellant (including oxidisers) control systems, and specially designed components therefor, usable in the systems specified in 1.A., designed or modified to operate in vibration environments greater than 10 g rms between 20 Hz and 2 kHz. 



Notes:



The only servo valves and pumps specified in 3.A.5. are the following:

Servo valves designed for flow rates equal to or greater than 24 litres per minute, at an absolute pressure equal to or greater than 7 MPa, that have an actuator response time of less than 100 ms.

Pumps, for liquid propellants, with shaft speeds equal to or greater than 8,000 rpm or with discharge pressures equal to or greater than 7 MPa.



Systems and components specified in 3.A.5. may be exported as part of a satellite.



3.A.6.	Hybrid rocket motors and specially designed components therefor, usable in the systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2.



3.A.7.	Radial ball bearings having all tolerances specified in accordance with ISO 492 Tolerance Class 2 (or ANSI/ABMA Std 20 Tolerance Class ABEC-9 or other national equivalents), or better and having all the following characteristics:



a.	An inner ring bore diameter between 12 and 50 mm;



b.	An outer ring outside diameter between 25 and 100 mm; and



c.	A width between 10 and 20 mm.



3.A.8.	Liquid propellant tanks specially designed for the propellants controlled in Item 4.C. or other liquid propellants used in the systems specified in 1.A.1.



3.A.9.	'Turboprop engine systems' specially designed for the systems in 1.A.2. or 19.A.2., and specially designed components therefor, having a maximum power greater than 10 kW (achieved uninstalled at sea level standard conditions), excluding civil certified engines.



Technical Note:



For the purposes of Item 3.A.9., a 'turboprop engine system' incorporates all of the following:

a.	Turboshaft engine; and

b.	Power transmission system to transfer the power to a propeller.



3.B.		TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



3.B.1.	"Production facilities" specially designed for equipment or materials specified in 3.A.1., 3.A.2., 3.A.3., 3.A.4., 3.A.5., 3.A.6., 3.A.8., 3.A.9. or 3.C.



3.B.2.	"Production equipment" specially designed for equipment or materials specified in 3.A.1., 3.A.2., 3.A.3., 3.A.4., 3.A.5., 3.A.6., 3.A.8., 3.A.9. or 3.C.



3.B.3.	Flow-forming machines, and specially designed components therefor, which:



According to the manufacturers technical specification can be equipped with numerical control units or a computer control, even when not equipped with such units at delivery; and



Have more than two axes which can be co-ordinated simultaneously for contouring control.



Technical Note:



Machines combining the function of spin-forming and flow-forming are, for the purpose of this item, regarded as flow-forming machines.



Note:



This item does not include machines that are not usable in the "production" of propulsion components and equipment (e.g. motor cases) for systems specified in 1.A.



3.C.		MATERIALS



3.C.1.	'Interior lining' usable for rocket motor cases in the systems specified in 1.A. or specially designed for systems specified in 19.A.1. or 19.A.2.



Technical Note:



In 3.C.1. ´interior lining´ suited for the bond interface between the solid propellant and the case or insulating liner is usually a liquid polymer based dispersion of refractory or insulating materials e.g. carbon filled HTPB or other polymer with added curing agents to be sprayed or screeded over a case interior.



3.C.2.	'Insulation' material in bulk form usable for rocket motor cases in the systems specified in 1.A. or specially designed for systems specified in 19.A.1. or 19.A.2.



Technical Note:



In 3.C.2. ´insulation´ intended to be applied to the components of a rocket motor, i.e. the case, nozzle inlets, case closures, includes cured or semi-cured compounded rubber sheet stock containing an insulating or refractory material.  It may also be incorporated as stress relief boots or flaps specified in 3.A.3.



3.D.		SOFTWARE



3.D.1.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of "production facilities" and flow forming machines specified in 3.B.1. or 3.B.3.



3.D.2.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of equipment specified in 3.A.1., 3.A.2., 3.A.4., 3.A.5., 3.A.6. or 3.A.9. 



Notes:



"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of engines specified in 3.A.1. may be exported as part of a manned aircraft or as replacement "software" therefor.



"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of propellant control systems specified in 3.A.5. may be exported as part of a satellite or as replacement "software" therefor.



3.D.3.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "development" of equipment specified in 3.A.2., 3.A.3. or 3.A.4. 



3.E.		TECHNOLOGY



3.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment, materials or "software" specified in 3.A.1., 3.A.2., 3.A.3., 3.A.4., 3.A.5., 3.A.6., 3.A.9., 3.B., 3.C. or 3.D.





CATEGORY II, ITEM 4



ITEM 4	PROPELLANTS, CHEMICALS AND PROPELLANT PRODUCTION



4.A.		EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS

None.



4.B.		TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



4.B.1.	"Production equipment", and specially designed components therefor, for the "production", handling or acceptance testing of liquid propellants or propellant constituents specified in 4.C.



4.B.2.	"Production equipment", other than that described in 4.B.3., and specially designed components therefor, for the production, handling, mixing, curing, casting, pressing, machining, extruding or acceptance testing of solid propellants or propellant constituents specified in 4.C.



4.B.3.	Equipment as follows, and specially designed components therefor: 



a.	Batch mixers with provision for mixing under vacuum in the range of zero to 13.326 kPa and with temperature control capability of the mixing chamber and having all of the following:

1.	A total volumetric capacity of 110 litres or more; and

2.	At least one mixing/kneading shaft mounted off centre;



b.	Continuous mixers with provision for mixing under vacuum in the range of zero to 13.326 kPa and with a temperature control capability of the mixing chamber having any of the following:

Two or more mixing/kneading shafts; or

A single rotating shaft which oscillates and having kneading teeth/pins on the shaft as well as inside the casing of the mixing chamber;



c.	Fluid energy mills usable for grinding or milling substances specified in 4.C.;



d.	Metal powder "production equipment" usable for the "production", in a controlled environment, of spherical or atomised materials specified in 4.C.2.c., 4.C.2.d. or 4.C.2.e.



Note:



4.B.3.d. includes:

a.	Plasma generators (high frequency arc-jet) usable for obtaining sputtered or spherical metallic powders with organization of the process in an argon-water environment;

b.	Electroburst equipment usable for obtaining sputtered or spherical metallic powders with organization of the process in an argon-water environment;

c.	Equipment usable for the "production" of spherical aluminium powders by powdering a melt in an inert medium (e.g. nitrogen).



Notes:



1.	The only batch mixers, continuous mixers, usable for solid propellants or propellants constituents specified in 4.C., and fluid energy mills specified in 4.B., are those specified in 4.B.3.



2.	Forms of metal powder "production equipment" not specified in 4.B.3.d. are to be evaluated in accordance with 4.B.2.



4.C.		MATERIALS



4.C.1.	Composite and composite modified double base propellants. 



4.C.2.	Fuel substances as follows:



Hydrazine (CAS 302-01-2) with a concentration of more than 70%;



b.	Hydrazine derivatives as follows:

1.	Monomethylhydrazine (MMH) (CAS 60-34-4);

2.	Unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine (UDMH) (CAS 57-14-7);

3.	Hydrazine mononitrate;

4.	Trimethylhydrazine (CAS 1741-01-1);

5.	Tetramethylhydrazine (CAS 6415-12-9);

6.	N,N diallylhydrazine;

7.	Allylhydrazine (CAS 7422-78-8);

8.	Ethylene dihydrazine;

9.	Monomethylhydrazine dinitrate;

10.	Unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine nitrate;

11.	Hydrazinium azide (CAS 14546-44-2);

12.	Dimethylhydrazinium azide;

13.	Hydrazinium dinitrate;

14.	Diimido oxalic acid dihydrazine;

15.	2-hydroxyethylhydrazine nitrate (HEHN);

16.	Hydrazinium perchlorate (CAS 27978-54-7);

17.	Hydrazinium diperchlorate;

18.	Methylhydrazine nitrate (MHN);

19.	Diethylhydrazine nitrate (DEHN);

20.	3,6-dihydrazino tetrazine nitrate (DHTN);



Technical note:



3,6-dihydrazino tetrazine nitrate is also referred to as 

1,4-dihydrazine nitrate



Spherical aluminium powder (CAS 7429-90-5) with particles of uniform diameter of less than 200 x 10-6 m (200 µm) and an aluminium content of 97% by weight or more, if at least 10% of the total weight is made up of particles of less than 63 µm, according to ISO 2591:1988 or national equivalents such as JIS Z8820;



Technical Note:



A particle size of 63 µm (ISO R-565) corresponds to 250 mesh (Tyler) or 230 mesh (ASTM standard E-11).



d.	Zirconium (CAS 7440-67-7), beryllium (CAS 7440-41-7), magnesium (CAS 7439-95-4) and alloys of these in particle size less than 60 x 10-6 m (60 µm), whether spherical, atomised, spheroidal, flaked or ground, consisting of 97% by weight or more of any of the above mentioned metals;



Technical Note:



The natural content of hafnium (CAS 7440-58-6) in the zirconium (typically 2% to 7%) is counted with the zirconium.



e.	Boron (CAS 7440-42-8) and boron alloys in particle size less than 
60 x 10-6 m (60 µm), whether spherical, atomised, spheroidal, flaked or ground with a purity of 85% by weight or more;



f.	High energy density materials such as boron slurry, having an energy density of 40 x 106 J/kg or greater.



4.C.3.	Oxidisers/Fuels as follows:



Perchlorates, chlorates or chromates mixed with powdered metals or other high energy fuel components.



4.C.4.	Oxidiser substances as follows:



a.	Oxidiser substances usable in liquid propellant rocket engines as follows:

1.	Dinitrogen trioxide (CAS 10544-73-7);

2.	Nitrogen dioxide (CAS 10102-44-0) / dinitrogen tetroxide (CAS 10544-72-6);

3.	Dinitrogen pentoxide (CAS 10102-03-1);

4.	Mixed Oxides of Nitrogen (MON);

5.	Inhibited Red Fuming Nitric Acid (IRFNA) (CAS 8007-58-7);

6.	Compounds composed of fluorine and one or more of other halogens, oxygen or nitrogen;



Technical Note:



Mixed Oxides of Nitrogen (MON) are solutions of Nitric Oxide (NO) in Dinitrogen Tetroxide/Nitrogen Dioxide (N2O4/NO2) that can be used in missile systems.  There are a range of compositions that can be denoted as MONi or MONij where i and j are integers representing the percentage of Nitric Oxide in the mixture (e.g. MON3 contains 3% Nitric Oxide, MON25 25% Nitric Oxide.  An upper limit is MON40, 40% by weight).





Note:



Item 4.C.4.a.6. does not control Nitrogen Trifluoride (NF3) (CAS 7783-54-2) in a gaseous state as it is not usable for missile applications.



b.	Oxidiser substances usable in solid propellant rocket motors as follows:

1.	Ammonium perchlorate (AP) (CAS 7790-98-9);

2.	Ammonium dinitramide (ADN) (CAS 140456-78-6);

3.	Nitro-amines (cyclotetramethylene - tetranitramine (HMX) (CAS 2691-41-0); cyclotrimethylene - trinitramine (RDX) (CAS 121-82-4);

4.	Hydrazinium nitroformate (HNF) (CAS 20773-28-8);

5.	2,4,6,8,10,12-Hexanitrohexaazaisowurtzitane (CL-20)
(CAS 135285-90-4).



4.C.5.	Polymeric substances, as follows:



Carboxy - terminated polybutadiene (including carboxyl - terminated polybutadiene) (CTPB);



Hydroxy - terminated polybutadiene (including hydroxyl - terminated polybutadiene) (HTPB);



Glycidyl azide polymer (GAP);



Polybutadiene - Acrylic Acid (PBAA);



e.	Polybutadiene - Acrylic Acid - Acrylonitrile (PBAN);



f.	Polytetrahydrofuran polyethylene glycol (TPEG).



Technical Note:



Polytetrahydrofuran polyethylene glycol (TPEG) is a block co-polymer of poly 1,4-Butanediol and polyethylene glycol (PEG).







4.C.6.	Other propellant additives and agents as follows:



a.	Bonding agents as follows:

1.	Tris (1-(2-methyl)aziridinyl) phosphine oxide (MAPO) (CAS 57-39-6);

2.	1,1′,1″-trimesoyl-tris(2-ethylaziridine) (HX-868, BITA) (CAS 7722-73-8);

3.	Tepanol (HX-878), reaction product of tetraethlylenepentamine, acrylonitrile and glycidol (CAS 68412-46-4);

4.	Tepan (HX-879), reaction product of tetraethlylenepentamine and acrylonitrile (CAS 68412-45-3);

5.	Polyfunctional aziridine amides with isophthalic, trimesic, isocyanuric, or trimethyladipic backbone also having a 2-methyl or 2-ethyl aziridine group;



Note:



Item 4.C.6.a.5. includes:

1.	1,1′-Isophthaloyl-bis(2-methylaziridine) (HX-752) (CAS 7652-64-4);

2.	2,4,6-tris(2-ethyl-1-aziridinyl)-1,3,5-triazine (HX-874)
(CAS 18924-91-9);

3.	1,1'-trimethyladipoylbis(2-ethylaziridine) (HX-877)
(CAS 71463-62-2).



b.	Curing reaction catalysts as follows:

Triphenyl bismuth (TPB) (CAS 603-33-8);



Burning rate modifiers, as follows:

Carboranes, decaboranes, pentaboranes and derivatives thereof;

Ferrocene derivatives, as follows:

Catocene (CAS 37206-42-1);

Ethyl ferrocene (CAS 1273-89-8);

Propyl ferrocene;

n-Butyl ferrocene (CAS 31904-29-7);

Pentyl ferrocene (CAS 1274-00-6);

Dicyclopentyl ferrocene;

Dicyclohexyl ferrocene;

Diethyl ferrocene;

Dipropyl ferrocene;

Dibutyl ferrocene (CAS 1274-08-4);

Dihexyl ferrocene (CAS 93894-59-8);

Acetyl ferrocenes;

Ferrocene Carboxylic acids;

Butacene (CAS 125856-62-4);

Other ferrocene derivatives usable as rocket propellant burning rate modifiers;



d.	Esters and plasticisers as follows:

1.	Triethylene glycol dinitrate (TEGDN) (CAS 111-22-8);

2.	Trimethylolethane trinitrate (TMETN) (CAS 3032-55-1);

3.	1,2,4-butanetriol trinitrate (BTTN) (CAS 6659-60-5);

4.	Diethylene glycol dinitrate (DEGDN) (CAS 693-21-0);

5. 4,5 diazidomethyl-2-methyl-1,2,3-triazole (iso- DAMTR);

	6. Nitratoethylnitramine (NENA) based plasticisers, as follows:

Methyl-NENA (CAS 17096-47-8);

Ethyl-NENA (CAS 85068-73-1);

Butyl-NENA (CAS 82486-82-6);

7.	Dinitropropyl based plasticisers, as follows:

Bis (2,2-dinitropropyl) acetal (BDNPA) (CAS 5108-69-0);

Bis (2,2-dinitropropyl) formal (BDNPF) (CAS 5917-61-3);



e.	Stabilisers as follows:

1.	2-Nitrodiphenylamine (CAS 119-75-5);

2.	N-methyl-p-nitroaniline (CAS 100-15-2).



4.D.		SOFTWARE



4.D.1.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of equipment specified in 4.B. for the "production" and handling of materials specified in 4.C.



4.E.		TECHNOLOGY



4.E.1		"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment or materials specified in 4.B. and 4.C.







CATEGORY II, ITEM 5



RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE





CATEGORY II, ITEM 6



ITEM 6	PRODUCTION OF STRUCTURAL COMPOSITES, PYROLYTIC DEPOSITION AND DENSIFICATION, AND STRUCTURAL MATERIALS



6.A.		EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



6.A.1.	Composite structures, laminates, and manufactures thereof, specially designed for use in the systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2. and the subsystems specified in 2.A. or 20.A.



6.A.2.	Resaturated pyrolised (i.e. carbon-carbon) components having all of the following:



Designed for rocket systems; and 



Usable in the systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.1.



6.B.		TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



6.B.1.	Equipment for the "production" of structural composites, fibres, prepregs or preforms, usable in the systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2., as follows, and specially designed components, and accessories therefor:



a.	Filament winding machines or fibre placement machines, of which the motions for positioning, wrapping and winding fibres can be co-ordinated and programmed in three or more axes, designed to fabricate composite structures or laminates from fibrous or filamentary materials, and co-ordinating and programming controls;



b.	Tape-laying machines of which the motions for positioning and laying tape and sheets can be co-ordinated and programmed in two or more axes, designed for the manufacture of composite airframes and missile structures;



c.	Multi-directional, multi-dimensional weaving machines or interlacing machines, including adapters and modification kits for weaving, interlacing or braiding fibres to manufacture composite structures;



Note:



6.B.1.c. does not control textile machinery not modified for the end-uses stated.



d.	Equipment designed or modified for the production of fibrous or filamentary materials as follows:

1.	Equipment for converting polymeric fibres (such as polyacrylonitrile, rayon, or polycarbosilane) including special provision to strain the fibre during heating;

2.	Equipment for the vapour deposition of elements or compounds on heated filament substrates;

3.	Equipment for the wet-spinning of refractory ceramics (such as aluminium oxide);



e.	Equipment designed or modified for special fibre surface treatment or for producing prepregs and preforms, including rollers, tension stretchers, coating equipment, cutting equipment and clicker dies.



Note:



Examples of components and accessories for the machines specified in 6.B.1. are moulds, mandrels, dies, fixtures and tooling for the preform pressing, curing, casting, sintering or bonding of composite structures, laminates and manufactures thereof. 



6.B.2.	Nozzles specially designed for the processes referred to in 6.E.3.



6.B.3.	Isostatic presses having all of the following characteristics:



a.	Maximum working pressure equal to or greater than 69 MPa;



b.	Designed to achieve and maintain a controlled thermal environment of 600oC or greater; and



c.	Possessing a chamber cavity with an inside diameter of 254 mm or greater.



6.B.4.	Chemical vapour deposition furnaces designed or modified for the densification of carbon-carbon composites.



6.B.5.	Equipment and process controls, other than those specified in 6.B.3. or 6.B.4., designed or modified for densification and pyrolysis of structural composite rocket nozzles and re-entry vehicle nose tips.



6.C.		MATERIALS



6.C.1.	Resin impregnated fibre prepregs and metal coated fibre preforms, for the goods specified in 6.A.1., made either with organic matrix or metal matrix utilising fibrous or filamentary reinforcements having a specific tensile strength greater than 7.62 x 104 m and a specific modulus greater than 3.18 x 106 m.



Note:



The only resin impregnated fibre prepregs specified in 6.C.1. are those using resins with a glass transition temperature (Tg), after cure, exceeding 145oC as determined by ASTM D4065 or national equivalents.



Technical Notes:



1.	In Item 6.C.1. 'specific tensile strength' is the ultimate tensile strength in N/m2 divided by the specific weight in N/m3, measured at a temperature of (296 ± 2)K ((23 ± 2)°C) and a relative humidity of (50 ± 5)%.



2.	In Item 6.C.1. 'specific modulus' is the Young's modulus in N/m2 divided by the specific weight in N/m3, measured at a temperature of (296 ± 2)K ((23 ± 2)°C) and a relative humidity of (50 ± 5)%.



6.C.2.	Resaturated pyrolised (i.e. carbon-carbon) materials having all of the following:



Designed for rocket systems; and



Usable in the systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.1.



6.C.3.	Fine grain graphites with a bulk density of at least 1.72 g/cc measured at 15ºC and having a grain size of 100 x 10-6 m (100 µm) or less, usable for rocket nozzles and re-entry vehicle nose tips, which can be machined to any of the following products:



Cylinders having a diameter of 120 mm or greater and a length of 50 mm or greater;



Tubes having an inner diameter of 65 mm or greater and a wall thickness of 25 mm or greater and a length of 50 mm or greater; or



Blocks having a size of 120 mm x 120 mm x 50 mm or greater.



6.C.4.	Pyrolytic or fibrous reinforced graphites usable for rocket nozzles and re-entry vehicle nose tips usable in systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.1.



6.C.5.	Ceramic composite materials (dielectric constant less than 6 at any frequency from 100 MHz to 100 GHz) for use in missile radomes usable in systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.1.



6.C.6.	Silicon-carbide materials as follows:



Bulk machinable silicon-carbide reinforced unfired ceramic usable for nose tips usable in systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.1.;



Reinforced silicon-carbide ceramic composites usable for nose tips, re-entry vehicles, nozzle flaps, usable in systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.1.



6.C.7.	Tungsten, molybdenum, and alloys of these metals in the form of uniform spherical or atomised particles of 500 x 10-6 m (500 µm) diameter or less with a purity of 97% or higher for fabrication of rocket motor components, i.e. heat shields, nozzle substrates, nozzle throats, and thrust vector control surfaces, usable in systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.1.



6.C.8.	Maraging steels having an ultimate tensile strength equal to or greater than 1.5 GPa, measured at 20oC, in the form of sheet, plate or tubing with a wall or plate thickness equal to or less than 5.0 mm usable in systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.1.




Technical Note:



Maraging steels are iron alloys generally characterised by high nickel, very low carbon content and use substitutional elements or precipitates to produce strengthening and age-hardening of the alloy.



6.C.9.	Titanium-stabilized duplex stainless steel (Ti-DSS) usable in the systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.1. and having all of the following:



a.	Having all of the following characteristics:

Containing 17.0 - 23.0 weight percent chromium and 4.5 - 7.0 weight percent nickel;

Having a titanium content of greater than 0.10 weight percent; and

A ferritic-austenitic microstructure (also referred to as a two-phase microstructure ) of which at least 10% is austenite by volume (according to ASTM E-1181-87 or national equivalents); and



b.	Any of the following forms:

1.	Ingots or bars having a size of 100 mm or more in each dimension;

2.	Sheets having a width of 600 mm or more and a thickness of 3 mm or less; or

3.	Tubes having an outer diameter of 600 mm or more and a wall thickness of 3 mm or less.



6.D.		SOFTWARE



6.D.1.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of equipment specified in 6.B.1.



6.D.2.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the equipment specified in 6.B.3., 6.B.4. or 6.B.5.











6.E.		TECHNOLOGY



6.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment, materials or "software" specified in 6.A., 6.B., 6.C. or 6.D.



6.E.2.	"Technical data" (including processing conditions) and procedures for the regulation of temperature, pressures or atmosphere in autoclaves or hydroclaves when used for the production of composites or partially processed composites, usable for equipment or materials specified in 6.A. or 6.C.



6.E.3.	"Technology" for producing pyrolytically derived materials formed on a mould, mandrel or other substrate from precursor gases which decompose in the 1,300oC to 2,900oC temperature range at pressures of 130 Pa (1 mm Hg) to 20 kPa (150 mm Hg) including "technology" for the composition of precursor gases, flow-rates, and process control schedules and parameters.





CATEGORY II, ITEM 7



RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE





CATEGORY II, ITEM 8



RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE





CATEGORY II, ITEM 9



ITEM 9	INSTRUMENTATION, NAVIGATION AND DIRECTION FINDING



9.A.		EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



9.A.1.	Integrated flight instrument systems which include gyrostabilisers or automatic pilots, designed or modified for use in the systems specified in 1.A., or 19.A.1. or 19.A.2. and specially designed components therefor.



9.A.2.	Gyro-astro compasses and other devices which derive position or orientation by means of automatically tracking celestial bodies or satellites, and specially designed components therefor.



9.A.3.	Linear accelerometers, designed for use in inertial navigation systems or in guidance systems of all types, usable in the systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2., having all of the following characteristics, and specially designed components therefor:



a.	'Scale factor' 'repeatability' less (better) than 1250 ppm; and

b.	'Bias' 'repeatability' less (better) than 1250 micro g.



Technical Notes:



1.	'Bias' is defined as the accelerometer output when no acceleration is applied.

2.	'Scale factor' is defined as the ratio of change in output to a change in the input.

3.	The measurement of 'bias' and 'scale factor' refers to one sigma standard deviation with respect to a fixed calibration over a period of one year.

4.	'Repeatability' is defined according to IEEE Standard 528-2001 as follows:

	'The closeness of agreement among repeated measurements of the same variable under the same operating conditions when changes in conditions or non-operating periods occur between measurements'.



Note:



Item 9.A.3. does not control accelerometers specially designed and developed as Measurement While Drilling (MWD) sensors for use in downhole well service operations.



9.A.4.	All types of gyros usable in the systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1 or 19.A.2., with a rated 'drift rate' 'stability' of less than 0.5 degrees (1 sigma or rms) per hour in a 1 g environment, and specially designed components therefor.



Technical Notes:



1.	'Drift rate' is defined as the component of gyro output that is functionally independent of input rotation and is expressed as an angular rate. (IEEE STD 528-2001 paragraph 2.56)



2.	'Stability' is defined as a measure of the ability of a specific mechanism or performance coefficient to remain invariant when continuously exposed to a fixed operating condition.  (This definition does not refer to dynamic or servo stability.)  (IEEE STD 528-2001 paragraph 2.247)



9.A.5.	Accelerometers or gyros of any type, designed for use in inertial navigation systems or in guidance systems of all types, specified to function at acceleration levels greater than 100 g, and specially designed components therefor.



Note :



9.A.5. does not include accelerometers that are designed to measure

vibration or shock.



9.A.6.	Inertial or other equipment using accelerometers specified in 9.A.3. or 9.A.5. or gyros specified in 9.A.4. or 9.A.5., and systems incorporating such equipment, and specially designed components therefor.



9.A.7.	'Integrated navigation systems', designed or modified for the systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2. and capable of providing a navigational accuracy of 200 m CEP or less.



Technical Note:



An 'integrated navigation system' typically incorporates all of the following components:

An inertial measurement device (e.g. an attitude and heading reference system, inertial reference unit, or inertial navigation system);

One or more external sensors used to update the position and/or velocity, either periodically or continuously throughout the flight (e.g. satellite navigation receiver, radar altimeter, and/or Doppler radar); and

c.	Integration hardware and software.



N.B.	For integration "software", see Item 9.D.4.



9.A.8.	Three axis magnetic heading sensors having all of the following characteristics, and specially designed components therefor:

a.	Internal tilt compensation in pitch (+/- 90 degrees) and having roll (+/- 180 degrees) axes.

b.	Capable of providing azimuthal accuracy better (less) than 0.5 degrees rms at latitudes of +/- 80 degrees, referenced to local magnetic field; and

c. 	Designed or modified to be integrated with flight control and navigation systems.



Note:



Flight control and navigation systems in Item 9.A.8. include gyrostabilisers, automatic pilots and inertial navigation systems.



9.B.		TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



9.B.1.	"Production equipment", and other test, calibration and alignment equipment, other than that described in 9.B.2., designed or modified to be used with equipment specified in 9.A.



Note:



Equipment specified in 9.B.1. includes the following:



a.	For laser gyro equipment, the following equipment used to characterise mirrors, having the threshold accuracy shown or better:

1.	Scatterometer (10 ppm);

2.	Reflectometer (50 ppm);

Profilometer (5 Angstroms);



b.	For other inertial equipment:

1.	Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) Module Tester;

2.	IMU Platform Tester;

3.	IMU Stable Element Handling Fixture;

4.	IMU Platform Balance Fixture;

5.	Gyro Tuning Test Station;

6.	Gyro Dynamic Balance Station;

7.	Gyro Run-In/Motor Test Station;

8.	Gyro Evacuation and Filling Station;

9.	Centrifuge Fixture for Gyro Bearings;

10.	Accelerometer Axis Align Station;

11.	Accelerometer Test Station.



9.B.2.	Equipment as follows:



a.	Balancing machines having all the following characteristics:

1.	Not capable of balancing rotors/assemblies having a mass greater than 3 kg;

2.	Capable of balancing rotors/assemblies at speeds greater than 12,500 rpm;

3.	Capable of correcting unbalance in two planes or more; and

4.	Capable of balancing to a residual specific unbalance of 0.2 g mm per kg of rotor mass;



b.	Indicator heads (sometimes known as balancing instrumentation) designed or modified for use with machines specified in 9.B.2.a.;



c.	Motion simulators/rate tables (equipment capable of simulating motion) having all of the following characteristics:

1.	Two axes or more;

2.	Designed or modified to incorporate sliprings or integrated non-contact devices capable of transferring electrical power, signal information, or both; and

3.	Having any of the following characteristics:

a.	For any single axis having all of the following:

1.	Capable of rates of 400 degrees/s or more, or 30 degrees/s or less; and

2.	A rate resolution equal to or less than 6 degrees/s and an accuracy equal to or less than 0.6 degrees/s;

b.	Having a worst-case rate stability equal to or better (less) than plus or minus 0.05% averaged over 10 degrees or more; or

c.	A positioning “accuracy” equal to or less (better) than 5 arc second;



d.	Positioning tables (equipment capable of precise rotary positioning in any axes) having the following characteristics:

1.	Two axes or more; and

2.	A positioning “accuracy” equal to or less (better) than 5 arc second;



e.	Centrifuges capable of imparting accelerations above 100 g and designed or modified to incorporate sliprings or integrated non-contact devices capable of transferring electrical power, signal information, or both.



Notes:



1.		The only balancing machines, indicator heads, motion simulators, rate tables, positioning tables and centrifuges specified in Item 9 are those specified in 9.B.2.



2.		9.B.2.a. does not control balancing machines designed or modified for dental or other medical equipment.



3.		9.B.2.c. and 9.B.2.d. do not control rotary tables designed or modified for machine tools or for medical equipment.



4.		Rate tables not controlled by 9.B.2.c. and providing the characteristics of a positioning table are to be evaluated according to 9.B.2.d.



5.		Equipment that has the characteristics specified in 9.B.2.d. which also meets the characteristics of 9.B.2.c. will be treated as equipment specified in 9.B.2.c.



6.  Item 9.B.2.c. applies whether or not sliprings or integrated non-contact devices are fitted at the time of export.



7.  Item 9.B.2.e. applies whether or not sliprings or integrated non-contact devices are fitted at the time of export.



9.C.		MATERIALS



None.



9.D.		SOFTWARE



9.D.1.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of equipment specified in 9.A. or 9.B.



9.D.2.	Integration "software" for the equipment specified in 9.A.1.



9.D.3.	Integration "software" specially designed for the equipment specified in 9.A.6.



9.D.4.	Integration "software", designed or modified for the 'integrated navigation

systems' specified in 9.A.7.



Note:



A common form of integration "software" employs Kalman filtering.



9.E.		TECHNOLOGY



9.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment or "software" specified in 9.A., 9.B. or 9.D.



Note:



Equipment or "software" specified in 9.A. or 9.D. may be exported as part of a manned aircraft, satellite, land vehicle, marine/submarine vessel or geophysical survey equipment or in quantities appropriate for replacement parts for such applications.





CATEGORY II, ITEM 10



ITEM 10	FLIGHT CONTROL



10.A.	EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



10.A.1.	Hydraulic, mechanical, electro-optical, or electromechanical flight control systems (including fly-by-wire systems) designed or modified for the systems specified in 1.A.



10.A.2.	Attitude control equipment designed or modified for the systems specified in 1.A.



10.A.3.	Flight control servo valves designed or modified for the systems in 10.A.1. or 10.A.2., and designed or modified to operate in a vibration environment greater than 10 g rms between 20 Hz and 2 kHz.



Note:



Systems, equipment or valves specified in 10.A. may be exported as part of a manned aircraft or satellite or in quantities appropriate for replacement parts for manned aircraft.





10.B.	TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



10.B.1.	Test, calibration, and alignment equipment specially designed for equipment specified in 10.A.



10.C.	MATERIALS



None.



10.D.	SOFTWARE



10.D.1.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of equipment specified in 10.A. or 10.B.



Note:



"Software" specified in 10.D.1. may be exported as part of a manned aircraft or satellite or in quantities appropriate for replacement parts for manned aircraft.



10.E.	TECHNOLOGY



10.E.1.	Design "technology" for integration of air vehicle fuselage, propulsion system and lifting control surfaces, designed or modified for the systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.2., to optimise aerodynamic performance throughout the flight regime of an unmanned aerial vehicle.



10.E.2.	Design "technology" for integration of the flight control, guidance, and propulsion data into a flight management system, designed or modified for the systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A.1., for optimisation of rocket system trajectory.



10.E.3.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment or "software" specified in 10.A., 10.B. or 10.D.







CATEGORY II, ITEM 11



ITEM 11	AVIONICS



11.A.	EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



11.A.1.	Radar and laser radar systems, including altimeters, designed or modified for use in the systems specified in 1.A.



Technical Note:



Laser radar systems embody specialised transmission, scanning, receiving and signal processing techniques for utilisation of lasers for echo ranging, direction finding and discrimination of targets by location, radial speed and body reflection characteristics.



11.A.2.	Passive sensors for determining bearings to specific electromagnetic sources (direction finding equipment) or terrain characteristics, designed or modified for use in the systems specified in 1.A.



11.A.3.	Receiving equipment for Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS; e.g. GPS, GLONASS or Galileo), having any of the following characteristics, and specially designed components therefor:



a.	Designed or modified for use in systems specified in 1.A.; or



b.	Designed or modified for airborne applications and having any of the following:

1.	Capable of providing navigation information at speeds in excess of 600 m/s;

2.	Employing decryption, designed or modified for military or governmental services, to gain access to GNSS secure signal/data; or

3.	Being specially designed to employ anti-jam features (e.g. null steering antenna or electronically steerable antenna) to function in an environment of active or passive countermeasures.



Note:



11.A.3.b.2. and 11.A.3.b.3. do not control equipment designed for commercial, civil or 'Safety of Life' (e.g. data integrity, flight safety) GNSS services.



11.A.4.	Electronic assemblies and components, designed or modified for use in the systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A. and specially designed for military use and operation at temperatures in excess of 125oC. 



Notes:



1.	Equipment specified in 11.A. includes the following:

a.	Terrain contour mapping equipment;

b.	Scene mapping and correlation (both digital and analogue) equipment;

c.	Doppler navigation radar equipment;

d.	Passive interferometer equipment;

e.	Imaging sensor equipment (both active and passive). 



2.	Equipment specified in 11.A. may be exported as part of a manned aircraft or satellite or in quantities appropriate for replacement parts for manned aircraft.



11.B.	TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



None.



11.C.	MATERIALS



None.



11.D.	SOFTWARE



11.D.1.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of equipment specified in 11.A.1., 11.A.2. or 11.A.4.



11.D.2.	"Software" specially designed for the "use" of equipment specified in 11.A.3.



11.E.	TECHNOLOGY



11.E.1.	Design "technology" for protection of avionics and electrical subsystems against Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP) and Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) hazards from external sources, as follows:



a.	Design "technology" for shielding systems;



b.	Design "technology" for the configuration of hardened electrical circuits and subsystems;



c.	Design "technology" for determination of hardening criteria for the above.



11.E.2.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment or "software" specified in 11.A. or 11.D.





CATEGORY II, ITEM 12



ITEM 12	LAUNCH SUPPORT



12.A.	EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



12.A.1.	Apparatus and devices, designed or modified for the handling, control, activation and launching of the systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1., or 19.A.2.



12.A.2.	Vehicles designed or modified for the transport, handling, control, activation and launching of the systems specified in 1.A.



12.A.3.	Gravity meters (gravimeters), gravity gradiometers, and specially designed components therefor, designed or modified for airborne or marine use, and having a static or operational accuracy of 7 x 10-6 m/s2 (0.7 milligal) or better, with a time to steady-state registration of two minutes or less, usable for systems specified in 1.A.



12.A.4.	Telemetry and telecontrol equipment, including ground equipment, designed or modified for systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2.



Notes:



12.A.4. does not control equipment designed or modified for manned aircraft or satellites.



12.A.4. does not control ground based equipment designed or modified for terrestrial or marine applications.



12.A.4. does not control equipment designed for commercial, civil or 'Safety of Life' (e.g. data integrity, flight safety) GNSS services.



12.A.5.	Precision tracking systems, usable for systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2. as follows:



a.	Tracking systems which use a code translator installed on the rocket or unmanned aerial vehicle in conjunction with either surface or airborne references or navigation satellite systems to provide real-time measurements of inflight position and velocity;



b.	Range instrumentation radars including associated optical/infrared trackers with all of the following capabilities:

1.	Angular resolution better than 1.5 mrad;

Range of 30 km or greater with a range resolution better than 10 m rms; and

Velocity resolution better than 3 m/s.



12.A.6.	Thermal batteries designed or modified for the systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2.



Technical Note:



Thermal batteries are single use batteries that contain a solid non-conducting inorganic salt as the electrolyte.  These batteries incorporate a pyrolytic material that, when ignited, melts the electrolyte and activates the battery.



Note:



Item 12.A.6. does not control thermal batteries specially designed for rocket systems or unmanned aerial vehicles that are not capable of a "range" equal to or greater than 300 km.



12.B.	TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



None.



12.C.	MATERIALS



None.



12.D.	SOFTWARE



12.D.1.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of equipment specified in 12.A.1.



12.D.2.	"Software" which processes post-flight, recorded data, enabling determination of vehicle position throughout its flight path, specially designed or modified for systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2.



12.D.3.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of equipment specified in 12.A.4. or 12.A.5., usable for systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2.



12.E.	TECHNOLOGY



12.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment or "software" specified in 12.A. or 12.D.





CATEGORY II, ITEM 13



ITEM 13	COMPUTERS



13.A.	EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



13.A.1.	Analogue computers, digital computers or digital differential analysers, designed or modified for use in the systems specified in 1.A., having any of the following characteristics:



Rated for continuous operation at temperatures from below -45oC to above +55oC; or



b.	Designed as ruggedised or "radiation hardened".





13.B.	TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



None.



13.C.	MATERIALS



None.



13.D.	SOFTWARE



None.



13.E.	TECHNOLOGY



13.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment specified in 13.A.



Note:



Item 13. equipment may be exported as part of a manned aircraft or satellite or in quantities appropriate for replacement parts for manned aircraft.





CATEGORY II, ITEM 14



ITEM 14	ANALOGUE TO DIGITAL CONVERTERS



14.A.	EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



14.A.1.	Analogue-to-digital converters, usable in the systems specified in 1.A., having any of the following characteristics:



a.	Designed to meet military specifications for ruggedised equipment; or



b.	Designed or modified for military use and being any of the following types:

1.	Analogue-to-digital converter "microcircuits", which are "radiation-hardened" or have all of the following characteristics:

a.	Having a quantisation corresponding to 8 bits or more when coded in the binary system;

b.	Rated for operation in the temperature range from below -54oC to above +125oC; and

c.	Hermetically sealed; or

2.	Electrical input type analogue-to-digital converter printed circuit boards or modules, having all of the following characteristics:

a.	Having a quantisation corresponding to 8 bits or more when coded in the binary system;

b.	Rated for operation in the temperature range from below -45oC to above +55oC; and

c.	Incorporating "microcircuits" specified in 14.A.1.b.1.



14.B.	TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



None.



14.C.	MATERIALS



None.



14.D.	SOFTWARE



None.



14.E.	TECHNOLOGY



14.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment specified in 14.A.







CATEGORY II, ITEM 15



ITEM 15	TEST FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT



15.A.	EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



None.



15.B.	TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



15.B.1.	Vibration test equipment, usable for the systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2. or the subsystems specified in 2.A. or 20.A., and components therefor, as follows:



a.	Vibration test systems employing feedback or closed loop techniques and incorporating a digital controller, capable of vibrating a system at an acceleration equal to or greater than 10 g rms between 20 Hz and 2 kHz while imparting forces equal to or greater than 50 kN, measured 'bare table';



b	Digital controllers, combined with specially designed vibration test "software", with a ‘real-time control bandwidth’ greater than 5 kHz and designed for use with vibration test systems specified in 15.B.1.a.;



Technical Note:



‘Real-time control bandwidth’ is defined as the maximum rate at which a controller can execute complete cycles of sampling, processing data and transmitting control signals.



c.	Vibration thrusters (shaker units), with or without associated amplifiers, capable of imparting a force equal to or greater than 50 kN, measured 'bare table', and usable in vibration test systems specified in 15.B.1.a.;



d.	Test piece support structures and electronic units designed to combine multiple shaker units into a complete shaker system capable of providing an effective combined force equal to or greater than 50 kN, measured 'bare table', and usable in vibration test systems specified in 15.B.1.a.





Technical Note:



Vibration test systems incorporating a digital controller are those systems, the functions of which are, partly or entirely, automatically controlled by stored and digitally coded electrical signals.



15.B.2.	Wind-tunnels for speeds of Mach 0.9 or more, usable for the systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A. or the subsystems specified in 2.A. or 20.A.



15.B.3.	Test benches/stands, usable for the systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2. or the subsystems specified in 2.A. or 20.A., which have the capacity to handle solid or liquid propellant rockets, motors or engines having a thrust greater than 68 kN, or which are capable of simultaneously measuring the three axial thrust components.





15.B.4.	Environmental chambers as follows, usable for the systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A. or the subsystems specified in 2.A. or 20.A.:



a. Environmental chambers capable of simulating all the following flight conditions:

1.	Having any of the following:

a.	Altitude equal to or greater than 15 km; or

b.	Temperature range from below –50ºC to above 125ºC; and



2.	Incorporating, or designed or modified to incorporate, a shaker unit or other vibration test equipment to produce vibration environments equal to or greater than 10 g rms, measured 'bare table', between 20 Hz and 2 kHz imparting forces equal to or greater than 5 kN;



Technical Notes:



1. Item 15.B.4.a.2. describes systems that are capable of generating a vibration environment with a single wave (e.g. a sine wave) and systems capable of generating a broad band random vibration (i.e. power spectrum).



2.	In Item 15.B.4.a.2., designed or modified means the environmental chamber provides appropriate interfaces (e.g. sealing devices) to incorporate a shaker unit or other vibration test equipment as specified in this Item.



Environmental chambers capable of simulating all of the following flight conditions:

1.	Acoustic environments at an overall sound pressure level of 140 dB or greater (referenced to 2 x 10-5 N/m2) or with a total rated acoustic power output of 4 kW or greater; and

Any of the following:

Altitude equal to or greater than 15 km; or

Temperature range from below -50oC to above 125oC.



15.B.5.	Accelerators capable of delivering electromagnetic radiation produced by bremsstrahlung from accelerated electrons of 2 MeV or greater, and equipment containing those accelerators, usable for the systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2. or the subsystems specified in 2.A. or 20.A.



Note:



15.B.5. does not control equipment specially designed for medical purposes.



Technical Note:



In Item 15.B. 'bare table' means a flat table, or surface, with no fixture or fittings.



15.C.	MATERIALS



None.



15.D.	SOFTWARE



15.D.1.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the "use" of equipment specified in 15.B. usable for testing systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2. or subsystems specified in 2.A. or 20.A.



15.E.	TECHNOLOGY



15.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment or "software" specified in 15.B. or 15.D.





CATEGORY II, ITEM 16



ITEM 16	MODELLING-SIMULATION AND DESIGN INTEGRATION



16.A.	EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



16.A.1.	Specially designed hybrid (combined analogue/digital) computers for modelling, simulation or design integration of systems specified in 1.A. or the subsystems specified in 2.A.



Note:



This control only applies when the equipment is supplied with "software" specified in 16.D.1.



16.B.	TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



None.



16.C.	MATERIALS



None.



16.D.	SOFTWARE



16.D.1.	"Software" specially designed for modelling, simulation, or design integration of the systems specified in 1.A. or the subsystems specified in 2.A or 20.A.



Technical Note:



The modelling includes in particular the aerodynamic and thermodynamic analysis of the systems.



16.E.	TECHNOLOGY



16.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment or "software" specified in 16.A. or 16.D.



CATEGORY II, ITEM 17



ITEM 17	STEALTH



17.A.	EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



17.A.1.	Devices for reduced observables such as radar reflectivity, ultraviolet/infrared signatures and acoustic signatures (i.e. stealth technology), for applications usable for the systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A. or the subsystems specified in 2.A. or 20.A.



17.B.	TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



17.B.1.	Systems, specially designed for radar cross section measurement, usable for the systems specified in 1.A., 19.A.1. or 19.A.2. or the subsystems specified in 2.A.



17.C.	MATERIALS



17.C.1.	Materials for reduced observables such as radar reflectivity, ultraviolet/infrared signatures and acoustic signatures (i.e. stealth technology), for applications usable for the systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A. or the subsystems specified in 2.A.



Notes:



1.	17.C.1. includes structural materials and coatings (including paints), specially designed for reduced or tailored reflectivity or emissivity in the microwave, infrared or ultraviolet spectra.



2.	17.C.1. does not control coatings (including paints) when specially used for thermal control of satellites.



17.D.	SOFTWARE



17.D.1.	"Software" specially designed for reduced observables such as radar reflectivity, ultraviolet/infrared signatures and acoustic signatures (i.e. stealth technology), for applications usable for the systems specified in 1.A. or 19.A. or the subsystems specified in 2.A.



Note:



17.D.1. includes "software" specially designed for analysis of signature reduction.



17.E.	TECHNOLOGY



17.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment, materials or "software" specified in 17.A., 17.B., 17.C. or 17.D.



Note:



17.E.1. includes databases specially designed for analysis of signature reduction.





CATEGORY II, ITEM 18



ITEM 18	NUCLEAR EFFECTS PROTECTION



18.A.	EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



18.A.1.	"Radiation Hardened" "microcircuits" usable in protecting rocket systems and unmanned aerial vehicles against nuclear effects (e.g. Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP), X-rays, combined blast and thermal effects), and usable for the systems specified in 1.A.



18.A.2.	'Detectors' specially designed or modified to protect rocket systems and unmanned aerial vehicles against nuclear effects (e.g. Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP), X-rays, combined blast and thermal effects), and usable for the systems specified in 1.A.



Technical Note:



A ´detector´ is defined as a mechanical, electrical, optical or chemical device that automatically identifies and records, or registers a stimulus such as an environmental change in pressure or temperature, an electrical or electromagnetic signal or radiation from a radioactive material. This includes devices that sense by one time operation or failure.



18.A.3.	Radomes designed to withstand a combined thermal shock greater than 4.184 x 106 J/m2 accompanied by a peak over pressure of greater than 50 kPa, usable in protecting rocket systems and unmanned aerial vehicles against nuclear effects (e.g. Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP), X-rays, combined blast and thermal effects), and usable for the systems specified in 1.A.







18.B.	TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



None.



18.C.	MATERIALS



None.



18.D.	SOFTWARE



None.



18.E.	TECHNOLOGY



18.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment specified in 18.A.





CATEGORY II, ITEM 19



ITEM 19	OTHER COMPLETE DELIVERY SYSTEMS



19.A.	EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



19.A.1.	Complete rocket systems (including ballistic missile systems, space launch vehicles, and sounding rockets), not specified in 1.A.1., capable of a "range" equal to or greater than 300 km.



19.A.2.	Complete unmanned aerial vehicle systems (including cruise missile systems, target drones and reconnaissance drones), not specified in 1.A.2., capable of a "range" equal to or greater than 300 km.



19.A.3.	Complete unmanned aerial vehicle systems, not specified in 1.A.2. or 19.A.2., having all of the following:

Having any of the following:

1.	An autonomous flight control and navigation capability; or

2.	Capability of controlled flight out of the direct vision range involving a human operator; and

Having any of the following:

1.	Incorporating an aerosol dispensing system/mechanism with a capacity greater than 20 litres; or

2.	Designed or modified to incorporate an aerosol dispensing system/mechanism with a capacity greater than 20 litres.



Technical Notes:



An aerosol consists of particulate or liquids other than fuel components, by-products or additives, as part of the "payload" to be dispersed in the atmosphere.  Examples of aerosols include pesticides for crop dusting and dry chemicals for cloud seeding.



An aerosol dispensing system/mechanism contains all those devices (mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, etc.), which are necessary for storage and dispersion of an aerosol into the atmosphere.  This includes the possibility of aerosol injection into the combustion exhaust vapour and into the propeller slip stream.



Note:



Item 19.A.3. does not control model aircraft, specially designed for recreational or competition purposes.



19.B.	TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



None.



19.C.	MATERIALS



None.



19.D.	SOFTWARE



19.D.1.	"Software" which coordinates the function of more than one subsystem, specially designed or modified for "use" in the systems specified in 19.A.1. or 19.A.2.



19.E.	TECHNOLOGY



19.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment specified in 19.A. 1. or 19.A.2.





CATEGORY II, ITEM 20



ITEM 20	OTHER COMPLETE SUBSYSTEMS



20.A.	EQUIPMENT, ASSEMBLIES AND COMPONENTS



20.A.1.	Complete subsystems as follows:



a.	Individual rocket stages, not specified in 2.A.1., usable in systems specified in 19.A.;



b.	Solid propellant rocket motors or liquid propellant rocket engines, not specified in 2.A.1., usable in systems specified in 19.A., having a total impulse capacity equal to or greater than 8.41 x 105 Ns, but less than 1.1 x 106 Ns.



20.B.	TEST AND PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT



20.B.1.	"Production facilities" specially designed for the subsystems specified in 20.A.



20.B.2.	"Production equipment" specially designed for the subsystems specified in 20.A.







20.C.	MATERIALS



None.



20.D.	SOFTWARE



20.D.1.	"Software" specially designed or modified for the systems specified in 20.B.1.



20.D.2.	"Software", not specified in 2.D.2., specially designed or modified for the "use" of rocket motors or engines specified in 20.A.1.b.



20.E.	TECHNOLOGY



20.E.1.	"Technology", in accordance with the General Technology Note, for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment or "software" specified in 20.A., 20.B. or 20.D.





UNITS, CONSTANTS, ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

USED IN THIS ANNEX
 

 

 

 

 
ABEC
 
Annular Bearing Engineers Committee
 

 
ABMA
 
American Bearing Manufactures Association
 

 
ANSI
 
American National Standards Institute
 

 
Angstrom
 
1 x 10–10 metre
 

 
ASTM
 
American Society for Testing and Materials
 

 
bar
 
unit of pressure
 

 
°C
 
degree Celsius
 

 
cc
 
cubic centimetre
 

 
CAS
 
Chemical Abstracts Service
 

 
CEP
 
Circle of Equal Probability 
 

 
dB
 
decibel
 

 
g
 
gram; also, acceleration due to gravity
 

 
GHz
 
gigahertz
 

 
GNSS
 
Global Navigation Satellite System e.g.

'Galileo'

'GLONASS'	- Global’naya Navigatsionnaya Sputnikovaya Sistema

'GPS'	– Global Positioning System
 

 
h
 
hour
 

 
Hz
 
hertz
 

 
HTPB
 
Hydroxy–Terminated Polybutadiene
 

 
ICAO
 
International Civil Aviation Organisation
 

 
IEEE
 
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers
 

 
IR
 
Infrared
 

 
ISO
 
International Organization for Standardization
 

 
J
 
joule
 

 
JIS
 
Japanese Industrial Standard
 

 
K
 
Kelvin
 

 
kg
 
kilogram
 

 
kHz
 
kilohertz
 

 
km
 
kilometre
 

 
kN
 
kilonewton
 

 
kPa
 
kilopascal
 

 
kW
 
kilowatt
 

 
m
 
metre
 

 
MeV
 
million electron volt or mega electron volt
 

 
MHz
 
megahertz
 

 
milligal
 
10-5 m/s2 (also called mGal, mgal or milligalileo)
 

 
mm
 
millimetre
 

 
mm Hg
 
mm of mercury 
 

 
MPa
 
megapascal
 

 
mrad
 
milliradian
 

 

ms
 
millisecond
 

 
µm
 
micrometre
 

 
N
 
newton
 

 
Pa
 
pascal
 

 
ppm
 
parts per million
 

 
rads (Si)
 
radiation absorbed dose
 

 
RF
 
radio frequency
 

 
rms
 
root mean square
 

 
rpm
 
revolutions per minute
 

 
RV
 
Re-entry Vehicles
 

 
s
 
second
 

 
Tg
 
glass transition temperature 
 

 
Tyler
 
Tyler mesh size, or Tyler standard sieve series
 

 
UAV
 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
 

 
UV
 
Ultra violet
 

 




TABLE OF CONVERSIONS USED IN THIS ANNEX
 

 
Unit

(from)


 
Unit

(to)
 
Conversion
 

 
bar
 
pascal (Pa)
 
1 bar = 100 kPa
 

 
g (gravity)
 
m/s2
 
1 g = 9.806 65 m/s2
 

 
mrad (millirad)
 
degrees (angle)
 
1 mrad ≈ 0.0573°
 

 
rads
 
ergs/gram of Si
 
1 rad (Si) = 100 ergs/gram of silicon (= 0.01 gray [Gy])
 

 
Tyler 250 mesh
 
mm
 
for a Tyler 250 mesh, mesh opening 0.063 mm
 

 




SLUIT AANHALING

