you know , one of the great vernügen of traveling and one of the joys of the ethnographischen research is , together with the people who are still alive with the old days , and their past are still in the wind , they &apos;re in the regen of the regen stones , put it into the bitter leaves of plants .
just simply that jaguar-schamanen is still beyond the milky way or the importance of the mythen of the inuit , or the importance of the mythen of the inuit is that the buddhisten of the inuit is still alive , but only as a model of the realität , as a model of the realität , as a model of the reality that we &apos;re living in a gruppe of
and of course we all share the same .
we &apos;re all born . we bring children to the world .
we went through the initiationsrituale .
we have to rethink the unaufhaltsamen separation of the death and so it shouldn &apos;t surprise us that we all sing , dance and art .
but interestingly , the unique inflection of the liedes , the rhythm of the dance in every culture .
and it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s the penan in the woods of the woods , or the voodoo-akolythen in the anden of nordkenia , or the warrior in the andes of the sahara , or a karawanserei in the wüste , or a yak-hirte of the kollege , or even a yak-hirte on the hängen of the qomolangma , everest , the world &apos;s gottmutter .
all of these people teach us that there are other existenzmöglichkeiten , other ways of looking at other ways of guidance on earth .
and this is a notion that if you think about it , you can only fulfill it with hope .
together together , the myriad cultures of the world is a network of spirituellem and kulturellem life that &apos;s the earth , and the probably of the earth is just as important as the biological lebensnetz that you know as a biosphere .
you can imagine this cultural lebensnetz as a ethnosphäre , and ethnosphäre , myths and dreams , myths and intuitions , which have been made by the human imagination since the beginning of consciousness .
the ethnosphäre is the great legacy of humanity .
it &apos;s the symbol of all of what we are and what we &apos;re capable of as a amazingly wissbegierige species .
and as the biosphere was widely abgetragen , this was actually the ethnosphäre -- just to be able to add greater speed .
no biologist would not be able to say that 50 percent of all species are aussterben , because it &apos;s not true , and yet , that apokalyptischste szenarium on the area of the biological diversity , is not what we &apos;re doing as a optimistischstes of the gebiet diversity in the area of cultural diversity .
and the crucial thing that &apos;s the extinction of languages is the extinction .
when any of you in this room was born in this room , were spoken on earth .
now , a language is not just the sum of the vokabulars or a series of grammatikregeln .
a language is the expression of the human spirit .
it &apos;s a means of a means of the soul of a specific culture in the material world .
every language is like a altbestehender forest of the mind , a pivotal point , a thought , a ecosystem of spiritual possibilities .
and from these 6,000 languages are now going to be in monterey , right now , that half the ears are not geflüstert in the ears of children .
they won &apos;t be taught in the world , which is , if nothing is going to happen , you &apos;re actually dead .
what could be lonely as the main people , one of the last people who are being umhüllt , one of the last people who talk about , is not a chance to have the wisdom of the ancestors , or the hope of the people ?
and yet , this terrible fate of somebody on earth , about two weeks , about two weeks , because all two weeks ago , a elderly man dies and takes the last week of a old language to the grave .
and i know some of you say , &quot; isn &apos;t it better ? &quot; wouldn &apos;t it be better ? &quot; wouldn &apos;t it be a better place if we would all talk to a language ? &quot; and i say , &quot; well , let &apos;s be very much talk . let &apos;s be kantonesisch .
let them be kogi . &quot;
and then you would suddenly realize how it would be if you could not speak your own language .
so i &apos;d like to take you through a journey through the ethnosphäre , a short journey through the ethnosphäre , to try to try to make them understand what actually went out .
now there are some under us , the kind of forgotten that i say , if i say , &quot; different ways of the other , &quot; really different ways of the meal .
take this kid in the northwest of the amazon in the northwest of the amazonas , the people who are the people who are mythologisch the milchfluss from the east coast of sacred snakes .
this is a people who didn &apos;t cognitively cognitively between colors and green , because the himmelszelt of the people who are dependent on the forest , which is the people who are dependent on .
they have a eigenartige language and a heiratsvorschrift called the linguistic exogamie , you have to marry somebody who &apos;s going to talk a different language .
all of this is all in the mythologischen past . the labor of these great houses are in which the mischehen six or seven languages are spoken , but that &apos;s not that you never hear a language .
you just listen to the only thing to talk .
or , one of the most intriguing tribes that i &apos;ve ever lived in the northeast of ecuador , a amazing people who have been released in 1958 .
in 1957 , five missionare kontakt , and we did a schwerwiegenden mistake .
they were struck by the air from the air , what we would have thought as a friendly gesture .
they lifted this photographs from the forest , trying to see behind the face or the character , found nothing and schlussfolgerten that this was visitenkarten visitenkarten , and he killed the five missionare with the spear .
but the waorani doesn &apos;t kill the waorani killing the speer .
they durchbohrten each other .
54 percent of the deaths have happened through durchbohrungen .
we &apos;d like to go back eight generations , and then we found two instances of a natural death , and when we had a menschen of it , they gave them a little bit of a alters , and that he was so old , he killed his son , and we killed him with the spear .
but at the same time , it had a clear place that was amazing .
their hunters could smell the urine of a creature that &apos;s smell of the same distance , and determine what the robot was that one of these particular one .
in the early 1930s , i got a really amazing job when i was going to go to haiti and fragte the secret societies that were the foundation of the strength of duvalier and tonton macoutes , which was the foundation of duvalier and tonton macoutes that was used for the power of the stärke , to make sure .
to give you a sense of this sensation , i had to give you something about this remarkable belief of knowing knowledge and voodoo is not a organic black magic .
in the opposite , it &apos;s a complex story .
it &apos;s interesting .
if i asked them , the great music , what would you say ?
christianity , islam , islam , buddhism , or whatever .
a continent will continue to me because the guess was that there was no way in sub-saharan africa . of course there was a überbleibsel , and it &apos;s simply the überbleibsel of this very intense religious phenomenon , which is the tragischen of the sklavereizeit diaspora .
but what makes it interesting is that living relationship between the living and the dead .
the living ones are the spirits .
the spirits can be heraufbeschwört by the big water , answers to the rhythm of dance , to make the soul of living in the living room , so that the akolyth for a brief moment is going to be a brief moment .
deshab , the voodooisten , &quot; you want white , &quot; you know , you know , the church and jesus talk about god .
we dance in the temple and become god . &quot;
and because you &apos;re obsessed with the spirit , you &apos;re going to be caused by the spirit . how can you get hurt ?
you see this amazing demonstrations : voodoo-akolythen in a trancezustand , the glühende coal , the glühende coal , a remarkable human being to influencing the ability to influencing the body that it &apos;s going to be in a state of extreme erregung .
now , of all of the people i &apos;ve met , the kogi of sierra nevada de santa de santa santa in nordkolumbien , who are the most perfect nevada .
the old tyrannischen civilization , the karibische küstenebene of colombia and outgrowth of the conquest in a folge volk , massiv back into a isoliertes vulkanisches , which is aufsteigt over the karibischen .
in a blutbefleckten continent , these people were the only ones that were never conquered the spaniern .
until today , they &apos;ll be governed by a ritual priesthood . the education is very extraordinary .
the young age of the ages of three and four years of the finsternis and in in a schattenhaften world at 18 years of finsternis , in steinhütten , at 18 years , in steinhütten , and two periods of the glacier was absichtlich by the neun nine years of the pregnancy , which is verbrachten , and they spend the neun of their mother , and they spend a
and as all of this time , they &apos;re going to be introduced to the values of their society , values that makes the claim that their prayers and only their prayers , the cosmic -- or we could say the ecological -- balance .
at the end of this amazing epic , you &apos;ll be taken out of a tages , and in the age of the early days , you see a sonnenaufgang , and in the age of the time , it &apos;s all the way to be a sunrise , and the priests is going to be back in incredible , and the priests is going back to the same thing
it &apos;s so wonderful . you have to protect it . &quot;
they call the older brothers and say that we are the younger brothers , for the destruction of the world .
now this level of intuition is very important .
whenever we think of sight and landscape , we either rousseau rousseau and the old meaning of the gas empire , which is a rassistischer thought or the other , or the other people , and say , these people are more connected to nature than we are .
so , eingeborene are not sentimental , nor get rid of the nostalgie .
it doesn &apos;t have a lot of space in the malariaverseuchten sümpfen of tibet , but the cold of tibet , it &apos;s not shaped by a mysterious nimbus of the earth , not to be consciously close to the idea of being bewusst , but on a conventional intuition , the idea that the earth can exist in the idea of being human consciousness .
now , what does that mean ?
it means that a little kid made the andes , the mountain is a apu-geist , and a different relationship to this resource , and a other relationship to this resource , and a different relationship to this resource , as a little kid in the belief that is that a mountain is a lot of stones that can be widely abgetragen .
whether he &apos;s a aufenthaltsort of a mind or a haufen erz .
the interesting thing is the metaphor , which is the relationship between the individual and the nature of the nature .
i grew up in the forests of britisch colombia , and believed that these forests are there to be gerodet .
this was a different man than my friends , who believe that these forest of hukuk and the gebogenen himmelsschnabel , and the kannibalischen spirits , the kannibalischen spirits , the kannibalischen spirits , the most knowledgeable of the world , geister , to bring them out of their hamatsa-initiation .
now , if you start to look at the idea that these cultures can create different realities , you can understand some of your extraordinary discoveries . like this plant .
it &apos;s a photograph that i first put in the middle east in the middle east .
this is ayahuasca , from many of you have heard , the most powerful psychoaktive präparat of the repertoire of the schamanen .
what &apos;s fascinating is so fascinating , it &apos;s not just the pharmakologische potential of this präparats , but it &apos;s actually made a series of betakarbolinen , harmin , harmolin , harmolin , leicht , leicht , leicht , leicht , leicht , birgt , birgt , birgt , but this kletterpflanze trüber , it &apos;s about as a blue trüber , it will be a blauer trüber ,
this plant , some of these are some very strong tryptamine that are serotonin , dimethyltryptamin-5 and methoxydimethyltryptamin .
and if you &apos;ve seen the yanomami , how you schnupfen this stuff , these substance that you can also create from various species .
this powder is about as a gewehrlauf set of gewehrlauf , gesäumt from barocken &apos;s paintings and the landing on a seas of electricity .
it &apos;s not going to be distortion of reality , but the resolution of reality .
i actually have a professor , richard evan shultes , who &apos;s eingeleitet evan with the magic mushrooms in mexico in mexico , about discussing that tryptamine , because i was praying that you couldn &apos;t be einordnen , because at the moment that you don &apos;t have a lot of things that you &apos;re in the moment , you don &apos;t have a halluzination .
but the thing is that they can &apos;t be oral , because it &apos;s been able to darm through a human brain , of course , natürlich enzym , natürlich enzym , denaturiert .
you can only have a lot of other chemicals with some other chemicals , the mao denaturieren .
now this amazing thing is that the betakarboline that are in the liane , mao-inhibitoren of the kind of the species that is necessary to potenzieren the tryptamine , so you ask yourself .
how can these people from a flora plant adstringierender plants that are not finding plants that are combined to figure out how to combine this way , a kind of biochemischer version of the other , so that the sum of the sum is ?
we use this great idea of the world , trying to be able to get errors and the fehler .
but you ask the indianer say , &quot; the plant is to us . &quot;
so what does that mean ?
this tribe , the cofan , the 17 versions of ayahuasca that they all have in a lot of distance in the woods that are in the woods for our eyes than a kind of way of looking at .
and then you ask them , how you exercise your taxonomie and you say , &quot; i thought you &apos;ve got something from plants .
i mean , you know , you know , you know , &quot; and i said , &quot; no . &quot;
so it turns out to be every 17 varieties of vollmond in vollmond , and they &apos;re singing a different type of tonlage .
now , that &apos;s not going to you get a ph.d. in harvard , but it &apos;s much more interesting than a stamina .
now , the thing that &apos;s the problem is that even the diejenigen of us , the sympathy of the power , they have to look at the schwierige and farbenfroh , but somehow it &apos;s a vergangenheit , but the real world , which is the world , the world .
so the fact is that you &apos;re not going to be in the 20th century , in 300 years , and it &apos;s a ära of technical innovations , and the massive destruction of the biological and cultural diversity on earth is either active or passively . so the problem isn &apos;t the change .
all cultures have always involved in the dance with new lebenmöglichkeiten .
and the problem isn &apos;t the technology .
the sioux-indianer stopped listening to sioux than they were , as they were flying and arrow , when americans stopped americans when they &apos;re horse and pferdewagen .
not change and technology , the integrity of the ethnosphäre , it &apos;s power . the ugly face of the domination .
and wherever you &apos;re in the world , you &apos;re not going to be able to see the dynamisch of the schlamm , a nomadenvolk of sarawak , a nomadenvolk frei in the heimatland of the anpassung , a nomadenvolk frei in the heimatland of the anpassung , and the japanischen of the schlamm , the ungeheuerliche of the schlamm , the ungeheuerliche of the schlamm , the ungeheuerliche of
or if we go into the mountains of tibet , where i neuerlich a lot of bold , you &apos;ll see ugly face of the political face .
you know , the genocide , the phyische extinction extinction , allgemein , but the ethnozid , the destruction of the lifestyle , but the ethnozid , not only , but generally , and vielerorts as part of a entwicklungsstrategie .
and you can &apos;t understand the suffering if you don &apos;t have a unterster level .
i went with a young colleagues from chengdu meilen by lhasa überland by lhasa überland , and i just saw the face behind the statistics of which you see , 6,000 people who have been hört , and ashes that were being turned into rubble , and the 1,2 million people that were murdered in the revolution .
the father of this young manns was manns as a tag of the panchen specimen .
it meant that he was working during the chinese invasion of invasion .
his uncle was in the middle of your holiness that people killed for nepal .
his mother was locked up as a punishment for crimes -- for the crimes of crime .
he was taken in the age of two years to hide under her rockzipfel , because she wasn &apos;t going to live without him .
the sister who did this tapfere , was brought into a erziehungslager .
someday they were out of a armband maos , and for those übertretung had to do for seven years for seven years .
the suffering of suffering can be unerträglich , but the most likely of the people &apos;s mind is a little bit more manageable .
and at the end of the end , we are really going to be a choice . we want to live in a monochromatischen world of monotonie or in a polychromatischen world ?
margaret mead , the great anthropologist said that it &apos;s the biggest thing that &apos;s going to be richtung , we can &apos;t just see the entire bandwidth of human imagination , but that someday we can detect one day of human imagination , but that someday we wake up from a dream , and forgotten that there &apos;s ever been to be other options .
and it &apos;s been an indication that our species might have existed for 600,000 years .
the neolithische revolution , the landwirtschaft , and in this moment , the poesie of the saatkorns unterwarf , the poetry of the prosa and hierarchy , specialization and used , specialization and used , and it was only 10,000 years ago .
the modern industrial world as we know about 300 years old .
now , this shallow story tells me that we all have answers to the challenges that we &apos;re facing in the ensuing millennia .
if we ask this myriad weltkulturen to the meaning of the meaning of the human being , please join 10,000 .
and in this song , we &apos;re going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to realize that people realize that people realize the importance of the importance of the importance of the importance of the importance of the importance of the importance of getting a space that needs to be zugesichert , and there &apos;s great moments of optimism .
here &apos;s a photograph that i took at the north end of the baffin-inseln , when i went to inuits , and this man , olaya , told me a wonderful story of his grandfather .
the canadian government isn &apos;t always very well with the inuit and during the 50iger years in the zuge of our domination , they were forced to pull in settlements .
the großvater of this old man refused .
the family that fear had to be his life , and he took all of the guns and all tools .
now you have to know that the inuit is not afraid of the cold , they use them to their advantage .
the gleitschienen of their rights were originally made out of fish that was made in karibu-haut .
the man of man &apos;s didn &apos;t get out of the arctic arktischen , or the remains of the sound .
he schlüpfte out of out of out of out , put his pants out of seehundsfell and defäkierte in his hand , and as the feces started to frieren , it shaped it into the shape of a messers .
he went down to the sides of the fäkalien-messers and when it was frozen , he was a dog .
he enthäutete the dog and he was a geschirr , which was a skeleton of the dog and a schlitten , spannte a schlitten , and entschwand a anderen dog and entschwand entschwand with the eisschollen with the fäkalien-messer .
so you can do anything .
and this is on many ways of the symbol of the resistance of the western and all the native world .
the eastern government gave the inuit in april 1999 , the vollständige of the area of a area that &apos;s bigger than california and texas .
it &apos;s our new home and called heißt .
it &apos;s an international area . they all control all the mineralvorkommen .
a remarkable example , like a nation , a state of the wiedergutmachung that can be wiedergutmachung with your people and achieving .
and finally , i think it &apos;s pretty obvious , at least for those of us who are gereist the distant purposes of earth , realize that they &apos;re not yet away from all .
they &apos;re the heimatländer of someone .
they represent pieces of human imagination , which in the past are in past times , and for all of us , the dreams of these children are , like the dreams of our children are part of the hope of hope .
what we &apos;re trying to do is we think we believe that politicians never achieve something .
we believe that polemik -- we believe that polemik is not nearly complex , but we believe that the world &apos;s aging can change the world , and therefore we are probably the best institution for storytelling , our website is 35 million hits a month .
the 156 nations send us send our fernsehkanal .
our magazines are going to read from millions of millions .
and we &apos;re taking a series of travel in the ethnosphäre of the ethnosphäre , which we thought of the publikum of such cultural wonders , that this world has made a lebensmöglichkeit of the zentrale revelation of anthropology , that this world has made a lebensmöglichkeit in a really different way of what we can find in a truly multicultural universal rights , where the wisdom of all people
thank you .
what i &apos;m going to show you as quickly , is the basic work , a new technology that we &apos;re doing , a new technology that we &apos;re doing in a part of a year , and it &apos;s a umgebung , and it &apos;s a environment where they either are either or removed with huge amounts of visual data .
we see many , many of the gigabytes of digital photographs that you can turn seamlessly and start fortwährend , schwenken , to schwenken in any way .
and it &apos;s no matter how many information we look at how big these collections are or how big those images are .
most of you are digital &apos;s digital right now , but this one here is for example , for example , is a scan of the kongressbibliothek and it &apos;s in a field of 300 .
it doesn &apos;t matter , because the only thing that makes the performance of a system like this one can be a system that &apos;s the number of music on the screen on the screen in every moment .
this is a whole book , an example of nichtbild-daten .
this is bleak house of dickens . every column is a chapter .
to prove that it really evolved to a text and not a picture , we can really show something like this , that this real representation of the texts and no picture .
maybe this is a artificial way of reading a e-buch .
i wouldn &apos;t recommend it .
this is a realistischerer case . this is an copy of the guardian .
every big picture is the beginning of a abschnitts .
and that &apos;s really what pleasure and the good experience of reading a magazine or a newspaper , which is a kind of medium with multiple orders .
we also have something on the edge of this particular particular particular particular machine of the guardian .
we &apos;ve designed a wrong display with high school in a normal display than a normal display , and we added additional content .
if you want to see the functions of this car , you can see you here .
or other models , or even engineering .
and this really does this really look at these ideas , these constraints for the verfügbaren space .
we hope that it &apos;s not a pop-ups and other nonsense -- that should not be necessary .
of course , the world is one of the really obvious applications for a technology like this .
and i don &apos;t really want to spend very much time , except to say that we &apos;re going to be able to contribute .
but these are all the streets in the u.s.
übereinandergelagert top on the erdräumlichen picture .
let &apos;s now let us now another .
now this is live in the internet . you can nachprüfen it .
this is a project with the name of photosynth , which is really two different technologies together .
one is seadragon and the other thing about computervision , the von of noah , a universitätsstudenten of the university of washington , under the beratung of steve seitz on the uw of steve seitz .
and rick szeliski was done by microsoft research . a very good collaboration .
so this is live in the internet . it &apos;s powered by seadragon .
you can see this if we create this kind of views where we can do through pictures and do this experience of the mehrfachen .
but the spatial arrangement of images is in the indeed of meaning .
the computervision-algorithmen , they have taken these pictures , which is the real space that were made in the kanadischen of the grassi lakes , which is actually entsprechen , and you see elements of stabilisierten dias , or panoramischer dias , and these things were all wired in relation to each other .
i don &apos;t know if i &apos;ve got to show you other people &apos;s lives .
there are the ones that are much more empowered .
i &apos;d like to show you a originalen of noah from noah , and this is from a early prototype of the sommer that we &apos;ve been working on the summer , to show you that it &apos;s really the punchline behind this technology , and this is not so clearly as much as you see the environments that we have on the website .
we had to do it because of the lawyers and so forth .
this is a rekonstruktion of the cathedral notre dame , who was working on the computer with pictures of flickr , and they just give up a notre dame on flickr and auf , and they &apos;re going to have a picture of men and the orangefarbenen , which is a picture that was discovered as a picture of this model .
so this is all flickr-bilder , and they all are in the way that they are in the relationship .
and we can actually navigate in these very simple way .
you know . you know , i never believed that i &apos;m going to work at microsoft at microsoft .
i &apos;m very thankful for the reception here .
i suspect , you can see that this is a lot of different types of cameras : everything is the handy-kamera , from the handy-kamera slrs , a pretty large number of you that have been put in that environment .
and if possible , i &apos;ll find some of the curious .
many of you are from faces to see and so forth .
there are a series of photographs -- here are you .
this is actually a poster of notre dame , which was really recorded .
we can move from the poster to a physical view of this environment .
the point here is that we can do things with social environment , and it will be now data from all of the collective web -- like , visual memory of the earth -- and everything will be connected to each other .
all these pictures are connected to each other , and it creates something that &apos;s bigger than the sum of the parts .
they get a model that comes out of all of the earth .
think of this as the sequel of the work of stephen lawlers of stephen lawlers .
and this is something that &apos;s through complexity , with the people using it , grows and use the use of the users with the use of the use of the use of the use of the use of the use of the use of the use of the use of the use .
their own pictures are going to be with the metadata , which has a different person .
if someone has the trouble , and they have all of these sacred , and they &apos;re all mitteilt , and i can do it , my photo from the notre suddenly , and i can use it as a place , and i can use it to the ausgangspunkt , the photos of other people , and thus sort of a kind of übergreifender modaler of social experience with
and of course , byproduct all the immens are the vast rich , models of every interesting part of the earth that not only have been through überflüge or satellite , but by collective memory .
thank you .
i &apos;m going to do it right ? your software allows us to be a certain time , within the next few years , all images that are being used by somebody in the world , in principle , are being connected to someone ?
yeah . it &apos;s not something else .
if you want to make it hyperlinks between the images .
and it does this because of the content in the images .
and this is really exciting if you think of the abundance of the information information that have many of those images .
how if you &apos;re a websuche for images , where you stack and text and text of the text contains a lot of information about it , which is the image that &apos;s the picture .
but how would it be if that image you &apos;re wired with all of your images ?
then the amount of semantischen querverbindung and the abundance that makes it really , really , really , really , really , a classic netzwerkeffekt .
blaise , that &apos;s really incredible . it &apos;s a congratulations .
thank you very much .
i &apos;m going to tell you some things from my book , which i hope to do in the direction of the things that you &apos;ve heard , and i &apos;m going to try to make some connections if you don &apos;t have any of those .
i want to start with the beginning , what i call &quot; offizielles dogma . &quot;
that official dogma of what ?
the official glaubenssatz of all western societies .
the official dogma works : when our goal is the most powerful of our citizens , it &apos;s all about the maximierung of the freedom of the individual .
the reason is that freedom is good , valuable , valuable , value , a unverzichtbare assumption for human human .
if people have freedom , it &apos;s all of us to do about the things that our collective services and nobody has to decide .
the path is too blind to maximize choice .
the more choices have people , the more freedom you have , and the more freedom you have , the more that they have .
this is , i think , deep in our wasserversorgung , that there would be no way in the meaning .
and it &apos;s also deeply deeply deep in our lives .
i &apos;m going to give you some examples of this , which is going to allow us to make progress .
this is my supermarket . no big .
i just want to say briefly about salatdressing .
there &apos;s a thousand dressings in my supermarket , if you don &apos;t get the 10 different extra extra dimensions of extra extra dimensions , and you can buy 12 pieces of balsamico-essig you can make a large number of salad dessings , which is that the unlikely case that none of the fuel that they &apos;re not right in the store right now .
so that &apos;s how the supermarket is .
and then you go to the verbraucher-elektronik store around a stereo -- speaker , cd-player , a kassetten-player , a kassetten-player , a kassetten-player , verstärker , healthy , and in this one electronics , there &apos;s so many stereo plants .
we can anlagen 6.5 million different stereo zusammenstellen from the components that are going to be offered in this one store .
you have to admit that this is a big selection .
in other areas -- the world of communication .
there was a time when i was a boy , because you could have had any phone , as long as he was bell .
they have their phone phone . they don &apos;t have bought .
a consequence of the first was that the telephone never broken was broken .
these days are over .
we now have a infinite selection of phones , especially in the world of the cellphone .
these are the mobile future of the future .
my favorite one is the in the middle -- mp3-player- , nasen-haar-trimmer and crème brûlée .
and if you &apos;ve seen that , you know , you can &apos;t see that in your business , you &apos;ll be sure that it will soon be soon .
and what it does is it takes people to go into the business and ask this question .
now you know what the answer to this question ?
the answer is &quot; no . &quot;
it &apos;s not possible to buy a cellphone that doesn &apos;t do too much .
in other aspects of life , the very much more sophisticated than the buy of the things that are being gegenständen , is the same explosion of choice .
health care -- it &apos;s not a longer that &apos;s going to go to the united states , and that &apos;s what you &apos;re going to do .
instead , you go to the doctor and the doctor of the doctor : we could make a difference or we could do b .
a has a benefits and risks .
b has these benefits and risks . what do you want to do ?
and they say , &quot; doctor , what should i do ? &quot;
the doctor says , a has this benefits and risks and b has those benefits and the risks .
what do you want to do ?
and if you say , &quot; if you were , if you were , what would you do ? &quot;
the doctor says , &quot; but i don &apos;t . &quot;
the result is -- we call it &quot; patient autonomy , but in reality , the last of someone &apos;s treffen -- namentlich of the verantwortung of someone &apos;s disease -- namentlich of the doktor -- namentlich of the doctor -- namentlich of the doctor -- namentlich of the doctor -- and that &apos;s not going to be a choice -- the patient &apos;s patient .
there &apos;s a tremendous marketing for verschreibungspflichtige medicine for people like you and me , if you think about it , no sense , because we don &apos;t buy them .
why are you going to be able to buy us if we can &apos;t buy ?
the answer is : you expect to be able to learn the doctor in the next morning and ask for one change .
something like our identity is now a question of choice like this slide .
we &apos;re not erben identity , we invent them .
and we invent how we want to redefine ourselves as we want .
that means that every day if you wake up at the morning , you decide to decide what kind of person they want to be .
in terms of marriage and family , there was a time that almost every everybody had a had a hatte , and they had this fast as quickly as they could , and then quickly kids were able to get their children as they could .
the only choice was &quot; who &quot; who &quot; is &quot; who , &quot; not when they did .
now , today , all right .
i teach wonderful smart students , and i &apos;ll give you a 20 percent fewer work than i did .
and it &apos;s not because they &apos;re less smart , and not because they are less carefully .
it &apos;s because they &apos;re busy with other things , they ask yourself , &quot; should i marry , or not ? am i gonna marry ?
i &apos;ll get married later ? should i have children , or until it ?
they &apos;re all kinds of issues questions .
and you &apos;ll be surprised that question , whether it means all the tasks that i &apos;m doing and not get good grade in my class .
and in fact , they should do this . these are important questions .
work -- we &apos;re blessed like carl &apos;s carl , with the technology that we allow us to work every minute every minute of every single day on the planet -- except on the randolph hotel .
there &apos;s a corner , by the way , i &apos;m not going to tell you that the wirelesslan work .
i &apos;m not going to tell you that because i want to use it .
so what it means is that incredible freedom of choice we have to make in terms of work , again and again , again , or not working on work .
we can play our kids playing soccer game , and we have our cell phone at a hip of a hip and our blackberry on other waist , and our laptop on our laps .
and also , if you &apos;re all of them , every minute in the verstümmeln of the verstümmeln we &apos;re going to ask our child in a fußballspiels zugucken , we also ask , &quot; should i think that call ?
should i have respond to this email ? should i write this letter ? &quot;
and even the answer to the question , &quot; no , it &apos;s certainly not going to be able to have your experience of your child &apos;s body &apos;s experience of your child .
all of us look , big things and small things , tangible things and lifestyle , life is a question of choice .
and the world in the world we were living in .
so i want to say there was some choices , but not everything was a question of choice .
and the world in the world we see now .
and the question is , are the good news or bad news ?
the answer is &quot; yes . &quot;
we all know what &apos;s good , so i &apos;ll just think about what &apos;s bad about it .
all these choices have two effects , two of these two effects .
a effect , paradoxer , is that he &apos;s going to lift the phone instead .
with so many options you can choose , it &apos;s very hard to get people to do .
i &apos;m going to give you another drastisches example , a study of investing in volunteer in volunteer .
one of my colleague of me had access to investitions-akten vanguard , who was gigantischen fondgesellschaft by a million of a million people and about 2,000 different things .
and what she found was a 10 investmentfonds die that was anbot the participation , the participation was nahm by two percent .
they offer 50 investmentfonds -- 10 percent less employees than if you only offer five to five . why ?
because it &apos;s 50 investmentfonds who are on the choice , it &apos;s so hard to decide what you want to pick it on tomorrow .
and then tomorrow , and then tomorrow , tomorrow , and tomorrow , and tomorrow , and tomorrow .
you know , that &apos;s not only that people have to go to the retirement , because they don &apos;t have to go to the retirement , because they have to have enough money to be able to make it , it means that they &apos;re really hard to miss the decisions of their own employers .
by not , by participation , they were on the 5000 u.s. dollars on the arbeitsgeber , the happy would have been happy to reproduce .
paralysis is a suite of choices .
and i think it makes it look like this .
you really want to make the decision really make if it &apos;s all of the eternity , right ?
they don &apos;t want to pick up the wrong investment , or even the wrong thing .
so this is a effect . the other effect is that even if we go through the paralysis and make a decision , we end up with a decision , we end with the result of choice , as if we had the opportunity to have the opportunity to decide to get us between less choices .
and there &apos;s several reasons for this .
one of them is , in fact , is a lot of auswahl salatdressings unterschiedlicher , and it &apos;s not perfect -- and what happens is that they have a different choice of alternative , and what happens is that they have a different choice , and what happens is that they have a choice , and this idea is a zufriedenheit negative , which you had to make their
the more options there is , the simple is not going to be anything at first , that &apos;s a enttäuschend for choice you meet .
second , what economists call economists .
dan gilbert : a great point of this morning , he told him how much the way we evaluate things that we can do .
well , if there &apos;s a lot of alternative to concerns , it just seems to be attractive properties of alternative that you &apos;re doing , that makes you less content with the alternatives that you &apos;ve chosen .
here &apos;s an example . for those of you who are not new yorkers , i apologize .
but here &apos;s what you should have thought .
here &apos;s a couple of the hamptons .
very expensive immobilien .
beautiful beach . great day . you have it all for itself .
what could be better ? &quot; damn &quot; the man thinks , &quot; it &apos;s august .
everybody in my manhattener neighborhood is gone .
i could park right in front of my house . &quot;
and he spends two weeks from the mind that he &apos;s been able to have missed the opportunity to have a great deal .
oppertunitätskosten senken senken the satisfaction that we get through our choices , also if that &apos;s what we &apos;ve got .
and the more opportunities there are available to choice , the more attractive properties of these choices are going to take into the oppertunitätskosten .
here &apos;s another example .
now , this cartoon makes some statements .
he makes a statement about it in the now , and maybe things are slowly slowly .
but a important point that he &apos;s doing is always who you decide to do , decide to do other things .
and these other things like many , many of them , and it will make you make less fuss .
third , eskalation , the expectations .
this is how i wanted to go to my jeans .
i &apos;m wearing jeans , almost all the time .
and there was a time in the kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of a kind of kind of kind of a kind of kind of a kind of kind of kind of pottery , and they have bad gepasst , and when they had a long enough , and they often have enough enough to get their &quot; ok
so , to buy new jeans , a lot of years of the old age of the old age , and i said , &quot; i &apos;d like to have a couple of jeans here , here &apos;s my size . &quot;
and the counter said , &quot; you want to schlanke schlanke , light or a lot ?
do you want to be buttons or reißverschluss ? stone or säure ?
would you want to be jeans with holes ?
you want to go down the bottom , kegelig , blah blah , blah blah ... &quot; and so on .
my jaw was downstairs , and after i recovered , i said , &quot; i &apos;d like to have the kind of the way that i &apos;d had the only species . &quot;
he had no idea what was that , so i spent a hour to all these damn jeans , and i &apos;m giving you the truth -- and i say the truth -- with the best of the jeans i &apos;ve ever had .
i had better . all of this choice i would better .
but i felt bad .
why ? i wrote a whole book to try to explain myself .
the reason i felt bad was , with all these tools , my expectations , which is a good thing for a good , very few jeans .
i had low expectations . i didn &apos;t have any concrete expectations than it was just in a way .
when it came in 100 ways , damn one of them would have been perfect , and one of them should have been perfect .
and what i was doing was good , but it wasn &apos;t perfect .
and so i &apos;d given what i had to get to what i was expecting , and what i had was in comparison with what i expected .
the add of opportunities in humans , people need to have expectations that people have to be the expectation that they have to be good .
and this leads to fewer satisfaction with the results , even if the results are good .
nobody in the world of the marketings white , because if you would , you don &apos;t know what you &apos;re going on here .
the truth is more like this .
the reason is that it was more than anything than anything was bad , when everything was bad , it was a bad experience that was possible to make a pleasant surprise .
today , in the world where we live in -- we are wealthy , with perfection as a expectation , which is the best for you ever ever , and the best way to do that is that you &apos;re all about to do .
they will never be angenehm because their expectations , my expectations , my expectations , haushoch .
the secret to the glücklichkeit -- that &apos;s what you &apos;ve got all of them -- the secret to the glücklichkeit are low expectations .
i want to say -- a short autobiographischer moment -- i &apos;m a woman with a woman , and it &apos;s really wonderful .
i have no better do this . i didn &apos;t have niedergelassen .
but niederlassen isn &apos;t always a bad thing .
finally , one of the kaufens of a bad sitzenden , if it &apos;s only a kind of bad , if it &apos;s only , if you &apos;re dissatisfied , and you wonder , who is responsible , the answer is , the world is responsible . what would you have to do ?
when hundreds of different kinds of things are available , and you buy one that &apos;s the disappointing , and you ask , who is responsible ?
it &apos;s also clear that the answer is : you &apos;re .
they would have done better .
with 100 different sorts of jeans in the schaufenster , there &apos;s no excuse for mistakes .
and so when people meet decisions , and even though the results are good , they feel disappointed , they &apos;re beschuldigen themselves .
clinical trials , economic males in the industrial world in the world .
i think a signifikanter -- not the only beiträger of the explosion of depression , and also , in fact , people have experience because they &apos;re the position , because they have to explain those experiences , and then if you have to explain that experience , you would have it .
and so the bilanzergebnis is that it &apos;s better , objective , objective , and we feel bad .
so let me just remember .
this is the official dogma dogma that we all think of right now is completely wrong . it &apos;s not true .
there &apos;s no question that &apos;s a little bit more issue than none of it is not , but it doesn &apos;t follow that more choices than something .
there &apos;s a magical amount . i don &apos;t know what it is .
i &apos;m pretty sure that we &apos;ve been able to have been verpasst for the selection of our collective .
now , as a tough question -- i &apos;m almost done -- as a tough question that &apos;s going to think about the think about the way that all of those choices are enabled in the industrialized societies , is the material of the material .
there are many places in the world , and we &apos;ve heard of many of you , whose problem is not the problem .
your problem is that they have too little .
so the things i &apos;m talking about is a wondrous issue of modern , rich , western societies .
and what &apos;s frustrating and a lot of things : steve levitt has told you about how those expensive and hard to installierenden car seats , it &apos;s a waste of money .
what i &apos;m telling you is that these expensive , complicated decisions -- it &apos;s not easy that you don &apos;t help .
they &apos;re actually getting .
they &apos;re concerned that we are .
if something of the people that enables our societies to make our societies to make decisions in their societies , would have evolved to be able to make people better , wouldn &apos;t just be improved , but our dignity would be improved .
economists call this a pareto-verbesserungs application .
einkommensumverteilung is going to make sure that it &apos;s all better -- not just the poor -- because all these great choices are plagt us .
finally , please , please , please , please , please , and , a hochentwickelte person says , &quot; ah ! what &apos;s going on ?
you don &apos;t know anything possible in this goldfischglas . &quot;
verarmten imagination , a kurzsichtige view of the world -- and that &apos;s the way i first read it .
but the more i thought about this , the more i got to the point that the fish knows something .
because the truth is that if you break the goldfischglas , so that it &apos;s possible , they don &apos;t have freedom . they have paralysis .
if you break the goldfischglas , so that it &apos;s possible to senken your satisfaction .
they increase the paralysis and the senken .
everybody needs a goldfischglas .
this is almost as fast as the fish -- possibly , for the fish , definitely , definitely for us .
but the abhanden of a comprehensive goldfischglas is a recipe for misery , and i guess , i guess .
thank you very much .
you know , i &apos;ve been talking about some of these projects earlier , about the human genome and what that meant , and over the discovery of the genes .
in fact , we &apos;re starting from a new point : we have the biology to go and now we &apos;re going to go from the digital code into a new phase of biology , to build new life .
we &apos;ve always got to ask ourselves questions .
what &apos;s life ? it &apos;s something i believe that many biologists have tried to understand and that we &apos;ve got to have a different kind of biologist .
we &apos;ve tried several attempts to spend it on the minimum components .
we &apos;ve got nearly 20 years later , and when we have the humangenom , the vollzog of the change in the world &apos;s analogen world of the world &apos;s world .
now we &apos;re trying to ask if we can regenerate life or whether we can make new life from this digital universe ?
this is the map of a small organism , surrounded by a little bit of a species , the smallest genome of a species can replicate itself in the lab , and we &apos;ve tried to do that with a smaller genome .
we &apos;ve managed to go to about a hundred genes from the 500 or so that are here .
but if we look at these metabolic map , the very simple , which is very simple , to me , is the way we can look at this genes that we can see one of the genes that we can see one of the genes that it would be a very unlikely that would lead this to a living cell .
so we decided that there &apos;s the only way to move this chromosome actually to synthesize that , which allows us to go to the individual components and thus ask some of these fundamental questions .
and so we started with the question , we can have a chromosome ?
lets it enables the chemistry to make these really great molecules , which is never done before ?
and if we can do that , we can we do this ?
a chromosome is just a piece of inertes chemical material .
our steps were exponentially in the prison of life .
our ability to write genetic code has really been very slowly , but still , we have a very slowly , and our final point would have now put on a exponential curve .
we started 15 years ago .
it took a couple of years ago with a bioethischen electronic before we did the first experiments .
it turns out it &apos;s very difficult to do .
there are tens of thousands of machines around the world , and we can create small pieces of dna , but it &apos;s a degenerativer process , so the longer you make a piece of power , which is more mistakes .
so we had to develop a new method we can put these little bits of pieces and the mistakes .
this was our first try to try and the digital information , the genome of the genome .
it &apos;s a little virus of bacteria .
we made small pieces , a fehlerkorrektur and had a dna molecule of about 5,000 letters .
the exciting stage came out when we took this piece of inerte chemical and put it into a bacterium , and the bacterium started reading the genetic code and made dark particles .
the viral particles then became the cells , and then killed back and killed e. coli .
i recently talked about the oil industry and they were saying that this model was very much .
they laughed more than you do .
so we think that this is a situation in the software that actually build your hardware in a biological system .
but we wanted to go a lot of time . we wanted to build a whole bakterielles chromosome , it &apos;s more than 580.000 letters code , we figured out we could build it in some metric of the virus of the kassetten of the kassetten of the kassetten of the kassetten of the kassetten of the kassetten of a living cell .
design is the key , and if you want to start with the digital information in the computer , that digital information has to be really irrational information .
when we first did in 1995 , the fehlerrate had been a fehler pro in a fehler basenpaare .
we found out the resequenzieren 30 errors . if we had the original sequence would have never been hochzufahren .
part of design is to make pieces of the 50 letters long , and the other to do with other animals , to build smaller sub-einheiten .
we have a unique elements here .
you might have heard that we &apos;ve got waterzeichen .
think about this : we have a 4-buchstaben code : a , c , g and t and t , and t. t .
triplets of this letter -- these letters actually encode about 20 amino amino acids , and there &apos;s a single purpose for each of those amino acids .
so we can use the genetic code to write our words , sentences , thoughts .
initially we have signed .
some people were disappointed that it was not a poetry .
we &apos;ve been so constructed the plays so that we could easily break them down , and there &apos;s tremendous opportunity to go and back to the world .
and we started creating pieces , starting with pieces of stücken , buchstaben letters , and we put these messages to make these aneinander to make these back back to these again .
in every step , we produced this plays in the überschuss , so we could sequence them , because we tried to get a very robust process to see what you &apos;re going to see in a minute .
we &apos;ve tried to get to the point of the automation .
so this looks like a basketball-playoff .
if we &apos;re going to get these right to 100,000 pieces -- with 100,000 circles -- then these don &apos;t just grow to e. coli , and it &apos;s übersteigt the opportunities of modern molecular molecular , and so we &apos;re going to use other mechanisms .
we knew about a mechanism called the homologe rekombination , which is the biology to fix dna that can be able to bring those pieces .
here &apos;s an example of this . there &apos;s a organism called deinococcus radiodurans of the three million radiation of radiation at radiation .
you see in the upper area that his chromosome is just pulling apart .
12 to 24 hours later , everything was all caught up as well .
we have thousands of organisms that can do that .
these organisms can be completely ausgetrocknet , they can actually live in the vacuum .
i &apos;m absolutely sure that life is in space and move on looking for aquatischen conditions .
in fact , nasa has shown that there &apos;s a lot of it out there .
here &apos;s a gefügeaufnahme of the molecule that we made using these processes -- actually we have only off-the-shelf hefe-mechanismen with the right design of the pieces , we put them together . yeast , that then automatically fügt the automatically automatically .
this is not a elektronenmikroskopaufnahme , it &apos;s a reguläre mikroskopaufnahme .
it &apos;s so a big molecule that we can actually see it with the lichtmikroskop .
these are recordings of a dauer of six seconds .
this is the publication we &apos;ve only been completed recently .
these are about 580.000 letters in genetischem code . it &apos;s the largest molecule with definierter structure that ever created by humans .
it has a molekulargewicht of 300 million .
if we had it with a schriftgröße of 10 and without any distances , it would contain it 142 pages , just to put this genetic code .
now how do we start a chromosome ? how do we activate it ?
obviously , it &apos;s a virus very simple . it &apos;s much more complicated with bacteria .
it &apos;s also easier when you &apos;re in eukaryonten like we are , you just take the nucleus out , and you have a different car , and that &apos;s exactly what you &apos;ve heard about the cloning .
in archaebakterien , the chromosome is the chromosome in the cell , but we &apos;ve shown you that you can actually turn a full chromosome of a cell to the other , and that can be activate .
we reinigten the chromosome of a mikrobenspezies , and the mäuse , we were able to put together some extra-gene out of the way people and mice , we had some extra-gene to destroy all the way to destroy all the protein . and it was very amazing than we put it into a cell -- and they &apos;re going to be very ausgereiften with our very ausgereiften graphs here
the new chromosome went into the cell .
in fact , we thought that this is the end , but we &apos;ve tried to bring the process .
this is the hauptmechanismus of evolution here .
we &apos;re all kinds of species here have a second chromosome , or a third of irgendwoher , every time thousands of times every time in a second to a second .
so people who think of evolution as a gene that &apos;s going to be missed a lot of the biology .
there &apos;s the enzyme die called the dna .
the chromosome that was in the cell , the chromosomes we &apos;ve already completed .
it was exprimiert in the cell and realized that the other chromosome as a fremdes material , and so we had a cell to the end of a new chromosome .
it &apos;s verfärbte blue because of the genes we had .
and after a very short time , all of the characteristics of species have lost all of the species and konvertierte completely new species based on the new software that we &apos;ve given in the cell .
all the proteins changed the membranes -- when we read the genetic code , it was exactly what we &apos;re going to share .
it may sound like genomic alchimie , but we can move through the software-dna , things really change dramatically .
now i &apos;ve convinced that this is not the genesis -- that &apos;s based on 3.5 billion years ago , evolution in half billion years ago .
and i have convinced that we are now a new form of cambrian cambrian cambrian explosion in the massive of the massive amount of new artenbildung based on this digital design .
why should we do this ?
i think it &apos;s pretty obvious in terms of what we need .
we are at nine billion people in the next 40 years .
in order to ask it in my context : i was born in the year .
today , three people on this planet is in the last year , in 40 years , within 40 years , it will be four .
we have problems with food , with frischem and water water , medicine , fuel , the fuel for the other billion people .
it becomes a challenge for 9 .
we need over five billion tons of coal , 30-plus billion billion oil pills , which is hundreds of millions of millions of oil pills .
if we think about biological processes or any process that &apos;s going to replace it , it becomes a giant challenge .
then , of course , there &apos;s all the co2 from this material that &apos;s in the atmosphere .
we now have taken out of our discoveries around the world , a database of about 20 million genes , and i want to believe that those are the designkomponenten of the future .
the elektronikindustrie had a dozen components and see the diversity of the coming out of the walls .
we &apos;re in the first line in the world , the limits of biological reality and the one of our imagination .
we have technologies today , because of these fast synthesemethoden , to do what we call kombinatorische genetics .
we now have the opportunity to build a large robot to build the millions of chromosomes on the day .
if you can convert these 20 million genes to make oktan or medikamente new kinds of vaccines , or drugs , we can only change a little team of biology than the last 20 years ago .
and it &apos;s just nurmale selection , we can selektieren nach to lebensfähigkeit , production of chemicals or treibstoffproduktion impfstoffproduktion and so on .
this is a shot of a wirklicher design-software that you &apos;re actually trying to sit and sit and new and new species on the computer .
you know , we don &apos;t know how it &apos;s going to look like . we know exactly how their genetic code will look like .
we &apos;re now focusing on the fourth generation .
they &apos;ve seen corn corn , which is just a bad experiment .
we have the zweiten- and third generation , the relatively soon coming out of the relatively soon will be much more vivid , like oktan or different types of butanol .
but what we think is the only way of biology without the cost of the cost of food , or the limitation of the cost of the cost is when we see co2 as a sink , and so we &apos;re working on the way that we &apos;re working on the path that go into this way , and we &apos;re working on the path .
and we think we &apos;re the first generation of treibstoffen the fourth generation , and that &apos;s about 18 months .
and sunlight and co2 are a method -- a method .
but in our discovery of the world , we &apos;ve all sorts of different ways .
this is a organism that we described in 1996 .
he lives in the deep sea , about ein-einhalb miles , in almost nahezu kochenden .
it cost carbon dioxide in methane , under use of hydrogen as a source .
we can investigate whether we can use gespeichertes co2 that could easily be brought into produktionsplätzen , konvertieren the co2 in fuel , to bring this process to bring this process .
within a brief period of time , we believe we could be able to solve one of the fundamental questions of life .
you know , we have -- moderate goals like the ersatz of the earth &apos;s ersatz industry , right . if you couldn &apos;t do that at ted , where else ? where you can get a hauptquelle of energy .
but the same thing we &apos;re working on is the same approaches for the development of the development .
you &apos;ve seen this year , we &apos;re always a year in the back , and they have a dollar if it &apos;s going to be the right vaccine .
i think that can be changed by rekombinante impfstoffe vaccines in the vorhinein .
this is what the future might look like with changes , can now accelerate the evolutionsbaum today with synthetic bacteria , archaen , and potentially eukaryonten .
we &apos;re going to improve a light of people to improve people . our goal is that we have a chance to survive long enough to do that , thank you very much .
at the last ted conference , i had a introduction to the lhc .
and i promised back to you to explain how the machine works .
so it &apos;s a lot of time . and for all those who were the biggest scientific trial which is the largest scientific experiment that has been the magic -- 27 miles in diameter .
his job is to create the conditions that less than a milliardstel second , of the universe -- and that &apos;s up to 600 million times in a second .
it &apos;s just breathtaking .
this is the machine below the answer .
we take pictures of these mini-urknalle in detectors .
i &apos;m working on this . he calls up to a atlas detector -- 44 feet in the width , 22 meters in diameter .
and here &apos;s a spectacular picture of atlas in the construction that you see the scale .
at the 10th 10 last year , the machine was the first time .
and this picture was taken by atlas .
it &apos;s a verursachte immensen in the core .
it &apos;s a picture of the first strahlenpartikels that the entire track around the lhc , then intentionally , with a part of the lhc to allow a rain of dark to the detector .
in other words , when we saw this picture at the 10th of september , we knew that the machine works , which is a great triumph of a great triumph .
i don &apos;t know if this is the biggest jubel jubel , or this , when someone liked the google , and the front of the front .
it means that we have a cultural impacts on the scientific .
about a week later , there was a problem with these guys who had to do with these guys -- these golden wires here here here here here here here here here .
these wires leiten leiten ampere when the machine is running on hochleistung .
now , the engineers are going to look at them and say , &quot; no , no , you don &apos;t . that &apos;s small wires . &quot;
you can afford it because if you &apos;re very far in the way you &apos;re going to get into it .
so , in minus 271 , cooler than the room between stars , these wires can withstand the tension .
in one of the connections , between the neuntausend magnet in the lhc , there was a manufakturdefekt .
it &apos;s heat at the wires and 13-tausend ampere , suddenly begegneten resistance .
this was the result .
now , it &apos;s even though , even though it &apos;s a magnet that magnet over 20 tons of ton and around about 30 inches .
so we &apos;re going to be about 50 of the magnet about the magnet of the magnet , about 50 of the magnet about the magnet of the magnet , about 50 of the magnet about the magnet .
and they had to remove what we did .
we konditionierten them , reparierten them .
they &apos;re all back to their way back .
the end of march is going to be back .
we &apos;re going to be able to take it and expect to be able to collect on june or july or setzen our journey to figure out what the building blocks of the universe .
now , in a kind of funny , they &apos;re doing this accidents for the debate about the value of science and ingenieurskunst of such limits , it &apos;s easy to reject something .
i think that it &apos;s so hard to reach out that we can reach our borders through the borders , the value of things like the lhc .
i &apos;m going to be talking to my english scientists , humphrey davy , who i think was michael experimente , as a result , as a result of the human spirit , as a result , our scientific vorstellungen , that our scientific imaginations are not endgültig in nature that there are no purpose in nature that our triumphe are vollzählig , and that there is no new worlds
thank you .
i &apos;m a writer .
books is writing , my profession , but it &apos;s more than that .
it &apos;s also my big , lifelong love and fascination .
and i don &apos;t expect that that will change the change .
but the fact is a little bit of weird in my life and my career that led me to the whole of the work .
this is a strange event that i wrote a book -- a biography called „ eat , pray , love , love , which is why , unlike all my previous books in the world , and a big mega-ereignis aus , and a big mega-ereignis , international bestseller-ding .
the result is that i don &apos;t care where i am , treated , as i would be the untergang .
seriously -- the untergang geweiht !
for example , they get a lot concerned on me and say , &quot; don &apos;t you know that they &apos;ll never be übertreffen ?
have you no fear that she &apos;s going to be able to live their entire life and never create a book that &apos;s in the world ? never again ?
okay , that &apos;s really what makes really courage .
but it would be worse if i wasn &apos;t remember , when i first told me about the first time i told the first time i wanted to be a writer , with the same kind of angstbesetzter response .
people said , „ did you not afraid to have any success ?
you don &apos;t have a afraid that you can kill the humiliation of a absage ?
did you have no fear that you live for your life and never get something that you &apos;ll never die on a schrotthaufen geplatzter dreams -- your mouth filled with the bitter asche of the versagens ?
so , you know , you know .
the answer -- the short answer to all these questions is : „ .
yeah , i &apos;m afraid of all these things .
and i &apos;ve always had .
and i &apos;ve got a lot more things that nobody would be about .
like algae -- and other kinds of things .
but if it &apos;s about writing , i &apos;ve been thinking about this for a while , and ask me , why ?
is that sensible ?
it &apos;s logical that is that it should be expected to be expected to do that he &apos;s afraid to do the work that he feels ?
and what &apos;s happening with the creative thing that they &apos;re doing is actually insecure to the gegenseitigen -- in a way that it does not do other professions ?
my father , for example , chemist , and i can &apos;t remember a situation in your 40 years as a chemist , in which he was asked to be afraid to be afraid .
with your chemiker-blockade , john -- like this ?
it &apos;s just not going to know ?
but to be fair -- the group of chemist have not been getting the ruf of the centuries of alkoholsüchtigen people .
we seem to have this kind of reputation . but not only the writers , but the creative genres , seem to have this reputation , seem to have this reputation , mentally tremendously .
all you have to do is to look at the bitter todeszahlen of really amazing , the young thing from the 20th century , the young and often of your own own .
and even the people who don &apos;t actually make suizid begingen , tracks by their talents .
norman mailer said his death in his last interview , every one of my books , every week , i &apos;ve got a little bit more .
a extraordinary statement you can do about your workplace .
but we don &apos;t even think if we say somebody &apos;s kind of thing that &apos;s kind of thing to say that because we have this kind of thing as long as a long time , and we have some of the things that creativity and tired of natural and leid and that art -- always the end -- always the seelenqual .
the question i want to show you today is this idea for you to do it ?
do you feel comfortable with it because only only one centimeter looks at a long distance -- i feel that really don &apos;t feel at that point .
i think it &apos;s .
and i find it dangerous . and i don &apos;t want to watch how you &apos;re going to go into the next century .
i think it &apos;s better if we live our big creative .
and i know it &apos;s a lot of me -- in my situation -- very dangerous , you know , this dark path of the upper group of kenya -- especially in the fact that i &apos;m in my career .
this is -- look at this : i &apos;m pretty young . i &apos;m only about 40 years old .
i have another 40 to me .
and it &apos;s probably probably what i &apos;m going to be in from now the world is being judged by the work that we &apos;re working on after the abgefahrenen success of my last book , right ?
i say it geradeheraus , because we &apos;re all sort of here , and it &apos;s very , very likely to be probably , my biggest success is behind me .
oh , jesus , what a thought !
this is the kind of thinking that someone can start to start to start nine in the morning , gin , gin , gin , and i don &apos;t want to .
i would rather keep doing this work that i love .
so the question is : how ?
after a time , i think , i think i can continue to write to write , to write a kind of schützendem psychological psychological organization .
somehow i have to find a way of now to get a safe distance to the writing of the writing that i &apos;m going to put in a very natural natürlichen , and very natural beklemmung about how the reaction will be on the subject .
while i &apos;ve been looking for , for the past year , i &apos;ve been looking for the past , i &apos;ve been trying to find other societies , whether you can use better or vernünftigere ideas about how to help to deal with how to deal with the emotional risks that are linked to creativity .
this search led me to the old greece and the old rome .
please follow me , because the circle will be close .
but in ancient greece , people didn &apos;t believe that creativity is the creativity of people , ok ?
they believed that creativity was a kind of göttlicher diener-geist , which is from a distant , unknown source -- from unerklärlichen , unknown , unknown , unknown .
the greeks called this divinity diener-geister of creativity diener-geister dämonen .
and from socrates , he believed he believed , he had a dämon , which was made of a weisheiten .
the romans the roman had the same idea , called this kind of körperlosem creative minds , a „ genius .
this is great . the roman thought that was a genius that was a very smart individual .
they believed that a genius was a magical göttliches , which was that it literally put into the walls of a künstlerateliers -- about dobby , the rauskäme -- the rauskäme -- the rauskäme -- the rauskäme and the performers , and the künstler of the work that was going on the work , and the result of the work .
this is brilliant -- there it is the distance that i talked about -- the psychological trait that you protect you from the consequences of your work .
and everybody knew that it worked so , right ?
the artist of the temporal lobe was kind of geschützt , like , for example , for example , too much , right ?
if your work was not going to look at you , you didn &apos;t know anything for you . everybody knew that you had this körperlose genius that helped you .
if your work is floppte -- not entirely your mistakes , or ?
everybody knew your genius was something .
so people have been really , in the west , really , really long time .
and then the renaissance and everything changed . and this big idea was : let &apos;s take the human one idea of the universe -- over all the gods and the truth , and there &apos;s no room for the mystic of creatures that are the instructions of the whole state .
it &apos;s the dawn of rational medical partner and people started to think that creativity was completely complete from their own individual .
for the first time in history , you hear people to do this or a poster , and you call it a genius -- instead of that he has a genius .
i have to say , i think that was a big mistake .
you know ? i think , a bloßen person , or it &apos;s like the gefäß , the essence of all of the becken and the essence of all of the divine , and the source of all divine , kreativen , unendlichen , a little bit of responsibility to a fragilen , human psyche .
it &apos;s like somebody to ask the sun .
the entstellt and motion of all of the egos and it creates all those unerreichbaren expectations in the success .
i think that this erfolgs-druck our artists have gone up the last 500 years .
and if that &apos;s true , -- and i think it &apos;s true -- is the question .
can we change it ?
maybe a new understanding of the relationship between people and the mystery of the creative .
maybe not .
maybe we can &apos;t get the gedankengut out of the gedankengut rationalen , not just in a 18-minütigen talk .
and there &apos;s certainly people in this audience , which really berechtigte really berechtigte , really , really , really , really , really , really , feen , feen , people who are nachfolgen and feenzauber on their projects .
i probably won &apos;t take all of you on this journey .
but the question i &apos;m calling is : why not ?
why not thinking about this ?
because it makes a lot of sense like everything that i &apos;ve heard when it went to explain the absolutely verrückt of creative launenhaftigkeit of the creative process .
a process that &apos;s -- like everyone knows what it has ever tried to do -- so in other words , it &apos;s not always sensible .
in fact , he can feel geradezu paranormal .
i had recently met the extraordinary american poet stone , who was in 90 years old , but she told me that it was a whole life , but she told me that she was growing up in the dörflichen virginia , and she said , they would feel like a poem about the landscape .
she said it would be like a donnernder train composed of air , air , air .
the over the country would be zurollen .
she felt when it came to , because it would put the earth under your feet .
she knew that they could only do a moment of just one moment , and that was -- in their words -- „ running like the devil “ .
they run the house for the house as they were being made by this poem , and it was only about a piece of paper and a pen that you had to get out of it , so it could allow it to get through it , and could be able to capture the leaf .
in other words , they were not fast enough , and ran it and ran it and ran the poem through it , and she would go through the house , and she would go through it , and she said it was going to go over the country and -- like they said -- „ after a different poet .
and then there were this moments -- the part i ever forget -- she said that there were times in which they were almost a lot of time .
so she runs to the house and the gedicht drive through the paper and the poem you walk through it as it travels through it , and then she grabs them through it -- she said it was so much like your hand and get it into it .
she &apos;s a erwischte of the poem on his tail and moved back to their body and just put it on the paper .
and these opportunities came up with the poem and intact intact , but backwards -- from the last word for the first time .
when i heard that , i was unheimlich , that &apos;s the same thing -- that &apos;s exactly how my creative process is .
this is not how my creative process -- i &apos;m not the channel !
i &apos;m a maultier . to work on the same day , i have to get to the same time , and sweat , me and really unangenehm unangenehm .
but even in my maultierart , i have got this thing gestreift .
and i guess that many of you have done this .
i had a work on the work i had work or ideas that i really can &apos;t identify from me .
what &apos;s this thing ?
and how do we engage with our minds without losing our minds without keeping us in the opposite of health ?
for me , the best example of the thing is , how do you create this , the musicians can waits the musician . i got to interview him a magazine .
and we talk about this topic . and you know what ? most of his life was tom tom , who tried to make the embodiment of modern artist , who tried to bring these unkontrollierbaren creative impulse that are in the beherrschen and with you .
but then he was older and he told me that he was riding a day on a freeway in los angeles . and there &apos;s all changed for him .
he went to high speeds as he suddenly hear a little fragment of a melody , which is a little bit of a oft , which is often a lot of fun for him , and he wants to have them . it &apos;s prachtvoll , but he can &apos;t do it .
he didn &apos;t have a piece of paper , he didn &apos;t have a pen , he doesn &apos;t have a kassettenrekorder .
so he starts , this old beklemmung in him , like „ i &apos;m going to lose this thing , and will be tracked by this song on forever .
i &apos;m not good enough , i don &apos;t pretend it .
but instead of being panicked , it was just listening to it .
he went all the whole breath and did something completely new .
he just looked into the sky and said , „ sorry , can you can &apos;t see that i &apos;m car ?
i look like this as i could be able to do a song ?
if you really want to exist , come on a günstigeren moment , if i can take care of you .
if not , if you don &apos;t know , somebody else &apos;s somebody else .
go and quäle leonard leonard cohen .
his entire arbeitsprozess experiment has changed .
not the work itself . the still was often dunkel as dark as the same thing .
but the process and the heavy beklemmung , the heavy crawling , he was aufgehoben , where he didn &apos;t get the genius from the ärger , where he had nothing to get out of trouble and he realized it was not a verinnerlichtes , quälendes thing .
it could be a eigentümliche , wundersame , bizarre collaboration , a kind of conversation between tom and the fremdartigen , a äußerlichen , äußerlichen , äußerlichen thing .
when i heard this story , it also has a little bit of the way i worked and it has saved me .
this idea i was in the middle of the schreibprozess of „ eat , pray , love , love , and i fell in a dieser gruben , and it &apos;s not going to work on something that it &apos;s going to work on , and you &apos;re thinking that it &apos;s a disaster . this is the worst book that &apos;s ever written .
not just bad but the worst of all times .
i began to think , i should just put the project .
but then i remembered the way tom was talking in the opening room , and i tried it .
so i took my view from the manuscript and i spoke to my comment in the direction of the room .
i spoke out loud : „ , you know , you know , you know , you know , when this book is not brilliant , that it &apos;s not completely my fault right now , right ?
because you see , i see that i &apos;ve got the things i &apos;ve got , i don &apos;t have more than that .
so if you want to have better have you have to have you have to put out here , you have to put out the proportion of the agreement .
okay . but if you don &apos;t do that -- you know what , then the devil &apos;s to do with it .
i &apos;m going to keep going to write , because that &apos;s my job .
and i want to ask you to want to want to start to want to the conclusion that i was in my part of my own part of the jobs .
... -- at the end , you &apos;ve got to be folgt , and centuries ago , in the deserts of nordafrikas people with sacred dances and music , who were used to spend hours -- until dawn .
these are always great , because the dancers were professional , and they were fantastic .
but again , again , very rare , something special , one of the mine was actually überweltlich .
and i know you know what i mean , because i know that you &apos;ve all seen a performance in your lifetime .
it was a time when the time was stillstehen and dancers through a kind of pforte , he did not have anything to do it before -- 1,000 nights before , but everything added together .
and suddenly he didn &apos;t get longer in more than it in human human .
it was convicted of erhellt and down from below , and everything erhellte through a göttliches fire .
when this was happening , the people knew what was . they called it in his name .
they put the hands together and started singing : „ allah , allah , allah , god , god , god , god .
that &apos;s god , you know ?
interesting historische fußnote : when the mohren südspanien brought these practice to the centuries of the centuries of „ , allah , allah “ , allah “ , allah “ , olé “ , olé , olé “ , olé “ , olé , das , which is still hört at stierkämpfen and flamenco-tänzen .
if an actors , in spain , something magical : „ allah , olé , olé , olé , allah , allah , großartig , großartig , bravo , bravo , bravo , it &apos;s a flüchtiger glance .
and that &apos;s great , because we need that .
but , the tricky part of the next morning , when the dancers wakes up and realizes that there is 11 o &apos;clock on a tuesday -- and he doesn &apos;t have a fünkchen of god in itself .
it &apos;s only a alternder sterblicher sterblicher with schmerzenden knees . and maybe he &apos;ll never go back to the heights .
and maybe somebody else will never turn the god phone , when he turns out , but what should he do with the rest of his life ?
this is hard .
this is one of the most fundamental elements of a creative life .
but maybe it doesn &apos;t have to be full of pein when you didn &apos;t believe that the most expensive aspects of your existence of them .
if you only think that you &apos;re a banana -- from a unvorstellbaren source for a erlesene time , which is being passed on somebody else when they &apos;re done .
if we start to think about it , it changes all of it .
so i started thinking about , and so i &apos;m thinking about the book , as i worked on the book , which is going to be the dangerous , the dangerous , the dangerous , beängstigende , very erwartete , very high school teaching my abgefahrenen .
what i have to say is when i &apos;m crazy , is not afraid .
ain &apos;t a lot .
just do your job .
keep it for your contribution , which is also what he &apos;s going to be .
if your job is dance .
when the dumb of the dumme genius , that &apos;s what you &apos;re doing is deciding a hauch of wonder , then you have a hauch of wonder , then „ olé , dann olé !
and if not , if you don &apos;t know , dance , your dance .
and „ olé ! “ for you .
i believe in and i have feeling like , we should teach it .
„ olé ! “ for you , just for you , just that you have the mere human love and the eigensinn , that it &apos;s a lot of time .
thank you . thank you .
thank you . thank you .
olé !
last year , i showed these two slides to illustrate that the stem cells , which have been the size of the lower million years of the lower 48 , 40 percent of the lower east , to be 40 percent .
but this didn &apos;t really have enough enough to the seriousness of this particular problem , because it &apos;s not the thick of the ice .
in some sense , the arctic eiskappe is the beating heart of our global klimasystems .
they grows in winter and the nerve in summer .
the next slide i show you is a zeitrafferaufnahme of what happened in the last 25 years .
the dauereis is with red .
as you can see , it grows on the dunkelblau of the dunkelblau , this is the annual ice in winter , and it &apos;s the schrumpft in summer .
the so-called dauereis , five years old , or older , is almost like blood , which is from the body here .
in 25 years , it will be gone from here .
this is a problem because the warming is the frozen grund to auftaut the arctic ocean , where there &apos;s great quantities of carbon carbon , which is that if it &apos;s auftaut , when he &apos;s auftaut , from microbes .
compared with the entire amount of klimaverändernden in the atmosphere , that &apos;s where we can double this amount of time , if we can go to this critical period .
now , in some flat recycling lakes in alaska of itself .
professor katey walter in alaska is with another one another one another place to another flat lake .
wow !
you &apos;re all fine . the question is , how will it be ergehen .
and a reason is that vast wärmespeicher wärmespeicher , grönland , grönland .
this is a jährlicher tauwasserfluss .
but the volume is the volume than ever before .
this is the kangerlussuaq river in southwest greenland .
if you want to know , the sea level of sea ice caps you go into the ocean .
these rivers are taking the speed of .
on the other end of the planet , antarctica , the antarktis , the biggest eismasse on the planet .
last month , researchers have been a negative forscher now , that the entire continent has a negative shark .
and the westantarktis that &apos;s about a few unterwasserinseln , is particularly strong in melt .
this is a 20 fuß , like greenland .
in the himalayas , the drittgrössten eismasse , you see up the top up there , the new ones , the top of a few years ago .
40 percent of all people on earth are given half of their trinkwassers from this .
in the andes , this glacier is the trinkwasserquelle for this city .
the wassermengen have been expanding .
but if you zoom in , it will also wegfallen the drinking water .
in california was seen a 40 prozentige reduction in the sierra verringerung of sierra .
this is the speicherbecken .
and the predictions , as you read , are seriousness .
these austrocknung in all the world is going to lead to a dramatic improvement in fire .
and the disasters all over the world have been in a really ausserordentlichen and never zugenommen , and never zugenommen .
so many of the last 30 years in the last 30 years , like in the vorhergegangenen 75. of the vorhergegangenen 75. .
this is a completely unhaltbares entwicklungsmuster .
if you look at this in the historical context , you can see what it &apos;s anrichtet .
in the last five years , we have 70 million tons of co2 every 24 hours -- 25 million tons of tons of discarded every day every day every day .
look at the realm of eastern pacific , from the american continent , and beiderseits of the indian subkontinents , where it &apos;s a drastischen decline in the ocean .
the biggest factor for global warming , next to deforestation , which is 20 percent , which is burning of fossil fuels .
oil is a problem , and coal is the largest biggest largest problem .
the united states is one of the two largest verschmutzer , combined with china .
and the proposal was a lot of other kohlefabriken .
but we start to see a change .
here are the ones that have been released in the last few years , with some green alternatives that were proposed .
and there &apos;s a political issue in our country .
and the kohleindustrien and ölindustrien have spent a $ viertelmilliarde last mile last mile to promote clean coal , which is a contradiction in itself .
this picture reminded me of something .
in christmas around the christmas day , at home , i was at home in tennessee , a billion tons of kohleschlamm .
you &apos;ve seen it warscheinlich in the news .
this is in our entire country of zweitgrösste abfallfluss .
this was happening by christmas .
one of the commercials of the kohleindustrie of the kohleindustrie was that christmas was this .
frosty of the kohlenmann is a vergnügter , happy .
it &apos;s in charge and abundance in america , and it helps us to grow our economy .
frosty , the kohlenmann is going to be every day .
it &apos;s affordable and liebenswert , and workers remain in the atomic and bread .
this is the source of most coal in west virginia .
the most powerful bergarbeiter is the head of massey .
let me say a very obvious thing . al gore , nancy pelosi , harry harry , harry , you don &apos;t know what they &apos;re talking about .
so the alliance for hominids for military klimaschutz .
this is one , part of her .
we &apos;re going to see our climate change as a serious danger for our business .
so we &apos;ve got to auszugeben it for the top of the supreme zeil , a substantial geldsumme to bring a werbeaktion to get the truth over coal .
the fact is , coal is not dirty .
we think it &apos;s clean -- and it &apos;s also a good thing .
so they don &apos;t worry about the climate change .
they &apos;re taking us .
saueber coal , they &apos;ve heard a lot of it .
so let &apos;s make a tour of this modern , clean kohlefabrik .
fantastic ! this machine is pretty noisy .
but it &apos;s the sound of the clean kohletechnologie .
and yet , the burning of coal &apos;s kohle is the global warming , the remarkable kohletechnologie , which you see here , changes .
look at it , this is the today , clean kohletechnologie .
finally , the positive alternative with our economic challenge , and our challenge security .
america &apos;s in a crisis , the economy , the national security , the climate crisis .
the red thread that all of these combine is our dependence on the kohlenstoff-basierenden of the kohlenstoff-basierenden kraftstoffen , like the dirty and oil oil .
but now there &apos;s a bold new solution to get us out of this misslichen .
versorge america with 100 percent electricity , within the next 10 years , within the next 10 years .
a plan , america back to work , to make us safer and help us stop global warming .
finally , a solution that &apos;s big enough to solve our problems .
versorge america . find more out .
this is the last .
it &apos;s a neuversorgung of america .
one of the fastest ways of the schnellsten , our dependence of old , dirty times that our world are going to die .
the future is here . wind , sun and a new system .
new investment to create good jobs .
versorge america . it &apos;s time to accept reality .
there &apos;s a old african afrikanisches saying , &quot; if you want to be fast , go alone .
if you want to go far , go together . &quot;
we have to come back and quickly .
thank you .
i want to start to ask you to ask you , at the time of your childhood , when she was playing with video games .
as they realized , how you go to the hands and zugreift , the klötze and moves , learn , learn to think and problems through the understanding of understanding and change the world .
the spatial thinking is deeply closely related to how we understand a lot of our environment .
as a computer -- inspired by the kind of interaction with real objects -- and i started to wonder , if we were able to go to a flachen , the instead of a maus-zeigers , which would be like a digital fingerspitze of a flat arbeitsfläche -- -- what if we could put a digital fingerspitze on a flat track , and we could make the data with both
this question was so deeply that we chose to the study of the answer and the siftables developed .
in short , a siftable is a interactive computer in the size of a kekses .
you can move with your hand , you can see each other , you can detect your movements and you have a screen and a funkempfänger .
more importantly , are physically , why you &apos;re doing it like bauklötze just through the mind of the hands and access .
and the siftables are an example of a new generation of hilfsmitteln to manipulation &apos;s digitaler .
and if these tools are going to be a cause , and a conscious mind for their movements , each of them can see each other and the subtleties of our unconscious devices , then we can start to start with the exploration and unterhaltsamer .
i start with some simple examples .
this siftable is for the videowiedergabe konfiguriert , and when i kippe it into a direction , the video will begin with the video , if i put it into the other direction , it &apos;s going to be backwards .
and these interactive portraits taking each other .
so if i put them side-by-side , you &apos;ll make you interest .
if they &apos;re voneinader , you notice it , you can see that , and you can get something nervous .
and they &apos;re also ebenso their movements and slope .
a interesting implication of the interactions that we started to realize was that we could use everyday gestures on data , like about colors as to try to do this with the flüssigkeiten .
in this case , we have three siftables as a farbtöpfe and i can use them to be able to get color in the middle where they &apos;re mixed up .
if we overdo it , we can make a little bit of zurückschütten .
there also also have some nice opportunities in education as languages , mathematics or logikspiele , where we can give people the chance to be able to do the chance of the fast and the results .
here i &apos;m -- this is a fibonacci i &apos;m with a simple gleichungsprogramm .
this is a game with words , which is a kind of mixture of scrabble and boggle .
basically , you get every round of runde on every siftable basis , and while you &apos;re trying to make words , these dictionary will be made .
then after 30 seconds , then again , again , again , and you have a new dimension and new opportunities .
thank you .
these are some children on a outing of the media lab . i could move it to the media lab , and i could go to it .
they really loved it .
a interesting fact that &apos;s a kind of applications that you have to give people that people have not to give them a lot of instructions .
all you have to say is &quot; deep words , &quot; and you know exactly what to do .
here &apos;s a couple of people who put it .
this is our recent jüngster right there on the bottom right .
it turns out that he wanted to only have the siftables on the siftables .
so they were just bauklötze .
this is a interactive trickfilmanwendung .
we wanted to develop a lernmittel for sprachlerner .
this is the end .
he can bring new characters in the scene , by using the siftable from the table that shows this figure .
he lets he put the sun .
the sun is going on on the sun .
now he puts a tractor in the scene .
the orange one .
good work ! yeah !
by using the shake , and they put them together , and it can put the characters -- it &apos;s the characters .
... his own story invent .
hello !
it &apos;s a story with a offenem end , and he can decide how to evolve .
flying cat .
the last example i &apos;ve been now , is a musik-sequencer for live-auftritte that we &apos;ve recently developed and in the siftables as töne , like führungsstimme , bass and drums .
each four has four different variations ; you can select that you want to use .
and you can put these sounds into the sequence that you can put in in some kind of patterns .
and you put them on a indem just by a ton-siftable .
there are effects that you live live , like hall and filter .
you connect him with a certain tone and it gets to the tree .
and then even more übergeordnete effects like the pace and the volume that you go on the whole sequence .
so let &apos;s take a look .
we start to einspeisen the führungsstimme in two sequenz-siftable and those in a row , they expand and add a little bit more of the voice .
now i put a bass .
now i &apos;m going to do something about this .
and now i got the filter filter with the drums , so i can control the effect of the inner .
i can accelerate the whole sequence by breaking the pace into the one or other direction .
and now i &apos;m going to go to the filter , i &apos;ll leave the filter with the bass , for something more expression .
i can actually start the sequence as it is .
so i don &apos;t have to plan it for you , but it can improvise ; it &apos;s going to keep it or drink .
and finally , i can ausblenden the whole sequence by ausblenden , by looking at the lautstärke-siftable .
thank you .
so as you can see , my excitement is to develop new mensch-computer-schnittstellen that are better to the way our brains and bodies work .
and today i &apos;ve time , i &apos;ve got part of this new design-welt and some of the opportunities that we work in our lab .
the thought i want to give you to you with is that we are at the cusp of this new generation of interaction with digital media to the world that information in our world that make our demands .
thank you very much , thank you very much .
i &apos;m pleased to the talks to you with all of them .
yeah , good day .
i &apos;m pleased to me that i am there .
yeah , so what should be biohacking ?
i have to have a little bit of a little bit of a long time , and it &apos;s a little bit of beschäftigt at the modern molecular molecular .
i &apos;ve been studying molecular and i &apos;ve been working with a few years ago , and i &apos;ve been starting to know , because i just wanted to know it , and it was also a very important thing to do , which i wanted to learn as well as i &apos;ve learned in the study of theoretical .
so , that was my primary motivation .
so it was a curiosity , and i wanted to sort of closer to the matter , like this .
i think that the molecular economic growth now is very generally , very generally , biotechnology , everything you counts , synthetic biology and so on , etc .
extremely importantly , now , extremely important , and much more important , much more important , is going to be more important .
there &apos;s this kind of stuff like this whole , veränderten , plants changed on the äckern .
now there &apos;s craig venter in the u.s.a that tries to make a benzin of algae from algae .
and then , there &apos;s also things that are completely in the everyday world , which is most people who are not really aware of the people , for example , waschmittelenzyme , which allow us to wash 40 degrees of laundry , are also gentechnisch enzymes .
and the list can continue to continue .
and so in the interest of this , on this technology , i &apos;ll just continue to go further down .
so what &apos;s going on ?
most people know most people know that from the softwarebereich .
computers , and then it will always be in the media , and it will be the hackers that breaks a and klauen data and so on .
this is kind of a lot of traurig very sad because that &apos;s not what it &apos;s actually actually done , and what &apos;s actually really done .
and this is the software-hacker , in the 1970s , achtzigerjahren with computerbasteln , and it &apos;s also evolved the internet .
and it &apos;s about a playful , creative , originelle , exciting way of solving it .
and the problem is that it &apos;s not just a technical problem , it can also be a social problem , which can just be a zugangsproblem problem , so it can be just a zugangsproblem , so you can do a question , a question , and how can you do that better .
and it was just about software , but there &apos;s also a whole bastlerszene , there &apos;s also a whole bastlerszene that with all kinds of kinds of things that are all kinds of things .
and now , there &apos;s a lot of this kind of thing , and since i want to get this metaphor , the halt code , because the d.n.a code is actually a abstrakter code , because it &apos;s not a very much like computers , because it &apos;s dynamic because it &apos;s dark matter , so it &apos;s real matter , and not just cyber .
but it &apos;s a code , and it can also be coding and likewise you can also hack it , and that i find i find incredibly fascinating , and i just wanted to go to a lot of deeper with the solar system .
this actually only zweitausend eight folds of all this networks .
there &apos;s a hackteria dot dot , which is originally from switzerland , which is a kooperation in india , and with a cooperation in india , but now that &apos;s now , or active people everywhere .
this is a more artistic amount of künstlerische , so there &apos;s a lot of artists and working with scientists with scientists with scientists with scientists with these technologies and ask and ask and ask the creative , there &apos;s museumsausstellungen and yes , all sorts of things .
but it &apos;s always about finding such a lockeren access to having a sense of that .
and then there &apos;s do-it-yourself-bio dotcom dot , d.i.y.bio .
this is a network , which is actually more like this kind of a kind of forum where you can get out of where you can get and online .
they &apos;re a little bit of technical , and a little bit of businessmäßiger , then , then , then , ja questions .
and from these networks that have been made all the way all the way , have evolved so a scene that i want to get a porträtieren .
in the picture , you see biocurious , which is a hackerspace , so that &apos;s a kind of school , so a kind of school , so private school , a private school , a lot of institution , where everyone can get a hinkommen .
kids , old , old , all kinds of people go to just with it , you have a lab and look at what &apos;s going to do when these laborprotokolle are .
the left is a group of lower down at indonesia , house-of-natural-fibers is that we &apos;ve already got quite a long time .
it &apos;s more than any of these two networks .
the other thing that &apos;s also in this is also in such a different aspect of biological materials and , yeah , also , and combine that kind of a abgefahre kind of way .
a group of ankara i &apos;ve got a while ago , which i &apos;ve got a studentengruppe , which have a studentengruppe that would have to learn the public , which is the public interest in the class , and they have so focused on how to do it so on the straßenfesten and trying to teach people what &apos;s called d.n.a .
and i have a lecture in the other painting in copenhagen in the medical museum in the medical museum in a kombination of a room .
and that &apos;s , yes , that &apos;s most of the most difficult people , but the only thing that what &apos;s actually what &apos;s actually paying all the united nations .
and what you can do with and also , also , really helps to be able to do the society with society and asking , okay , what you do , what &apos;s going to do their own , you have to bring you so much of you ?
so , o.k , to hack now , you need to make a kind of material .
you need biological materials , and you need tools , and that &apos;s a lab .
what you normally understand , you know , you &apos;re normally versteht , which are kind of abgefahrene machines , extremely expensive , extremely extremely , extremely distanziert , only for fachpersonal , ausgebildete academics with two and so on .
and our approach was to say , o.k , o.k , that actually , that &apos;s not that you don &apos;t have to do that .
it &apos;s actually not necessary because every every every one everybody has developed , it has actually higher technology as most of the most laborgeräte , which is really like this .
and then the premise of this premise with this premise , for example , brian degger , a minimallabor zusammenzustellen , a minimallabor zusammenzustellen , a heizplatte , a heizplatte , a heizplatte , and , yeah , and then it &apos;s bakterien bacteria .
so , once you have a soup , which is a soup of vergammelt that he has been made for long , even before you &apos;ve done .
i &apos;ve been trying to do this in my lab , and then i &apos;ve got a little auszuweiten , and then i &apos;ve got second-hand-equipment second-hand-equipment on ebay , trying to analysis , trying to make a vaterschaftstest , so that &apos;s so / , so that &apos;s so hard to do that .
this should not be a joke .
here in the picture here , you see the lab , in anführungsstrichen , so that &apos;s so zugestellte garage with the uni , a group of laborgerümpel , which has a group of uni , which is a group of uni , which is actually a gruppe of what &apos;s been made and quite successful , and also a pretty interesting things that i want to do is also
and this is biocurious , who also mentioned erwähnte , this one , so that &apos;s kind of a kind of volkshochschule for molecular biology .
and , yeah , you see , it &apos;s relatively relatively heterogen , so there &apos;s some people who are doing the individually doing , so far as big organizations , the more organizations that have been already in institutionalisierter form .
but always always the approach that it &apos;s just getting out and accessible to it .
the first project we &apos;ve made as international group , as we were being aware of our ourselves , o.k , there are now in real inefficient , and we are online , and we know the people that are always and so on .
and then from the do-it-yourself-bio webseite website , the founder of the founder of the founder , and it &apos;s got gesagt , we have to meet , and then two events organized , and then two events organized , a in london , zweitausend ten , and short put in the u.s.a , in san francisco .
and then , there was also about , yeah , ja , who are we , what we want , what are we want to acknowledge ?
and what are our values and what is our our own purposes , our foundation ?
and there we have a code-of-conduct strategist .
so that was right , so everybody has just as his desires , and that , what it &apos;s moving , and then , you know , then , then , then , then , then , then , then , sir .
there was one of my opinion , a very good code .
and we have it &apos;s not a bacterial , but that &apos;s a minute , i think , well , i &apos;ve got very good at least , people are quite convinced .
and we actually have to go back to the academic world again , but there &apos;s no way in that .
so i think we &apos;re actually from the biohackerszene , even more than the academic world .
yeah , what are we doing now ?
a project i &apos;ve done with the hackteria-netzwerk in switzerland , was that we wanted to make a sogenannte optical particle or optical pinzette .
this is if you focus a laser beam , you can aggregate up small particles in the air , and then you can move into this focus , so that &apos;s a captured , so that &apos;s like a traktorbeamstrahl in principle .
this is really what &apos;s going on in the academic setting , and we thought , o.k , that &apos;s what we might have , then you have a webcam , the aufgeschraubt , the lens , you have a microscope , you have a microscope , the vergrößert , the vergrößert .
this is going on .
and then we have a d.v.d brenner auseinandergeschraubt and the brenner the laser , and then trying to focus on this camera .
and unfortunately , unfortunately , unfortunately , but we &apos;ve got a lot of learned .
so another project that comes from the french group from paris , which has a lot of things that &apos;s pretty cool .
and it &apos;s a kind of like a hirnwellenmessgerät , like a hirnwellenmessgerät , like this , or something like this , so he &apos;s dealing with neurobiologie , his favorite nickname is sam .
it has this this kind of helmet there , and in cooperation with the cooperation , it &apos;s the end .
there was the visitors going into the room , sich on these chair , this helmet .
then their brainwaves were measured , and the after what they thought , or how they thought , is then different lights in the room .
was a pretty fun project .
another thing from the united states , which is also going to do with this vaterschaftstestgeschichte , is the p.c.r , which is the polymerase-kettenreaktion , complicated word .
so it &apos;s about copying genes , to give them d.n.a , d.n.a , to give them fragments to produce , so you can do it .
so if i do this profiler , then they go out there , they go out there , collecting these haarproben , and then they then do this method , and then they can say , o.k , this hair belongs to this human , so that &apos;s the human .
and the machines that make this kind of thing that are pretty expensive that you buy that you go to viertausend .
and this is not in the hobbybereich , but it &apos;s a really cool technology that can also can also do a lot .
so that &apos;s just a practice of a lot that you can do with that .
and they have two two builders rangesetzt and say , and then we have a simple bastler , and then we have a einfacher source , so they &apos;re hardware out of open source , elektroniksachen , these device zusammengebastelt , and now they have the marktreife of the marktreife and are the cheapest of the billigste vendor of the world .
i think it &apos;s kind of like sechshundert dollars or something .
but anyway , it &apos;s still not cheap , but it &apos;s definitely in a frame of a frame where it &apos;s clearly .
so it &apos;s my opinion to a very gelungener .
a project i had started to build a gene-gun .
gene-gun , yes , like a luftdruckpistole , the shoots pulls about two inches or so .
you put d.n.a d.n.a , and then you go into these luftdruckpistole , and then i &apos;ve got the then back then , and then the leuchten then brought it into .
so the device you see here is that it doesn &apos;t work .
but this is my prototyp , but it &apos;s pretty abgefahren , so on a branch , so on this , a branch , electronics and pressure , and that was the pressure was too high , the thing is broken .
and then i took a sahnespender , and this is plugged out .
a sahnespender , if you add the full power with water , the enough pressure , i think , so vierzig , so bar .
and then you can do the particles , then the particles can accelerate enough and then go in the back .
and the commercial device costs about fünfzehntausend euros or something like this , sahnespender , so sahnespender the 50 .
so it doesn &apos;t have the same efficiency , but it &apos;s basically feasible .
so , it &apos;s also the moment that &apos;s in the moment , the kernanliegen of the scene , the availability of technology and the verständlichkeit that there are more people to engage .
because , as the beginning , it &apos;s a extremely important technology , and most people have relatively small amounts of it , and also a chance of getting out really well .
because if you &apos;re just reading about it , from sekundärliteratur , that &apos;s not the same thing as if you &apos;ve seen it before .
and i think technology is always going to be more important in our modern societies .
and if you can bürger the informierter choices in society and can &apos;t see the access to knowledge and technology .
and you have to do it and understand it , and understand it , to understand it .
and then the firmiert then unter under the schlagworten open knowledge and citizen science science .
so you can see that you &apos;re going to be able to make a citizens of the situation that we have to do with these scientific technologies .
and this is the kernanliegen of the biohackern .
these are the people who have been at least officially eingetragen on the website , d.i.y.bio-dot-org website .
this is a relatively remarkable number of people worldwide .
and interesting is also , they &apos;re also in southeast southeast southeast .
this is i think there are fewer people in there , in fact , in fact .
so i know some of some , which is not active .
and these are just the biohacker , the individual people .
partly with these hackerspaces , so this place together in there .
and that &apos;s actually happening in the beginning .
as i said , zweitausendacht has begun .
and hackerspaces , the computerhackerspaces , the computerhackerspaces , because the c-base in berlin was the first one .
and this is a gigantic network of a very good network , yes , infrastrukturzentren , the infrastrukturzentren that are all over the world .
and we hope that we can get ausbreiten , and then also , also , well , that &apos;s also good enough , so that &apos;s also that people can get more people .
and i would invite everybody to do it , and also what &apos;s going on .
it &apos;s not so simple , but it &apos;s not impossible to get out of there , but it &apos;s not impossible to get enough curiosity and enough energy , then you get too far .
thanks for listening .
that &apos;s it .
yeah , hi .
how do we work ?
this is a question that motivates me very moved as a designer , but also in the area of the forschungsbereich usability , and in all sorts of things in the field of user .
it &apos;s about how to put people in a interactive media so that you can use these interactive media and create a möglichst experience .
i think that the interactive media in us , cognitive models , the cognitive neuroscientist , so paradigm in our biological memory , very long , very long time , and that we can just have the eben media .
and this is very amazing because you think that these hochtechnologie , who you &apos;ve actually been in the future , but actually it &apos;s so much that the future is exactly the future , in our archaischen roots .
what are the way now are actually archaische ?
i &apos;ve got four stichworte and i want to explain to you .
now , cognitive mental illness and it &apos;s the models that we have in the pre-industrial times of us .
to this archaischen models , that we have a principle of natural relationship with the consequences .
this sounds like a little bit of thing .
i &apos;m going to go on it again , and i &apos;ll prove to you a lot of trying to prove that it &apos;s a natural relationship .
the second aspect is that we &apos;ve been able to talk about because of this archaischen models , very , very simple , even though we use a language language .
and the third area that &apos;s actually explaining himself .
we all know that the interactive media are per , which is the denial of the linearity , and what tells us that we feel the linearity today as normal .
the fourth point is that the history of us is a place of the informationsweitergabe .
now , what &apos;s the point that &apos;s now with the virtuality that &apos;s actually the most fundamental thing .
i want to prove to you .
how many doors has the house that you live in ?
that won &apos;t happen to me immediately immediately , but it &apos;s going to happen to that moment , right now .
they go on the spirit of this house , in demn , they live in , and look at how many doors are there .
and that &apos;s what they do .
they virtualisieren the reality and it &apos;s all right .
fantastic , right ?
and there &apos;s a lot of people around the world &apos;s most medien-campus for example , the virtual reality in our v.r.-labor , we can actually do that whole time .
and this wealth of this wealth of the virtual reality , which have the people who have had the people in the pre-industrial times , because they didn &apos;t have anything .
they had no books .
or no , no fotolitografie .
they didn &apos;t have mass media .
the only thing that had had been your head .
and in this head , the memory is going to be remembered .
in this head , knowledge and recognition images , the imagination , the imagination was also passed .
and so it &apos;s also so strong in us that we can overcome the jobs that way .
the interesting thing is , if i can do a little trip .
yeah , that &apos;s what .
the interesting thing is that at this time , at the time of the human being , the human being , at the same time , and medium itself .
if you think of a piece of thinking .
what are media today ?
then you &apos;ll notice that there &apos;s a change .
but i &apos;ll get to the same minute .
the wesentliches of the informationsvermittlung have been for known for centuries .
schamanen , priests , sogenannte , so-called wissenswächter , were extra strength to keep knowledge in stories .
and also today , we &apos;re still very , very strong .
the author of the book of the book , jonathan animal , zufolge , we still verbingen a year with the rezeption of stories .
it means for a kid , this is the großjährigkeit of the großjährigkeit of the großjährigkeit , the most of his life with the rezeption of stories .
now we think we &apos;re thinking about our love of stories that we have a child on the lap of our parents .
no , no , very much .
this is going to go back to the cultures in the cultures of the day .
but in the realm of the interactive media as a special , we &apos;ve been in special ways that we have to have per in our biological memory , the ability to think of the ability to think .
i &apos;ve got an example of the nordamerikanischen tribe of the nootka-indianer tribe .
and life lived in the küstenregion of british columbia .
and as you can see , it &apos;s a very inselreiches area , and you had to have to get to somehow island to get food to get food .
and they have made this with this kind of thing .
you may have you know , if you &apos;re interested in a little bit of the australian military .
the similar principle .
they don &apos;t have a lead-landkarten , but they have the so-called songlines songlines or traumpfade .
and what the interesting thing is that the navigation and the topographie of the world could be mapped .
where the language was untergeordnet of untergeordnetem rang .
that is , you know , you &apos;re talking about sounds and rhythm .
and this sounds and the rhythm have the geology of the geology that the u.s. national region and the topographie has also been able to put the topographie and other people and turn into the left , and then again , to the back of the left , and also wieder the ausgangsort .
why not that we don &apos;t have to get from the top to b from a b ?
anyway , not to navigate .
what &apos;s actually happening ?
this is what &apos;s happening to be so gennante .
we &apos;ve moved in the way that we &apos;ve moved in the magic .
this is happening the verb and this is happening , and it &apos;s the book , and it &apos;s the fotolitografie .
and this is what happens is that we have the responsibility for our memories and the own production of our individual mammography have a external media .
on the book and on the image .
so we have a piece of god &apos;s history to virtualisieren a piece of weit .
and the point is , of course , is completely charged , and has nothing to do with reality .
bruce brown , a famous designforscher on the brighton-university , is that this massenmedien , he says , and the image , he says , and the image , so , you know , the internet , and so on , that this media is what we have as media and our ability to have versteinert our memories and our ability to virtualisieren our own .
let &apos;s make a little bit of a zwischenbilanz .
from vogt-zeitalter to the machine .
what has the influences on our thinking and our erinnerungsvermögen ?
then the verblassenden is the einflüsse of the pre-industrial cultures .
and they &apos;re going to be in the course of the centuries over the centuries , and more überschrieben have been through the map of the maschinenzeitalters .
so instead of having to remember , we &apos;ve got a lot of time , far , in mass , the verbreitete pattern of memories that we can depend on our personal memories .
we don &apos;t produce more even ourselves .
we have a abstract language .
we &apos;re not going to put the thing in images of the things that things are not in pictures , but we &apos;re kodifizieren them our language .
we &apos;ve been used to that things happen .
and we have the linearity as a law and there &apos;s only exceptions , like the non-linearität .
what &apos;s left is the storytelling .
we &apos;re still in the storytelling as a informationsvermittlung , very strong .
the question is , what &apos;s going on ?
we had the vogt -zeitalter , we had the machine and we &apos;re going to go back to the so-called genannte .
it sounds very spacig , and it sounds very nach , i know , i know .
but these concepts of the cyber-zeitalters , which bring us back to our capabilities back to our capabilities .
it &apos;s about it , it &apos;s about non-linearität , it &apos;s about storytelling .
i want to explain that a little bit .
there are technical ideas like the augmented reality , which is the augmented reality .
so if you look at google glasses , then you &apos;re going to combine the concept of what makes us kombinieren the virtual world with the real world , which is called our affinität , the virtual , to feel that , natural , it will be addressed .
another example is the so-called virtual reality .
so , of course , this is what &apos;s like , of course , and then we &apos;re moving into nicht , virtual worlds , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very
and another example are the ambienten , smart systems .
these are spaces that can respond to a human .
all of this is the ability to accept our ability to accept the real world to accept it .
i &apos;m in the degree , and i hope that the video works , a very , very nice project that &apos;s the bachelorarbeit of michael burk , ann-kathrin krenz , joris krenz , joris klause and jan-moritz müller .
and the two letzteren are also here today .
maybe you can get a short time to get into the pause , and i can talk about the talk .
and this project i brought as an example of how to bring this archaischen , cognitive models of the brain .
the whole thing is a game , i have to say .
which is what the storytelling of the storytelling , of course , and it &apos;s a computer game .
and if i say , you have very likely to have very likely to have people who have people who have konsolen konsolen or you can play with some of the irgendeiner konsole in the hand .
anyway , they do that in the ground .
this is a game for outside .
and this is actually what i think is that i have the outside world , so that i would look back the real world .
and this game is connecting the virtual world , so the data that we produce , the world we produce with the real world .
i apologize i have to have this strong amount of research .
you can &apos;t explain the same amount of better , because there &apos;s more more more .
and it &apos;s about that i &apos;ve come to a city by looking at what &apos;s been positive or a negative race .
and so i get from the town of a whole bunch of impression , and i think , a very different impression , and i see positive zones of a city and a way of getting a very different kind of virtuelle , virtual , virtual , virtual , virtual , virtual landkarte of a very real city .
and we can now look at this .
ah , what you can see here , sorry , is a little explanation of what you see .
of course , this virtual world in the walls of our cities , is obvious .
and with a kind of flashlight , we can do this virtual worlds .
so i like to wrap up my my talk , and the fact that the properties of the vogt and the skills that we &apos;ve been doing in the vogt of the vogt -zeitalter , and the skills that we &apos;ve been doing , and that we can actually get into this kind of cyber -zeitalters , technological , technology , new products , actually , new products , actually
thank you .
yeah , i &apos;m very pleased to be very , very excited to you .
i &apos;ve been asked to have been a question if this bag is a sprechender bag , and my rather than talk .
it &apos;s not going to do .
i &apos;m also going to also figure out what &apos;s inside .
but i &apos;m going to do it again .
yeah , kids are from nature , or should be curious , or should be curious , designers .
i &apos;m a gestalter of house , so i &apos;m also trying to do with the topic of curiosity and how change the curiosity also also , and why we might have to do it again and have to go back and so forth .
this is a whole series of things that you &apos;re concerned with your actual existence as a creator .
if professors are , of professors , they &apos;re going to be häufig in the way that &apos;s in the middle of your n .
and this is what i had in the last year .
a forschungssemester for the subject of the legal complex interface .
now you &apos;re going to ask yourself , why all of these gestalter an on the natural , archaischen urformen of communication , interaction and so on .
and that &apos;s what i &apos;m just going to be here , just one of these little devices , because things are always more , and there &apos;s natural gas , and there you have to look at the natural , and you have to look at what is benutzungsfreundlich or intuitively .
and before the background , i &apos;ve been looking for the bereich of the natural design , so that the next generation in the relationship of man &apos;s in relation to the relationship of man , as our tool , or how computers can change from the computer the computer sukzessive .
so i &apos;ve been engaged with , of course , or what &apos;s intuitive .
maybe also , again , again , again .
why does that happen at all ?
so if we look at the development of our society , here , there &apos;s a little bit , then we &apos;re moving from the third gesellschaftsgeneration in the fourth gesellschaftsgeneration or gesellschaftsform .
so from the modern ones in the computergesellschaft .
every society is shaped by a primärmedium .
at the beginning of the language .
so you &apos;ve found that you &apos;ve been able to communicate a common language , you could have been able to communicate in the same cave , or in other areas , has cities , and villages , and dörfer , and it &apos;s created as nen .
but the language was the language , but the language , something very , very much .
you can also learn to learn , so no one can be a toddler by nature , but we learn it to be sukzessive and verhältnismäßig .
this was discovered by the ancient society and the first shape of abstraction .
this was a riesen-aufschrei , because you were talking to manifestieren the living language in the form of writing , which is what &apos;s called what &apos;s called the fluid and alive , i put it in rock and i manipuliere it .
as i meißel and when i meißel , it &apos;s a very different kind of coverage , as if it &apos;s a alive kind of thing .
but then the sukzessive then gave us these font as a primärmedium , received .
then the next generation we &apos;re actually going to have primarily .
this is just the pipeline and print geprägte font with gutenberg and others .
at the time , it was a affront where the arts , klerus and others : are you actually wahnsinnig if the people start reading , then the afterwards , and that &apos;s totally totally fatal .
and now we &apos;re going to come into the next generation and the exciting thing is , a generationswechsel is just all the few hundred years , and we &apos;re really in the moment in this particular period that we &apos;re in this particular period that we &apos;re in this particular period of time .
so , of course , the confused us , because we see on one side of the media , social media , facebook and so on .
with the total transparency , what the new thinking is , say , well , not that in the lasagne pferdefleisch and not a beef , or other phenomena , which is , i want to just talk to you just vertuschen and want to kundtun it .
and these two worlds are just straight together , new and old thinking .
the exciting thing is , if you look at this , these new society , these computergesellschaft , entlehnt , entlehnt and archaischer and archaischer can actually arise from the stammesgesellschaft .
now , no longer on the local level , but on global level .
we understood that the weather is global .
that the issue is ecology a global ecology .
not if i &apos;m looking at the local ökologisch , and the neighbor thinks you don &apos;t think of less , then the whole doesn &apos;t work .
this is actually a global village , which has become a global village , of course , which is , of course , the totale , but also the total transparency .
as you knew in the village , who knew what &apos;s going on with whom , and when that &apos;s happening today , that &apos;s what the expansion of our own mobile endgeräte is through the global climate crisis .
it &apos;s that we know global geography and always anhäufen and better .
this is how it was going on the village .
so , i just started to look at what &apos;s interesting to me with , which is what &apos;s actually , which is what we might have , which is what we might have , which is what we might have , but also , what makes the difference ?
because often , people come up , you can &apos;t make it benutzungsfreundlich , so everyone can handle it .
so you have to engage with what is that , because it &apos;s not just that , and not just change it is unlike it &apos;s a lot better .
and then , of course , it &apos;s kind of intuitive , and how can i take a gestalter and just the things that make it a benutzungsfreundlich , so that &apos;s what they &apos;re doing , because then they &apos;re fun and they &apos;re just getting fun .
you &apos;re busy in the studiums , with the subject of perceptions and the wahrnehmungspsychologie .
and this is what you start and guckt and says , okay , okay , now i &apos;m just going to go into the inner self .
and what &apos;s like this is because actually there ?
so how do we work if we put out of the reingucken ?
and what does not mean , of course , intuitive and how work our channels and how works the cognitive processing ?
because steve jobs has said , you can put need to dig deeper to .
so you really have to look at the detail if i want to make something benutzungsfreundlich or intuitive handhabbar , which is what is called the core .
and what you see is that you have a a bit of our seven senses , which we have only have five senses , but it &apos;s even seven times , because it &apos;s going to be a sieben of the next , and it &apos;s a erweiterung of the time that we have .
and looking at how process we process information , how do we take information on ?
alone agreed to say what is information ?
information is all the difference that makes a difference .
many use the word , you know , but not really what it does .
but i have to understand in the heart , in the essence of being information , when will information from information , and from information , and we know information , so i know how i can do it , or how i can do it , or could make things happen .
and of course , how does it make sense of perception .
we see this here , when i make things , i can look at things like the right side , where i can &apos;t know what &apos;s salt and pepper , or i can do it , i can make it intuitive .
so , very natural natural , in a gourd , but i see it right now , where is salt and pepper forms .
and if i say somebody , i give you a salt or pepper , then he &apos;ll be thinking about where it is in the right .
and the left-hand thing , you know , you know , and then i hope that there &apos;s no sugar in the salt .
but also our perceptions , how are you going to talk to us .
for example , this perception in context .
the right circle looks taller than the little , although that &apos;s not the case , but they &apos;re just a very big place , and yet , our perceptions , the way we do in the context of the context we &apos;re doing things .
does anybody know what that &apos;s ?
come .
pattern recognition should work .
there &apos;s a more of my glasses .
so it &apos;s your n .
a second circle starts to be a kind of resemblance to lack of resemblance or .
and then , if i have a halboval dazusetze , we see no one more one , and then we see no one unit , and , but we see a unit , but we don &apos;t see more , a circle , a circle , a circle , a different one .
you call it gestaltgesetz or eben gestaltpsychologie that we also have to make it again in the perception .
the important thing for the gestalter that have the most commonly semester in the first semester , the great gestaltgesetze .
gestaltgesetz , the closeness of closeness , gestaltgesetz of the continuity , and so on .
and they &apos;re going to have forgotten about the third one .
but this is a very important place of what you want to do with things that we want to do with .
the next phenomenon , which is also very interesting that &apos;s very interesting .
sounds banal , but it &apos;s a very exciting , if you &apos;re going to engage it .
so we have the eyes and now think , we see from the back of the back .
this is wrong .
you see it from the back right now .
and she &apos;s projiezieren a assumption that you see something you &apos;re talking about , beispielweise circle .
that means we &apos;re going to see our view , before we see it back to our seheapparat to say , to say , okay , okay , ok , ok ?
i &apos;ve got some cognitive rückkoppelung , you &apos;ve got what you want to see .
it &apos;s also , then , then , then that comes back back .
then again , again , again , the back of the front door , and it &apos;s not going to say , now , i &apos;m not going to ask you to go and make it again , and you can &apos;t see what you see , also what you see .
and then again , again , again , again , it &apos;s actually only seen .
so , a very , very spannender process , like certain things and what they happen to do in the millisekunden-bereichen things .
i don &apos;t know who knows that picture .
there &apos;s exactly the same thing that i &apos;ve described to you .
now everybody is trying to see something like this .
i don &apos;t know who sees what &apos;s going on .
someone &apos;s going to do something ?
a dalmatiner , right .
if i saw that , that there &apos;s a dalmatiner in that , you know .
you will never forget more forget because i &apos;m showing you where the dalmatiner is .
now you see the dalmatiner .
and on , now they &apos;re going to see it .
this is actually what i &apos;ve actually got to say that they don &apos;t have no more pattern to see patterns , but i &apos;ve got it to konditioniert it within a very short time , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again , again ,
and this is this projection of the oxygen , rückkopplung , see .
now i know , and now i &apos;m now projieziere , i see the dalmatiner .
i see the dalmatiner .
so , very , very , very , very , very exciting processes that then in this , yes , you don &apos;t actually know , but here &apos;s the rosanen mass in this rosanen .
does anybody know what three seconds ?
long , yeah .
this is our present present .
so , it &apos;s always interesting to know than designer .
when i know something takes three seconds , until i go out of the present , i can also sort of überbrücken out of the present in the vergangenheitsschleife , i can also do it very well in the gegenwart , which i can do it by a little bit of a million people .
it has to be just verarbeiten .
then it goes into the past , and i can actually make a very elegant wartezeiten for example , if i know this phenomenon .
what does fünfundzwanzig millisekunden ?
yeah , milliseconds .
also a very interesting phenomenon .
this is the period of time where you fell in love with love .
that means , if you know , if you know that , you know , you look at who you look like long , because i don &apos;t have any gewähr of any übernehme , which can happen to happen .
and sechzehn milliseconds , also a very interesting phenomenon .
this is the most zeitraum of most of the most extreme things we have .
this is what &apos;s going on in a rapidly fast speed , how we perceive things .
and as we see things , what we &apos;re seeing , and how we &apos;re going to have to pick up against our environment , so we can think of it .
of course , the creator of course , not only does the thema of the wahrnehmungen and neuronale verarbeitungen or kognitionsergonomie , but education , of course , with the topic of the mensch-objekt-beziehung .
so how are a human being used to a certain things .
there &apos;s once produktsprachlich functions , so that &apos;s so potent or formalästhetische aspects .
there are anzeichen-funktionen , where i know exactly where i have to reach .
but there &apos;s symbolic features , why there &apos;s a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a täschchen , where does it hardly be a little bit of what &apos;s reinpasst reinpasst , although it &apos;s not so handy ?
and there are we are more on the symbolischen , on the bedeutungsebene that we are also known as a creator of ourselves .
and then , to my actual subject of the natural of the user interface , and the topic of which , of course , is usability .
usability means &quot; how can i get quickly , or how can a user in a particular nutzungskontext möglichst , efficient and zufriedenstellend .
so it &apos;s the norm that &apos;s going to be on .
how can i make something more comfortable ?
can i go directly to you or i need to do your n or i need to do it , i need a second training .
and less usable or benutzungsfreundlich is it .
that i just make it different and beautiful enough , doesn &apos;t mean it &apos;s better .
you have to understand .
and then , if you look at the software that we saw , you know , why neunundneunzig percent of our software is wenig or not in anhieb , the i-pad in many areas or i-phone , even though it &apos;s a lot more intuitive than classical software .
and it &apos;s not only since apple &apos;s not a elementarer wirtschaftsfaktor , nen elementarer , if i just want to harness the first one of the people in the first time .
why ?
because in the rule we &apos;re in the way we &apos;re ínterfaces , the natural user user user , for example , five faster in the average of our goal .
you have to imagine that if you do something about the classical softrware , five hours , five hours , and with this new kind of natural software that &apos;s just one hour .
it &apos;s not that you might be able to go four hours a few hours to go home , but your employers , then you &apos;ll have a arbeitgeber , how he actually deals with the four hours .
i want to say that it &apos;s a second thing to make a second leistungssteigerung , also some things .
then , if we &apos;re going to go back in the realm of software , this is the first command of the software of the software that were very abstract , where you have a lot of months to deal with these systems .
then the next thing that happened now , with the nem , or mental model , as the software eergonomen , which is , you have a notion of something that metaphor the metaphor of a desktop to harness the computer .
so no longer and zeros or zeros or kryptische , but a metaphor .
that &apos;s the whole thing that has a lot of benutzungsfreundlicher , but it &apos;s also a lot better .
the next generation of graphischen benutzungsoberflächen works very much more with behavior .
so , as i &apos;m concerned about this as a gestalter , more often than that .
this is also a paradigm shift .
i suddenly realized that this is always a unwichtiger for success , just the usability .
and then , when i put a step into this little weitergehe in this extraordinary form , where i &apos;m going to vote in voice , and it &apos;s no longer , a gesture , and no longer that has to control the things that things have to control , then i &apos;m still going to go faster .
but i &apos;m also going to get to the point where the things are going to get the things that things are actually doing ?
when you get the pie , and then i have to go back to my little friend here and look at what &apos;s going on from the point of view of the kognitionsergonomie , when is really intuitive ?
and this is always a little intuitive , if i have to think of it , i have to think about it .
so he wouldn &apos;t like to think , but it &apos;s just going to make it happen .
the less i &apos;m going to think about it , the more the way it is .
and what does that mean for designers ?
so , if we look at that we can be able to transfer some flow of information from a single other way , for example , the metaphor , then i can do this as a creator .
that &apos;s what i can do is to make a decision , human handlungsmodell on a software and doing software that software do .
now , of course , the question is , what &apos;s actually the most natural handlungsschema of us , and now i &apos;ve got it .
this is called the sogenannte .
the use of us and osit is a acronym and it stands for orientieren , selektieren , informieren , transagieren .
it makes all of you all the time , but it makes it unconsciously and yes , or some intuitive , or partly instinctively .
the model is going to be ausprägt in the womb , so it works globally , and old , and it will use all of us to use all the time without the fact that most of the personality is that that &apos;s what &apos;s happening .
osit osit , it will be about 50 to the fünfzig of us , so in sleep , you have a less frequent strapaziert than the day .
i can now take this mental handlungsmodell , selektieren , selektieren , informieren , transagieren , transagieren , transagieren .
and through this kind of transmission , like the metaphor of the desktops , now , but not more than a metaphor of a physical object , but a metaphor of a handlungsmusters , a handlungsprinzips .
and this is on a higher grail of the benutzungsfreundlichkeit than the transmission of a classic metaphor , which is the desktops .
and if i &apos;m going to übertrage the now , for example , as a übersicht , selektieren , informieren , it &apos;s big , i can look at the big , and i can look at my own detail , and yes , i can send it to someone else or einkaufen and so on , and so on , and so on , and so on , and
then i can do this whole .
i &apos;m trying to take this one of a beispiels .
now , you &apos;ve got to eat pies .
this is : now i &apos;m going to tell you , i have to do with the object , can again , again , reinzoomen .
i &apos;ll get the whole thing , can now be filter now and say , you know , i &apos;m just given to you all of the things that i &apos;m just going to do with a chocolate .
and once a interface , a interface , which is a lot of the world and a lot of natural gas .
because i can grab things like the hard , and you can come up with a lot more natural than when you have hierarchisch organized or andere , or other ways of doing these things accessible to these things .
imagination is a more than , and with this sentence , i want to close to the one , and with this sentence , i want to go and have a nochmal , also , to have a lot of things to come and thank you for a lot of time , and i thank you right for their attention and ask .
i want to give you a very specific aspect of curiosity .
the first thing you &apos;re going to be as a kid , as a baby , you &apos;re going to have to take care of what they &apos;ve got to do , yes , and after your parents have to allow them to play more or rühren , the more , the more , the more , that &apos;s , you know , you will have to have their curiosity
and curiosity can &apos;t learn .
so that &apos;s all that here are here and curious , in fact , in fact , people who have a property that you can &apos;t learn .
i &apos;m going to go now , basically all this umweltdiskussion , weltuntergang , vierzig , vierzig , vierzig , vierzig .
and there &apos;s a central spot .
and the point of phosphorus is phosphorus .
give pee a chance .
every day , they give you two gram of phosphorus , and every day you have to pick two gram of phosphorus .
you can &apos;t have a teeth .
you can &apos;t save energy .
you can &apos;t have bone .
we could only be able to perform amorphe mollusken through the weltmeere .
if we did not do a phosphorus , and you get stuck .
it &apos;s what we &apos;re doing is that we &apos;re going to do something that &apos;s actually beschäftigen , which is actually , really , really , really , is not that .
because all of you talk about energy , but nobody talks about the phosphor-problem .
the phosphor-problem is much more critical .
we depend on two countries .
we only have two years of phosphorus and now , in the world &apos;s far more uranium in the world , is going to be used as in all atomanlagen .
alone in the last 20 years alone are fünfzehntausend in the last 20 years in germany .
and that &apos;s what we take on .
it makes a lot of leukemia .
and we think we would protect the environment if we &apos;re a little bit less harmful .
so , for example , schütz the environment , the average car .
schütz the environment , make less waste .
schütz the environment , verbrauche energy .
but that &apos;s not a protection .
this is like i would say , schütz your kid , it just emits a thousand times instead of a thousand times .
this is just a little bit less .
if we think of the wiege to the bahre , then our entire planet will be used to a friedhof .
that &apos;s why the wiege is about to think of the wiege .
and the most important thing is to look at the ground than that .
in the soil is over the sechzig of the kohlenstoffs .
we &apos;re building corn , we &apos;re going to lose maize , and they lose the elf , dreißig metric metric tons of metric per hectare , or on the 1930s .
that means we lose in the soil , about dense times more than new endeavors .
we can look at the müllproblem .
and everything is fine , or the content .
in offenbach , for example , at the hausmüll 20 percent of the world &apos;s war .
and because we are getting older , that will get the way .
it &apos;s like all of them are all in the vorwindelphase .
yeah ?
a baby needs about a thousand .
we could reduce the age of 10 percent , but what does that do ?
that &apos;s going to require in china in a second .
this is completely trivial .
so the question is , how do we tackle these kinds of issues ?
here &apos;s the proof of the way that men are not pigs .
i want to tell you .
because the phosphorus is going to be on the pigs that the festen .
people about the urine .
yeah . yeah .
so that &apos;s not a pigs .
because that &apos;s what &apos;s wrong , right ?
traditionally we think of the umweltdiskussion , we &apos;re too many on the world .
and if you do people who &apos;s going to exist unless you say that , that would be better you don &apos;t have any kind of money , you will be raffgierig and the next .
and so someone says , as al gore , one of our big hero , there &apos;s nothing more wichtigeres than the human population .
in israel , you say when you &apos;re a menschenleben , you would have the earth .
this is what it says , the more you get more , the better .
yeah . yeah .
the first question is , are we really too many ?
if you look at ants , the weight of the ants on earth , then the ants are weigh about four times more than we .
i could also see termites , but in the united states , nobody might like termites , in the same way that they &apos;re vegetarian .
that is , the ants weigh much more than we .
and because they &apos;re physically working with a lot of harder than we are , because it only has three months , you know , three months , you can do it in your weight , in energy consumption .
that means we &apos;re not too many , we &apos;re too stupid , right ?
and where you can see how far we could do , and how sad we could do , and how sad we are , you can see that for example , you can see that for example , you have a program to be vierzig , you might be going to be klimaneutral , right ?
you can only be klimaneutral if you don &apos;t exist , yes ?
the only chance .
have you seen a klimaneutralen tree ?
yeah ?
one one ?
that means our entire intelligence means that we want to be dümmer as a trees , right ?
yeah ?
no tree is kohlenstoffneutral .
luckily , right ?
there &apos;s no überbevölkerungsproblem on trees .
there are still a lot of billions of trees in the arctic room .
you &apos;ve heard of some of the überbevölkerungsproblemen of trees ?
that means all our intelligence means that we want to be dümmer than trees .
and where you see , even in a way , even if you were demeter , the strikteste bio- , that allows our own stoffwechselprodukte back .
every year we lose three million tons of phosphorus that had to go back in the mental workload .
and so we are too many .
alone alone on this .
this is what we &apos;re looking at is that we &apos;re not comfortable with the earth that we don &apos;t say , no bioland , no nature-et-progrès , no nature-et-progrès , and how they all have to go out and go back to our own exkremente .
it &apos;s not sad ?
so we are too many .
it &apos;s safe to be a sense of being less harmful , which is ölverbrauch .
but where are we useful ?
we &apos;re trying to try to try and build our ecological footprint , but it &apos;s about having a great footprint that is useful .
we want to be good for the society we want to be good for the economy , but if it comes to the environment , the highest is , right ?
nullemissionen , yes ?
you can only have nullemissionen , if you &apos;re not there .
even if you have stepped now , they would have emissions .
so you can &apos;t solve this .
we can do it differently .
we can get our nutrients .
we do in brazil in brazil , in fact , where we are zurückgewinnen the nutrients .
it &apos;s all right now , we can actually put in this way of nutrition in agriculture .
we do this in china , for example , where we are going to take the stuff of that .
in china , a nachttopf today is still honigtöpfchen , and then , in fact , yeah ?
and in our western world , we were always too dumb , our nutrition zurückzubringen .
this is the whole western zivilisationsgeschichte zivilisationsgeschichte that &apos;s going out of the city , but the farmers never have to have something .
so , they had to grow more growing , because the farmers went into cities and the cities had to keep their nutrients .
so all western empires are always expanding until they have no longer , and then they are implodiert .
yeah ?
in china , it was different .
you &apos;ve got bruchlos civilization over a thousand years , because you &apos;ve always been able to zurückzubringen the nutrients .
even now , even if you &apos;re invited to eat in china , you would expect to eat the food you &apos;re going to eat until you get the toilet .
because it &apos;s a lot of going to go and draw nutrients .
you have them invited to eat them , not to the nährstoffdiebstahl .
that means you can see in the internet , how you can get the nutrients .
so this is actually a nice thing that &apos;s actually , so , farming , in a hectare , in a hectare , in a hectare , in a hectare , can be able to get a farmer about $ eintausendfünfhundert and schwein and schwein and gemüse and vegetables and vegetables .
and the great thing is that the verbrechensrate in favelas are zurückgeht percent .
so we don &apos;t have to control people to be very bad .
we can support them well .
this is natural high-tech-landwirtschaft , but the sanitation is wearing himself .
the byproduct is clean water .
and they &apos;re so designed by design that you can simply hi a farmer .
that means that &apos;s going back to the verbrechensraten .
and none of these facilities , we &apos;ve now built over hundertfünzig in the last 20 years , not that we &apos;ve ever been sabotiert .
you might just get a liter altöl reinwerfen , and then the facility would be ruined over years .
it &apos;s not happening .
that means we don &apos;t have to control people to be very bad .
we can support them well .
that means we need to zurückkriegen phosphorus .
and by the way , if you want to do what you want , you write yourself , in germany , in germany , the best is the in in the frankfurt .
unfortunately , it &apos;s not in offenbach , but maybe you can actually help the frankfurtern .
because the frankfurter could be the best .
and the must have gone back .
we see that the phosphorus is really critical .
and we see that it &apos;s really .
we &apos;ve been used for three years now .
the dutch government explained , they &apos;ll be the first country in the world , which is the first country .
but we need the overall overall .
you know , there are two countries that almost nearly nearly 30 percent of the world &apos;s population .
there &apos;s opec a bunch of waisenknaben .
these are sechsundzwanzig countries , the 40 percent of the control control .
and the oil will replace us , can be able to do through others .
but the phosphorus is not going to replace .
that &apos;s not about making the existing amount of bad bad , but it &apos;s about making something right .
and especially , especially , to ask , what &apos;s the right thing .
it &apos;s about it , it &apos;s about improving , not about efficiencies .
in holland , you understand that , of course , because in holland is the country on flowers .
yeah ?
imagine if you &apos;re your wife &apos;s wife , if you have them , and you come back with a fünfzig .
it &apos;s totally inefficient .
but it &apos;s all effectively , right ?
or take a lippenstift .
a woman in germany eats , about six komma three years of three years during their lifetime .
and this is what we do .
it &apos;s not just not exactly the same thing because we don &apos;t know how much more weggeküsst is going to be .
but a lippenstift , even at this lighting , i can tell you , is totally inefficient , but it &apos;s really effectively , right ?
it &apos;s all in life is not efficient .
it doesn &apos;t have been not necessarily not managing but efficiency .
ask , what is the right ?
not a bit more and burning and verbrennen it with it and it ihn it with the verbrennungsanlage of the federal government to lose all the materials for excellence , but first time to ask , how do you do a brain cycles ?
imagine mozart &apos;s efficient .
yeah ?
if i go to dinner and say , well , there &apos;s a pill with offenbach-geschmack and a glass of water .
wonderful , &quot; do you know ?
this is efficient .
everything that &apos;s beautiful in life is not efficient .
if you fall in love with somebody &apos;s fall ?
yeah ?
that &apos;s what life is in life is not to save that .
the whole umweltdiskussion .
we say people , oh yeah , you don &apos;t have a green in the south .
no , the controls is exactly the right thing ?
every single thing , where you go , you know , you know , you &apos;re schafft again .
but the wrong things .
if you wegwirft the wrong things , you have a müllproblem .
in how we think of north .
there is every footprint .
if they walk , yes , everybody knows the soil .
because the ground is going to die of the mosses , and the wind and the wind and the water would go out the floor .
if you &apos;re in italy , everyone means that the water is going to stand up in the meadow .
so it &apos;s about creating a great footprint that will be a marsh .
not schuldmanagement .
we say in germany .
yeah ?
but if i ask them , how about your wife ?
what do you say ?
sustainable .
then i say , herzliches beileid , right ?
this is just the minimum .
so , not saving , avoid .
every waste is nährstoff .
and it &apos;s a lust when you see in italy , like people in the high siberia , as well as a coladose of the car .
because you know , this is a lustvoller process .
it &apos;s a ne form of revierverhalten , right ?
you can show you , i was there .
but with the right design , please .
we &apos;ve developed a eiscremeverpackung developed , which is the temperature of the room .
you can get them out of them where they go and stand .
in two hours , they &apos;re going to go everywhere .
and they contains seeds of rare plants so that it &apos;s contributing to the wegwerfen .
that means we &apos;re useful , not less harmful .
so it &apos;s two cycles .
not all of natural , of course .
a television or a washing machine , the use of it , you don &apos;t use them .
just the things that verschleißen , like schuhsolen , like autoreifen , like autoreifen , who have to be like that they have to go into biological systems .
the things that are only used , are in technical systems .
but today we &apos;re talking about the biological systems .
yeah ?
for example , the sneaker , yes ?
completely direct ads , and it &apos;s not for the company puma , but that they &apos;re now helping this business , that business is successful .
because we don &apos;t do things out of things .
yeah ?
so if i go to lunch and say , this is free from hähnchen , then you don &apos;t help you all .
no , we are stuck in what &apos;s inside .
positive positive .
so it &apos;s not like detox .
not in the toxic .
it &apos;s all in the things that &apos;s useful .
these are the first shoes that you can hinlegen on the fußgängerampel and the rubber in biological societies , right ?
everything is kompostierbar of it .
and if it comes out , we &apos;re looking at it , of course , for nike , for nike , for nike and mauritz and the whole textile .
and this is half of all the world &apos;s globally that causes us through textile .
so , you help them , you know , you &apos;re going to ask them to people .
hey , puma , power , you &apos;re really serious ?
because the ones have been going to have the vorstandsvorsitzenden of the vorstandsvorsitzenden .
and i &apos;m not sure that they really dabeibleiben .
so , help me a little bit of a little bit .
but it &apos;s all about .
yeah . yeah .
what &apos;s been missing .
this is .
we can do the things now that you &apos;re verschleißen when they kaputtgehen , if you zoom in , you can get in biological cycles .
the technical disabled spends the same .
there &apos;s a direct rücknamesystem .
this is the first environmental rucksack , actually , which is made in the circulation .
so , in each , you can do things .
if you &apos;re on the coming , yes ?
remember , you remember the windel ?
when the moment is the garbage .
all over the world are around , and it &apos;s nearly .
in the countries where people are getting money .
there &apos;s going on the deponien , but also otherwise in the landscape , yes ?
if we change the plastics , so it can change the wasserspeicher , if we can change the wasserspeicher , inside the wasserspeicher , you can go back to zellulosebasis , you can get a baby in israel or tunisia in tunisia .
yeah ?
if you take these windel , they zerkleinern , they zerkleinern , and the powder take to plant trees .
it &apos;s the baby &apos;s baby &apos;s baby &apos;s baby for all the way , already from beginning .
so we don &apos;t need to be klimaneutral , we can be klimapositiv .
it &apos;s a kind of beneficial poop poop .
yeah , yeah .
yeah ?
we can do this .
we can even reinvent anything else .
i &apos;ve got a institute .
there are lots of people there with lots of people , and they can all get engaged .
there &apos;s extra extra to be able to do it where everybody can be .
so no longer , always , avoid , avoid , reduce , not a schuldmanagement , but smart .
do you make this curious ?
thank you .
the work of the interpreten .
music as a language .
in the end , i wrote that as a interpretin , i was as a übersetzerin , so in english , in the english wortsinn .
interpreten are translator translator in klingende music .
you don &apos;t just say , as not as a translator not only , word for the text in the other , but also the deeper sense of the words and wortzusammenhang , so that it has to be a similar translation of what it has to do with fremdsprachen .
it &apos;s from the germans to translate into english , can more knowledge , which is why if you do it , or even if you do it or even poetry .
it &apos;s very strange , but it &apos;s for laien , what we do with our musiksprache .
as a interpretin of a musikstückes , i first started to just give the animal notes .
you think that the composer in the notes are exactly everything that he has got to be in .
in reality , the scores are very vague and ungenau .
these grades are about exactly the same or ungenau , like a verbal verbal , if you look very carefully , albeit very scheinbar , description of a landscape .
because in this verbalen landschaftsbeschreibung , the smell of the flowers is not smell the grad of the grüns , not to mention the säuseln of the windes , not to feel .
this is the reason that has got to be able to have this ungenauen angaben of the notensprache in another , namely , konkrete , nonverbale , nonverbale musiksprache .
today i want to show you what i would do with the other word , so , interpretiere , even in a verbal language .
so basically one translation of translation .
so i &apos;m afraid of doing this , because if i have to translate it in the english center , it would be a lot of time for me , it would be about translation of translation of translation .
so the music works for me as well as the spoken language .
the notierten grades have the function of the letters of the letters of a script .
so it doesn &apos;t get to learn reading reading reading reading reading , and the entsprechenden on the piano or the right place on a violinsaite .
that &apos;s just the letters that you learned from .
the point of the letter is , you can only see if you can do the language .
so you need to spend for the patient &apos;s lernprozess , as well as the lernprozess of the music &apos;s gesprochene for the spoken word .
there &apos;s also abstufungen , if you learn it for the hausgebrauch , only passively or passively , or you can also talk to the musical world .
the work of the interpreten starts to start like the theaterregisseurs .
after you first chose a piece of play because you &apos;re excited about , you &apos;re looking for the origin of the composition of the composition .
you know , you know , there &apos;s a lot of information about the piece of the piece in the sekundärliteratur .
you read in the letters , tagebüchern , notes , or if it &apos;s words , thoughts of the composers .
you use the works that he previously before and after it .
you compare .
the beweggründe , it &apos;s writing .
how did he be reflected ?
how were his circumstances , how the society and politics ?
all i &apos;m interested in .
you think of this time in this time , by doing contemporary pictures or literature .
but with time , you have a lot of knowledge for a komponisten , which you can play the composers that you can &apos;t get to get a lot , and it &apos;s always a easier to be able to feel it and feel it .
the komponist is becoming more to the friend that you live together .
his concerns , the piece of piece is getting more and more and more and more to my personal cause .
now , the notes is all the way to be a precise record of the composers , but just a scaffolding , i &apos;m applying the framework to make it back with meaning and meaning .
i say , then i say with my own words , which might be written between this framework .
i play games , what these sounds might have .
now for me and for me and for the composers and what you might mean today .
every note , every type of a type of creativity , because i feel it myself because it &apos;s from my now gelebten .
it has to be here in here and now , else , i can &apos;t convince my audience that that &apos;s my cause .
it &apos;s always a very happy concert if i have the experience , the piece that i have to do as long as the new ones .
how you &apos;re hearing a happy new day , even though , with the same rituals , the aufstehen , aufstehen , breakfast , and then , as long as i go , i &apos;m going to end up the same piece of the time .
i &apos;ve got a day of older to go to the seasons , my pulse is going to spend on the morning , in a konzertsaal , it &apos;s longer , that sound coming back to the home .
i take the breathe of the audience , and unconsciously .
all of this impacts me and all the impacts on the composition .
it &apos;s also a wonderful thing that i &apos;m with a duo-partner on the stage , and we have the same wavelength .
then the same thing happens in a good , angeregten conversation .
you bring a new idea in and make this answers with a reaction .
it &apos;s exciting , because then things that we don &apos;t have to do that and what you can &apos;t do .
it &apos;s a great fun thing to do this way , and they have to be music and then they have the audience , as the music would be alive .
so every concert is a anderes concert .
i will never play more like this .
i can &apos;t play this as much as in 20 years .
i &apos;m going to have more lebenserfahrung than today , and i &apos;m going to have a lot more farbnuancen , and we have more farbnuancen , emotion and emotions .
surely , i &apos;m going to have some farbtöpfe farbtöpfe , but it &apos;s new dazubekommen .
a nice example of this is a nice example .
it was on a klavierkursus for musikstudenten , professor , professor jürgen , a famous beethoven-spezialist , a famous beethoven-spezialist , konzertpianist beethoven-spezialist , konzertpianist and langjähriger professor of the musikhochschule here in stuttgart .
unfortunately , i was too young , so he was already emeritiert when i finally started studying .
but i had the big fortune , it was very early , with a very early , and i was born , and so i was in my high school .
i was 17 when i went back to a hole once again and playing the last of the four of the four handbags from chopin .
he wondered , what was the introduction of this ballade for me .
this is a getragenes part .
and in my jugendlichkeit , i said , expectation .
he schmunzelte and he said , like ?
this must be the altersunterschied .
because for me , it means .
he was about sechzig .
well , with the fact , you have a dreams , but not a lot of memories .
i &apos;m going to play this piece of years all over the few years and always it for me , although no one of the time has changed .
every time it &apos;s exciting , because always i read something new .
an example from a very different field . it &apos;s a monet gemalt .
it &apos;s always the same garden , but to different tageszeit , at verschiedenem light .
it &apos;s translated the seerosen verschiedentlich , as he saw them , as you saw him in this moment .
his personal impressionen of the seerosen .
the x-malige interpretation of a piece is that comparable .
i &apos;ve been as much as a chopin with zweiunddreißig years when he wrote the piece .
he &apos;s only lived for only neununddreißig years .
and it &apos;s important to me , and again , again , to look back into the notes , even though i can make them memorize .
to keep zwiesprache , directly with the composers .
because the grades are the only connection to him .
especially , if he died .
now how do you start to talk to the language of music ?
i said yes , you need about the same as for spoken for spoken .
often , the musikunterricht is that you only learn the notes .
you learn basically read the reading before you just say one word .
you learn the sounds to find the notes on the instrument .
when all of the finger and right time , and right like it &apos;s moving into the notes , then sounds like the phone as music .
if the greenhouse gases occurs , the students &apos;s going to go up .
the interpretation is not talking about the anfängerunterricht .
well , there &apos;s a walk on the front , that &apos;s a quick piece .
lento , slowly .
it &apos;s noisy and leisezeichen , r and b , etc .
now , you know most of the most here .
but even though you get this information , it still leaves something more technical .
and yet , it &apos;s always interpretation .
i wonder .
i wonder that you often happen to a little bit of a elementares .
because , in order to make music on the instrument , to do your own musical and feel available to it .
that &apos;s the singing .
a kid who didn &apos;t learn the singing , because it didn &apos;t have the parents , it &apos;s not going to be done by itself .
this is like sprechenlernen .
it &apos;s vital , its own experiences and the idea of music to get over a more way to get a tool , to get a tool .
people who never have done , they never felt with their own body , like it &apos;s a sound .
a phrase with his own breath .
the instrument is , is the extension of our body .
the vocal chords to sing , our hands and feet .
so the hammerköpfe are the hammerköpfe in the piano of my finger .
the melody is rooted out of the gesungenen and the rhythm of the dance .
the dauernde berieselung today are not förderlich with music .
you don &apos;t need to make more even music if it gets a boring .
no longer necessary to stop a liedchen or singing .
every music is going to be plattgemacht when you get the dauernd of the outside of music .
sure , there &apos;s some of you , the ones that say , yeah , but what if i don &apos;t get to singing ?
i &apos;m not going to ask you , you can &apos;t sing , because you don &apos;t think you can &apos;t singing singing ?
or b , because they don &apos;t learn from singing ?
at two , it &apos;s not too late to find out , if you can &apos;t yet , or learn how to use these little muscles that are used to mimic the vocal chords .
you can train that .
or c , because you have it bescheinigt that they &apos;re untauglich .
i ask , how fachlich was the diagnosis ?
have you &apos;ve got a zweit- or drittmeinung , how to do it ?
or d , you don &apos;t like music and want to have to do that too .
but what i &apos;d like to know is because music is a nice , kommunikative thing .
but maybe you can even get umstimmen .
well , you see , you can see , no one has no longer have a aussichtsloser candidate .
but don &apos;t tell you please , i don &apos;t understand anything of classical music .
i can &apos;t say whether it &apos;s good or bad .
i &apos;m sure , but surely you can tell you , if it like you or not .
because i don &apos;t think it says somebody doesn &apos;t know if i can &apos;t do it because i can &apos;t cook .
so , you don &apos;t eat the food ; they don &apos;t have cooking .
so you don &apos;t have to make classical music , because it doesn &apos;t play an instrument .
listen to them and say , if it doesn &apos;t be it or not .
if the music is to be able to ihnen them or sweet .
tell you what you &apos;re feeling .
with time , they also have ansprüche , and they want some more spices out there or taste of a lot of difference .
why i &apos;m now urge now by my audience that it &apos;s also active ?
because music is a language and a language is to communicate .
a piece of art that you never have to do is not have a force .
the food that &apos;s been cooked by a chef or a chef cooked , it has to be eaten and not only looked at me or recipes .
so please stop you , if a music played .
it &apos;s not just a nice geräuschtapete .
when in a environment , where the adult music is making music or at least active , a kid , it &apos;s very easy to get a musiklehrer , to ask , what color did you have your flower ?
can you play in blue now ?
and the kid plays in a gedenkpause , instead of a red flower now , a red flower .
and this sounds very differently than before .
and then it was the first beginning of a musical chromosome .
so the first step to a interpretation .
and what happens is when you play a piece of a hundred , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before , before photography , before ?
now , you have the instruments of instrumente .
there was also a time when instrument was a piano .
it was just not fiction .
i think that bach would have been thrilled if he had gotten the klanglichen opportunities to the world today .
i can now have the klangvorstellungen that has been the stream , on the modern wing of the modern , which is not a barockes cembalo .
and it &apos;s also a way of beethoven , that he had stopped more than he had already heard .
today , a modern orchestra is able to play everything that &apos;s a orchestra from then when unspielbar has been rejected .
so the composers of komponisten rely on us that reinventing pieces again .
so they &apos;re going to be hörbar , which is just in the dish .
and also , what they would think in the spirit of the spirit .
or what i &apos;m going to do today , because what you might think .
thank you .
you know what &apos;s envy ?
they were already in one ?
and how do it felt like ?
suck .
i have a friend who drives a passerati .
when i come from , with my little v &apos;s back to my little v , and i &apos;m wrong , this feeling .
i just sit through the head .
i say , ulf , what are you need to do so much better ?
that &apos;s where you have a verliert year in the first year .
and at all , you &apos;re actually getting much less than i &apos;m doing .
why have i got to do this ?
and then i &apos;ll go up , it &apos;s a little bit of times .
it &apos;s against justice .
and as i say the word justice , is that uncomfortable way .
our organism has invented a great method to make these kinds of feelings like envy .
you can also try to do that as powerful or rache or ähnlichem .
i want to show you this mechanism today , or something that tells you probably what &apos;s probably familiar with .
the mechanism comes from the lie .
but don &apos;t you think of the lie as you might have heard , if people say , nobody has a wall .
and then stones auftürmt , so he ihnen the sight .
in fact , in a lie , you see the liar didn &apos;t believe what he says .
it &apos;s actually worth making fun of the things that he has quite different .
he &apos;s just like , you know , it &apos;s just not .
no , the lie i &apos;m talking about doing that it &apos;s called themselves .
they need these lie to get a lebenslüge to get a selbsttäuschung .
the can you can get less easily , yes , nachprüfen or the decisive .
they need time .
now , from this time , one one that you might know .
the spanish painter pablo , he &apos;s got a woman .
this woman has evolved to mind , the portrait would not be similar .
picasso , &quot; wow , wait for you .
it will always be going to you .
and when you &apos;re laughing , you see , you see , you see how important it is that lie , and how much time you need to learn something , what artists can tell us to be really good at what artists can do .
because artists have a gestörtes relationship to the lie .
the artist gives you something with you , and all of this lady , which doesn &apos;t look at if you just look at the mirror .
the artist is sharing you in a portrait of a portrait with something that you &apos;re going to be familiar with , if you look at this art work .
and then , the awkward sense , it might not be like you &apos;re not going to see it , and it will always be more like you .
here you have this mechanism that we can use the lie as a great invention of our lebensverhältnisse .
and not only in the art , also in the volksmärchen , in the mythology , in stories , it again .
you might know this idea of the lady that looked at the mirror every morning and asked him who &apos;s because the most beautiful in the country ?
one day , this mirror , this mirror , yes , there &apos;s a schönere .
behind the seven mountains and so on .
and you also know how much hostility of this true , also , the mirror cannot lie , from this true sense of real .
but we should just make us familiar with that you can &apos;t tell a woman that there &apos;s a schönere somewhere else .
this is what we need to understand what we &apos;re using , which is to understand what we &apos;re seeing is going to be able to understand again .
we need to this place that lie that binds us to aufrechterhält the world , without not yet .
we don &apos;t just have in the art , in the volksmärchendichtung , but also in science of the science .
and there &apos;s this story of the woman &apos;s bischofs .
she heard about this book by charles darwin , which is the origin of the species and the ancestry of the human .
that the human being sollte and , yes , it &apos;s at least a common ancestor between people and apes .
and then they ran her to her husband and said , that &apos;s probably not true , but i guess that &apos;s not true , what charles write .
the man should be abstammen from the apes or a shared ancestor .
no , no , no .
and if it &apos;s true , we have to stop that people will be able to get it .
why do we have to stop people to do something about what it is ?
because we cannot live without those lebenslüge .
because we &apos;re this selbsttäuschung , this sense , not from the highest creature , not from a naturebene , not from such a naturebene like a organism that &apos;s still going to be a stone , and then else which is where the things that &apos;s going to be , and then what &apos;s the other things that is going on , that &apos;s for us .
so , we can &apos;t really look at these things .
we need to stop people to do things , especially when they &apos;re true .
so you see slowly , slowly , look at the full and look like the traces that he leaves on something else as a great image of ourselves , i want to give you a more story .
a particularly beautiful story , how i mean .
my wife has told me .
she came from one day , she &apos;s a teacher , she &apos;s a teacher , and she told them .
a autistischer student .
it likes to love it because he has a fancy slope .
and she asked him what are your hobbies ?
and there he says , well , i &apos;m at the feuerwehr of the fire .
and because i &apos;m at the fire , i &apos;m interested in fundraising for pyrotechnische things .
yeah , you know , you &apos;re spüren , you know , there &apos;s something that &apos;s not true .
i told my wife , whenever a human being in in a moral compass is because it used to replace the wörtchen because we should try to replace it through the wörtchen .
do it once again and then they learn the sentence .
even though i &apos;m at the fire , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
you feel , this is the real truth behind the auskunft .
so a little bub , who doesn &apos;t care for the feuerlöschen .
the interest in the interest .
but there &apos;s no vereine , looking for us to look at where you learn to fire .
there &apos;s only the second that &apos;s the firemen .
it &apos;s been signed up .
and überdies , you also say , you &apos;re also saying , you know , he &apos;s also like to put money back in the way , and if the fire fell down , if the fire fell .
no , it just looks much better if we show that we are in charge of our own way to get the dangers that are only feuer if they &apos;re just feuer .
here you have this little mechanism .
this verweis that in the innersten of the bub already knew that he actually is related to the fire , but it &apos;s not that he can &apos;t tell .
here you have this zensor between the unconscious and the conscious , which you can do something about it , and the things you know that they are quite different , so they &apos;re very different from you , so that they can be much better for them and others .
so , then these words are just like this words that we can also use the language of the politically cortex .
actually , we know that something else is the case .
but we know if we are the thinking , the social century are very sensitive .
we can &apos;t do that .
it &apos;s impossible to do things in a society that should work .
i want to give you now what we &apos;ve found in my institute .
what &apos;s the logic of logic , these self-deception , the willingness to know , a different reality , which is actually what we actually know in the unconscious know that it &apos;s actually valid .
so i want to give you two , maybe three examples .
the first example of the first example , which is what many of you know and some of them are not very , very few .
i mean the soul .
what &apos;s the soul ?
the soul is so much intellectual , says about the book .
it &apos;s something that &apos;s not from stop , is materieller .
and if you have people who have the festen , you can say that they have a soul , or you can say that it &apos;s like the soul to live , and then you can think of it , they &apos;re not just a geistiger frame of matter , and blood , something that &apos;s been out of matter and blood , something like the earth , vergängliches ,
and from this soul , now they &apos;re thinking that it &apos;s somehow in this wolkigen nature , in this luftigen , anima , it &apos;s in latin america , the lufthauch , the present .
and when this lufthauch then , it &apos;s filled with people , then he &apos;s filled with a dignity , with nature that can only live with a soul .
and then he can just davonlaufen .
this is the notion of how the soul works .
so you &apos;re supposed to go from the outside of the outside .
so we &apos;re going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be present for our lives .
and if you have this premise of eyes , then you understand the logic that we can experience is going to experience that happiness through a lie to a lie .
because now you can use a dreisatz .
dreisatz , you know , you know , you know .
now this is a dreisatz that &apos;s going on with a logic .
this is the way the most part of the most part of the most part of my talk .
here you need something to do something , but also the willingness to lie .
so , as opposed to lie , you can just use these logic .
in this dreisatz , three sentences come from .
the first sentence is , klaus , there &apos;s no soul .
so the second sentence is , if the klaus is right , he doesn &apos;t have soul .
now there &apos;s a third sentence .
i have taken him to be in here in particular .
a third sentence , who immediately went to people who have a strong sense for a soul .
the say who doesn &apos;t have soul who &apos;s not a soul , and can &apos;t really be anything .
and here you see it .
this is this logic in this , yes , in this täuschenden talk , the expression .
you see it immediately .
the first two sentences are being accurate .
i can say anything .
the logic doesn &apos;t make a talk about reality .
i can say the kanzlerin is a man .
and if i have right , then the kanzlerin is a man .
if i &apos;m not right , then the kanzlerin is not a man .
the logic doesn &apos;t matter what &apos;s true .
i can say anything .
but the key thing is , if i &apos;m right , it &apos;s true .
so if klaus says , there &apos;s no soul .
second , if he &apos;s right , he doesn &apos;t have a soul .
these things are logically .
and now , our täuschendes mind immediately , you can do something .
it &apos;s a third sentence that doesn &apos;t have any of the first two sentences and the size of the first , the opposite of the first sentence is available and provided it .
because actually , we have to prove whether it &apos;s the soul or not .
but with this logic that it just uses two sentences are correct , and a third dazuhängt , which looks like he could do something that we can save our lebenslüge .
so we &apos;re like , as if it was impossible to live without a soul .
and we are very happy about it .
we can do these things on different examples .
in the present , we have a very modern example of the füllt .
so , you have to be a more philosophisches subject , a dauerbrenner from the philosophy , present .
it has to do that we go back to the vierzehnte century .
there was a gelehrten who was called johannes , and after that &apos;s the buridansche esel named named after the buridansche .
the buridansche esel is a esel , which is made of pure nature .
the didn &apos;t have that soul .
this is a naturding .
and if you &apos;re exactly the right in the middle of two gleichgroßen , then he verhungert .
because he doesn &apos;t know what the haystack is going to go .
so it &apos;s right in the middle .
so they are the naturdinge .
gleichgroße forces forces with gegensätzlichem vorzeigenzeichen lösen .
there &apos;s nothing happening at all .
only if you take another example , if you go to the one hand , then it doesn &apos;t need any reason , doesn &apos;t need anything .
automatically just run for the right thought .
so if you have this idea that you &apos;re going to be driven in nature , you get determiniert , from the larger bunch of the larger scale , you have a sense that there &apos;s something like a free choice .
and if we &apos;re in frankfurt &apos;s main , then i remember the max-planck-institut for brain .
there &apos;s a gelehrten called the wolf called wolf , and it tells him , sometimes , wolf wolf behauptet , there &apos;s no willensfreiheit .
now , we can put the second sentence , and you can say , if the wolf singer , it &apos;s not a willensfreiheit .
these sentences are absolutely logically and correct .
and what we can read in the daily reading in the daily reading , which is , you can find it in this third sentence .
this is something like this , who has no willensfreiheit , can &apos;t be able to be able to get their actions and claims , and it &apos;s so unzurechnungsfähig .
again , you have it again .
actually , you &apos;d have to prove to you , if you have a kind of willensfreiheit like this .
but the logic of deception allows us to do as if the first sentence of the first sentence was being wrong , as you would have to adopt the opposite of any evidence .
and now you can just want to make yourself if you want to make yourself anything if you want to test yourself and all of you , if you want to make people happy , that &apos;s mut .
do you practice for this , if you meet a man , you can say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
and please use it for the german word for vorhersager , which is called the prophet .
you don &apos;t have to call them , that would be a little bit more politically in a little bit .
say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
immediately , you &apos;ll be able to give you a , , for the reason that we can do this , experience , you can &apos;t prove that .
and they have a problem .
because while you &apos;re busy , they &apos;re not going to be able to prove that there &apos;s no vorhersager , the man is perfectly happy .
he &apos;s really happy about it because he &apos;s fooled .
because he has led to a fährte on it , it doesn &apos;t bother itself .
because actually , that &apos;s actually not that human being really interested in .
it &apos;s only interested in itself , the necessity of the necessity that need to prove to prove that there are vorhersager .
so , in the kind of the shift in the beweislast , you &apos;re going to experience the brilliance of the lie .
and once you have a chance to do this dreisatz , you know , do it , they do it because they &apos;re going to be happy , because they don &apos;t have to remember that way .
thank you for your attention .
yeah , good day .
i &apos;ve got to me lilly , if i could mention them .
it &apos;s one of the veranstalterinnen here from this awesome event , and i asked me if i &apos;m going to talk to you a talk , and my idea .
i have to say , you &apos;ve got it mitgekriegt , it fell from my first idea to talk about .
and i may be able to imagine my inselprojekt that i &apos;m trying to imagine .
but of course , it &apos;s the sum of the whole , of many ideas .
i probably probably is probably the two of the two girls , i probably probably is probably made for this bad öko , because i &apos;ve got a neunzehnhundertneunundsiebzig of studieren in the generation of this , in studieren , technical economists , which is , i think , i think .
and then i got the middle of the achtziger &apos; 80s after berlin , because i wanted to make renewable energy and i didn &apos;t have the s .
there was the kernforschungsanlage leopoldshafen .
the hießen was all the kfa , the jülich called the jülich .
the hot date today .
because a good engineer has built either a great car , or atomkraftanlagen .
but this is what happens like this , from the n , from the kind of a hundred watts of water , that was a toy .
and in berlin , there was a crazy ingenieurkollektiv .
i &apos;m a little bit grateful that he got again again again , because after the mauerfall , you don &apos;t have to use a word because everything left was bad .
but it wasn &apos;t the last 20 years .
there was just so that there was selbstverwaltete alternativbetriebe , and one of them was sitting in kreuzberg in kreuzberg , where you were evil .
the place of the terrorismusses , but it was called wuseltronik and sonnenenergie and solar power , and i started the middle of the achtziger .
and yeah , a lot of what was told , touch me , because many , many beautiful expressions that i &apos;ve had a long time .
i &apos;ve been working on the site of the collectively , which was basisdemokratisch .
we were more people .
if one no told , the vetoprinzip , which is a completely zermürbt , i &apos;ve got a lot of times a schwachsinnige sache , because i &apos;m going to be a great deal of my father &apos;s colleague , because all of my colleagues are always zugeredet , you have the money to rausgeschmissen your window at your kid .
it &apos;s busy .
and it was really , very , very , very bitter , and you can get in the face of the stage , and you can get a picture of a picture where i &apos;ve been asked to a picture of a year , a thousand d-mark , and then , in the back of the year , einheitslohn , einheitslohn , of course , that &apos;s really the great
and i then hab up and then we &apos;ve been able to have the firma mitbegründer , i &apos;ve been mitbegründer with the company solon , which then was the spin-off q-cells of the biggest zellenhersteller of the world .
a riesenerfolgsgeschichte , but we have a little bit of a small company , and we have a little group of a growing company , and we have a small group , and we have a small group , and we have a little bit of the future of the future and our erachtens , which is again , again , that &apos;s again , that &apos;s the equivalent of
and i brought you a project i &apos;m going to show you now .
and the title of the talk was , yes , how you get a hundred percent renewable .
and we just have to start with a relatively einfach-verrückten story , where could you be able to have a memory of it today .
on this island , which is the island graciosa on the azoren .
yeah , that &apos;s the data .
there &apos;s a thousand thousand people .
now , the average person today have a erneuerbaren energieanteil percent of the 15 percent .
and the question is , why don &apos;t you have more ?
that &apos;s just not technologically .
if you look more carefully einander , catching the system starts to fail .
i also want to talk to the politicians , if you put into berlin-adlershof our system .
the say , why ?
we &apos;ve already heard a 20 percent in germany .
but can &apos;t be a problem .
but not , we have seven percent and our network , we see the european union .
if we had had in europe , then we have the same problems that people have on this island .
the question was simple , it was zweitausend2006 , the first one with the first time , the first one with the island , whereas just breaks through .
how big , because it was such a battery , so you can get a island to 20 , very , 40 , vierzig , 50 percent , maybe even even 70 percent .
and yeah , i &apos;ll go again .
the conventional system looks like this on the world .
by the way , a year , a hundred thousand gigawatt electric leistung on earth &apos;s world .
this is the performance of a hundred nuclear power , because that &apos;s all very quickly everywhere .
the energiehunger of the world , the effect , it &apos;s going to get out of it , because you don &apos;t need any need .
this is fast .
you put it out of it .
and then it looks like this .
in the run three of the dieseln , two are getting waited .
yeah , this is a little bit of the bottom here .
we also have very precise data .
and the windkraftanlage or the solaranlage or whatever it is , it &apos;s in the rule of a system system or a system that can only get into little quantities of this .
our goal was to say , okay , okay , okay .
the cancer becomes back-up and the wind , sun can unlock the load of the load that they can map the larger insulin .
and if you want to go over 20 , 30 percent renewable energy , so energy per year , not the performance in the moment , you need to turn the whole lot .
that &apos;s what the moment is that the renewables are going to take the renewables to do all the whole web .
you can only do it , of course , if you &apos;re going to be put in any way .
that &apos;s not the one one ever done in the world .
there &apos;s this little style , so you can also put your car back in your car to a little wechselrichter .
people always ask me what forscht you do in adlershof ?
it &apos;s all about .
but if you want to have multiple wechselrichtern of these wechselrichtern , and they should be able to build a grid , it &apos;s going to be a complicated .
and our goal was to be able to go to the time , and then this rest , the last 10 , the last 10 , the last 10 , 20 percent renewable , which will be very , very expensive , and that &apos;s not going to work out that you do that out of batteries .
this is going to be a spectrum , the hydrogen , the hydrogen , the hydrogen , methane , power to gas , or the way it will be .
you have to go to a saisonalspeicher and winter-sommer and not just tag-nacht .
we just wanted to know what &apos;s because with a normal , stinknormalen battery battery battery battery .
how far you can do that ?
and then you have a whole bunch of simulations .
and the sun and the sun and the sun and the last and the last and came to the outcome , a very interesting thing to be the conventional system that would have a middle east strompreis of about 50 cents a per unit , about vierundvierzig cents .
these were the first berechnungen of six years ago .
and then we said , okay , okay , okay , okay .
yeah , yeah , then we have a business business .
we are cheaper like the diesel-system , if the average five percent of five percent per year .
and then we started to negotiate with the insulanern .
what would all have to do ?
have investors with investors , i &apos;ve got new gesellschafter .
we were only five people to rebuild a order to rebuild the society .
and here &apos;s the plot .
the brown is kind of the conventional system , the green is our system .
that our system also has a preisanstieg , because we &apos;re going to do it more than 20 percent of you to do with diesel and also a preissteigerung on the other things .
and the power-utility that the elektrizitätsversorgungsunternehmen on the island , has gemeint that we find all great .
we also want to help , but we don &apos;t believe that you can solve the technical issue .
and so we have determined to build a hall in berlin , where we sort of like the electric viral of the island in the scale of the island of the island .
that means we have to find out the largest battery in the world .
this is her .
it &apos;s a total of asia , in the event of japan .
and witzigerweise is it in the back of the last years of bbc , which is abb , and then auslizensiert auslizensiert on the japanese .
you can see it &apos;s a very , very big battery .
it has a megawatts of performance , and can you have six hours , and this is the battery that we have to have simulationstechnisch .
and they &apos;ve set them .
we also have one of these diesel-aggregate in the same size , in the hall , in the hall , in the hall , which is actually the entire dynamic behavior of this web , so it &apos;s now this -- the one that &apos;s the big battery here , here &apos;s the big battery here , here &apos;s the whole battery , here &apos;s the whole umrichter that we
over here , we &apos;ll simulate the whole übertragungsleitungsystem , the kilometer-physik of cable , to put the schwingungsverhalten in the net .
and here you can see this whole thing .
we can also photovoltaik zweihundert kilowatt kilowatt on the net .
this is again again showing this again again , again , again , again , all the way , the whole one .
and what we did was since zweitausendneun , the hall was done by the end of the time , which is basically all the way between the individual system in electronics , in software , we &apos;ve done .
so we &apos;re not batteriehersteller , but we define ourselves as a company that only between the subject of battery and the topic of the bed and everything between the subject .
you have to communicate to battery , you have to communicate the grid , and that &apos;s very complicated .
the beauty is that you can basically basically have all of this in this island today , it &apos;s all the vorwegnehmen that we &apos;re getting to get from the workforce of renewables .
so this whole discussion , like the hin- and herbewegt , energiewende , energiewende , energiewende , like the island , we have to exzessenergie for instance , for example , for example , for example , we exzessenergie the wind and the sun .
natürlicht natürlicht is bietet .
so smart-grid , a riesenthema everywhere .
we can start to integrate on the island with elektromobilität , rumzufragen , you can see the load of the load .
that means if you &apos;re dealing with too much percent renewable , you can &apos;t do it without any memory .
you can &apos;t smart-grid through your n , you can actually get through the nets , yes , that should be , you should do that , but you can &apos;t get any of the memory .
and this is so n , the message of the message .
so many people come up , and look at this , because you can see what problems you get .
if we turn the first slide , you don &apos;t have these spinning mass that causes a certain inertia in the web .
and our europäisches verbundnetz is basically just a lauter mass of large kraftwerken , where the wave everywhere is going on all over the world .
we look in this grid , the 50 hertz hertz , and when it gets neunundvierzig , it &apos;s going to be hertz , we &apos;ll start a few ventilchen aufzumachen , then again , again , again , again , we get up .
this is the system .
and of course , it &apos;s incredibly difficult .
if you put it out of the somewhere , it &apos;s got a little bit .
the spinning announced at least 10 seconds to keep the net stable .
and in time , you can get other other way back .
if you don &apos;t have that , these spinning mass , then you have to replace it with leistungselektronik and elektrochemie .
and we can have two of these big battery in two milliseconds .
there &apos;s a look at what &apos;s going on there .
and the message is , we have to go to these broad masses , if we were going to take our targets 20 , 20 percent , 20 , 30 , 30 percent , 30 percent , 30 percent and so on , if we want to reach the way that we want to reach at all .
then we have to break our must-run in the grid .
must-run is simple , which is simple , the power station to keep the frequency .
yeah , this is a riesendebatte moment in moment , zubau from the kohlekraftwerken , because we don &apos;t have any , or gasturbinen , because that &apos;s not .
and we just try to have that you can have the capacity , the must-run , to get the must-run , by creating elektrochemische memory .
now , there &apos;s also a lot of research now .
and this purpose , people are always coming up and look at our versuchsstand , sort of our transportation system .
and yes , the discussion is always about the question , how far you can get a piece of a far future .
and many discussions i had in the last six years , were similar to the discussion that i had had been in the last 30 years .
it &apos;s not , a 100,000 , kinderspielkram , we &apos;ve never been all the things that we &apos;ve never seen .
we have today dreißig gigawatt in germany .
this is vorbildlich .
and i just just like that , we &apos;re going to have the same capacity to elektrochemischen capacity on the world .
it &apos;s just simple , so it will come .
there &apos;s a whole bunch of widerständen and arguments .
the beauty is that i &apos;ve been working on the last two years now , that scientists have the scientists on my page .
we &apos;ve got over tens of millions of millions of caps , also , in order to klemmen , i &apos;m going to klemmen the german net network .
this will happen in the next april .
so you can see that there &apos;s a change there , and it &apos;s just about this abwehrhaltung , and it &apos;s just about the idea of the idea , hundreds of percent renewable , a hundred percent renewable .
and if you have a hundred percent renewable , then it &apos;s like a autarkes system .
now , in discussions , these insulaner , which are doing these insulaner , who are doing a little bit of a tiny , tiny , that has nothing to do with our verbund .
the question is simple , if you &apos;re completely independently to irgendwelchen or uranen energierträgern , which are going to be rausgebohrt somewhere in the world , and they &apos;re going to be hingebracht , you &apos;re going to be a island .
and then they just use it , which is what the sun and wind is there where they live .
and this is a little bit of our vision of a vernüftigen , and i &apos;m also a cradle-to-cradle also , that they have been said to be safe .
and this is what we do , and in the talk , the talk of premium kola , that you can have a collective collective , and solar power , here &apos;s a little bit of a little bit of a little bit .
and yeah , i want to encourage you to just want to just encourage you , that you can be a little bit of a bit of a vision and also have a vision .
and you have to stay really zäh , but i think it &apos;s going to be .
thank you .
when steve lopez , the los angeles times , one day , one day , one day through the streets of los angeles , he heard a wonderful music .
she came from a man , a african-american , sympathisch , rau , a obdachlos , who played on a violin that had only two of the other .
many of you know the story , because of steves articles was a book that was verfilmt with robert lopez , and jamie foxx , the kontrabassisten , the kontrabassisten , the kontrabassisten , the kontrabassisten , the kontrabassisten , and whose other state had been beendet by its paranoide settlement through its paranoide .
nathaniel left , suffered a nervenzusammenbruch and 30 years later , he lived as a homeless on the streets of skid row in the center of los angeles .
i &apos;m going to tell you all of the things that i &apos;m going to suggest to you or to look at the movie , or looking at the movie that &apos;s not just helping these connection , but how they ended up calling the instrument , if this pun , the mithalf , the mithalf , the mithalf , nathaniel away from the street .
i met mr. ayers in 2008 , two years ago , in the walt disney hall .
he had just a performance of beethoven &apos;s first and fourth symphony and vierter , came out the stage to imagine me .
he was talking about a very heiteren and geselligen note about yo-yo and hillary clinton and about how the dodgers never would be able to create the baseball world , and that &apos;s all the alles of the first geige of the first satz of the first sentence in the last sentence of the first place .
we came to speak to music . and a few days later , i got a email , which was that nathaniel was in the state that nathaniel were interested in me .
i have to mention that nathaniel offers a medical treatment because it was already working with elektroschocks and mit , and handschellen treated , a trauma that has been made of his life .
so as a consequence of this , it &apos;s a very vulnerable to be a anfällig phasen . they &apos;re sometimes so bad , and he disappears , in the streets of skid , and it &apos;s row , and the horror and the folterqualen of your own spirit .
and in the same way , nathaniel was nathaniel , when we started with our first class in the walt disney disney , and he had this irre flackern in his eyes and the hidden .
he was talking about invisible dämonen and smoke and rauch , how someone wanted to poison in sleep .
i didn &apos;t think i was afraid , but i had noticed that he could be able to put it in a his dance , and i could destroy his relationship with the violin when i started to talk about tonleitern and arpeggios and other exciting forms of the didaktischen geigenpädagogik .
so i just started playing on .
i was playing the first sentence of beethoven &apos;s first sentence .
and as i was playing , i noticed that in nathaniels eyes , i was going to be a complete shift .
it was as if he was under the impact of a &quot; invisible , a chemical reaction , whose catalyst was my game .
nathaniels manischer , anger in understanding , in a quiet curiosity and the time .
and as a miracle took his violin and started playing a few of the ausschnitte of violinkonzerten , and then asked me to play a few of the ausschnitte of violinkonzerten and asked them to play , mendelssohn , tschaikowski , sibelius .
and then we started talking about music , starting from bach , and it &apos;s been started by beethoven , brahms , and all the other bs , from bartók to esa-pekka to esa-pekka .
and i realized that he wasn &apos;t just a enzyklopädisches knowledge of music , but it also tells you a close personal relationship .
he talked about a passion and a grasp that i only have to know from my colleagues in the philharmonie of los angeles .
by talking about music , silly man who was moved from the streets of los angeles , a liebenswerter , gebildeter , gebildeter , ausgezeichneter , ausgezeichneter , ausgezeichneter , ausgezeichneter .
music is medicine . music changes us .
for nathaniel , music means music means .
because the music allows him to be able to him , his thoughts and delusions with its imagination and creativity into something .
and so he entflieht his quälenden .
i understood that this is the nature of art .
this is why we do music : so we do something that is inside us , deep inside all the inside , our emotions , our feelings , through our artistic lens , through our creativity .
and the reality that all of us is all achieved us , and move , inspired , inspired .
what &apos;s going on in the world , so it brought him back to a community of friends .
the erlösende force of music brought him back to a family that understood him , who understood his talent and ihn him .
and i &apos;m going to keep going to wieder with nathaniel music , whether it &apos;s a walt disney concert or in skid row , because he reminds me of the musiker of why i got musicians .
thank you .
bruno giussani : thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank
robert gupta .
robert gupta : i want to play something that i &apos;ve stolen in unverschämterweise .
i hope you forgive me .
so i &apos;ve been in my life of a lot of fish .
i only loved two .
this first one , which was more like a passionate type .
it was a beautiful fish , wohlschmeckend , good consistency , gehaltvoll , gehaltvoll , a bestseller on the menu .
what a fish .
better , he was convicted in aquakultur according to the supposedly of sustainability .
so you could feel comfortable with it .
i had a relationship with this beauty for several months .
one day , the head of the company , and i asked , if i could think of the nachhaltigkeit of the sustainability .
&quot; of course , &quot; i said .
there was a company that was trying to solve what this unimaginable is being addressed for our chefs , how are we going to go to our speisekarten ?
in the last 50 years , we &apos;ve got the oceans , as we have mad bare .
it &apos;s hard to get the destruction .
ninety percent of the great fish that we love , the tuna , the heilbutte , the lachse , schwertfisch , they &apos;re collapsed .
it &apos;s almost nothing left .
so , or übel , aquakultur , fischanbau , a part of our future .
many arguments . fischzuchtanlagen verschmutzen , the environment , most of you , most of you , and they &apos;re inefficient , we &apos;re taking it .
he has a futterverwertung of 15 .
that &apos;s called 15 pounds of wildfisch , so you get a pounds of zucht-thunfisch .
not very sustainable .
it doesn &apos;t really taste very well .
so here was a company , trying to make it right .
i wanted to participate .
the day before the event i called the ceo of the öffentlichkeitsarbeit for company .
let &apos;s call him the don .
&quot; don &apos;t &quot; don &apos;t &quot; don &apos;t &quot; just &quot; just to have the facts right , you &apos;re famous to the extent that you didn &apos;t get the environment . &quot;
&quot; the true &quot; he said , &quot; we &apos;re so far outside that the waste is distributed , not concentrated . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; we &apos;re basically a world .
this futterverwertung of 2.5 , &quot; he said .
&quot; the best in industry . &quot;
2.5 , great .
&quot; 2.5 ? what &apos;s what ? &quot;
&quot; sustainable proteins , &quot; he said .
&quot; great , &quot; i said , &quot; i put .
and at this evening i was in bed and thought , what &apos;s hell is a sustainable protein ?
so i phoned the next day , just before the event , don &apos;t .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t look like , what &apos;s sustainable ? &quot;
he said he didn &apos;t know that . he &apos;ll be able to give up .
now , i &apos;m telefonierte with a few people in the company . nobody could give me a bad answer . until i finally ended up with the senior biologists .
let &apos;s call him the name .
&quot; don , &quot; don &apos;t &quot; i said , &quot; what &apos;s for instance ? &quot;
now , he mentioned some algae and some fischmehle , and then he said , hühnchen-pellets .
i said , &quot; hühnchen-pellets ? &quot;
he said , &quot; yes , feathers , skin , knochenmehl , reste , reste , getrocknet and food . &quot;
i said , &quot; how much percent of the average is futters ? &quot;
in the assumption of maybe two percent .
&quot; well , that &apos;s about 30 percent , &quot; he said .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t , what &apos;s sustainable about the fish ? &quot;
there was a long pause in the line , and he said , &quot; there &apos;s just too much chicken on the world . &quot;
i got me from this fish .
no , not because i &apos;m a selbstgerechter genießer and gutmensch .
i &apos;m actually .
no , i actually have micht from this fish , because i swear , i swear to god , the fish after chicken .
this second fish , that &apos;s another kind of like this .
it &apos;s the romantic form , the way you know , the better you know your fish , you get the fish more .
i first got it in a restaurant in a restaurant .
a befreundete journalist had been talking about a long time for a long time .
it &apos;s got us in some sense of verkuppelt .
he came on the table with a light , almost white color .
the chef had him verkocht him .
you can hold twice .
amazingly it was still delicious .
who can make a fish so that he was verkocht ?
i can &apos;t do it , but this guy can .
we call it miguel . in fact , it &apos;s called miguel .
and no , he doesn &apos;t cooked fish , and he &apos;s not a chef . at least in the way that you and i understand .
it &apos;s a biologist at veta la la palma .
this is a fischaufzucht in the südwestlichen corner .
it &apos;s near the mouth of the river .
until the 1980 was the farm in the hands of argentiniern .
they züchteten fleischrinder on what they were doing .
they did that by cutting the country .
they built these complicated panels from channels , and they switched out of water out of the country out of the country .
well , they couldn &apos;t make that that &apos;s not economically .
and the ökologisch was a catastrophe .
it brought about 90 percent of the birds to be a lot of birds .
and so it has a spanish company with the country .
what did you do ?
they have the flow of water .
they literally have the lever .
instead of the water , they used the canals to get the water back .
they fluteten the canals .
they created a 11.000 hectares of fischaufzucht -- barsch , meeräsche , shrimp , garnele , aal -- and the firma and his company zerstörung the ecological devastation .
the farm is incredible .
i mean , you &apos;ve never seen this .
it &apos;s rigid on the horizon that &apos;s a million miles away , and everything you see is geflutete channels and that density , a dichte .
i wasn &apos;t a long time ago .
it &apos;s a incredible guy , three pieces of charles darwin and a part of the kiss .
okay ? there we were fighting through the wetlands and i keuche and schwitze , and i schwitze matsch , habe matsch until my knees and miguel it &apos;s a biologievorlesung .
this is what he put up a rare gleitaar .
now he mentioned the mineralbedürfnisse of phytoplankton .
and here , here he sees a pattern of concentrate that &apos;s going to do it in the tansanische giraffe .
it turns out that the biggest part of the biggest part of his career in the mikumi national park in africa .
i asked him how he &apos;s gotten a fisch-experten .
he said , &quot; fish ? i don &apos;t know about fish .
i &apos;m a expert for relationships . &quot;
and then he goes into more gerede of rare birds and algae and algae .
and i don &apos;t get me wrong , that was really fascinating , you know , the biotische community , like the kind of thing .
it &apos;s great , but i was in love .
and my head was about the verkochte piece of köstlichen , i had the vorabend .
so i was interrupted . i said , &quot; miguel , how come it is that your fish are so good ? &quot;
he showed up on the algae .
&quot; i know , boy , the algae , the phytoplankton , the relationships , that &apos;s incredible .
but what does your fish eat ?
how is the futterverwertung ? &quot;
now , he &apos;s going to tell me that it &apos;s such a reichhaltiges system that the fish eat , what they eat in the wild .
the pflanzliche biomass , the phytoplankton , the zoo , that &apos;s what the fish .
the system is so healthy , it &apos;s completely selbsterneuernd .
there &apos;s no food .
the one of a farm is not a farm that doesn &apos;t feed their animals ?
and later on the day i went on this site , and i asked him , i said , &quot; for a place that seems to be , &quot; unlike any farm i ever had , &quot; how do you succeed ? &quot;
at the moment , it was like a filmregisseur monk would have a bühnenwechsel .
and we trained around the corner and us around the most amazing sight , thousands of new trials , a literally new teppich carpet .
&quot; this is success , &quot; he said .
look at their bäuche , pink .
they schlemmen . &quot;
schlemmen ? i was completely overwhelmed .
i said , &quot; miguel , don &apos;t you use your fish ? &quot;
&quot; yes , &quot; he said .
&quot; we lose 20 percent of our fish and fischeiern on the birds .
now last year , on this site , 600,000 birds , more than 250 different species .
it &apos;s the biggest and one of the most important private vogelreservate in europe .
i said , &quot; miguel , is a great gedeihender vogelbestand doesn &apos;t want to have the last one that you want to have a fischaufzucht ? &quot;
he shook his head , no .
he said , &quot; we build a building , not intensely .
this is a ökologisches network .
the flamingos eat the shrimp .
the shrimp eat the phytoplankton .
so the new york is the better the way the system better . &quot;
okay , let &apos;s give us the recovery . a farm that doesn &apos;t feed your animals and a farm that &apos;s misst their success .
a fischaufzucht , but also a vogelreservat .
oh , and by the way , the flamingos of the vornherein doesn &apos;t have to be there .
they breed in a city of miles away , where the bodenbeschaffenheit is better for the nestbau .
every morning they fly to the farm .
and every night they fly back to the same time .
they do that because they can follow the gestrichelten white line of the landstraße .
seriously .
i had a kind of journey of penguins , so i looked at the miguel .
i said , &quot; miguel , fly back to the farm and fly back to the evening ?
do you make that for the children ? &quot;
he looked at me as a song , i had a song of whitney in the whitney .
he said , &quot; no . you do that because the food is better . &quot;
i didn &apos;t mention the skin of my beloved fish , the delicious was , and i don &apos;t like fischhaut . i don &apos;t like knusprig . i don &apos;t like knusprig .
it &apos;s this beißende , verkohlte taste .
i fell down all the way almost .
and yet , when i &apos;ve been doing it in this restaurant , she didn &apos;t have geschmeckt at all .
they liked it , and it was as if you would take a chunk of the ocean .
i mentioned that to miguel the gegenüber and he nickte .
he said , &quot; the skin is like a sponge .
it &apos;s the last layer before before something in the body .
it has evolved in the evolution of evolution to unreinheiten unreinheiten . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; but our water has no unreinheiten . &quot;
okay . a farm that doesn &apos;t feed your fish . a farm that &apos;s success on its success .
and then i realized , if he says , a farm that doesn &apos;t have any unreinheiten , because the water that &apos;s going on that farm is coming from the river .
it &apos;s a river that &apos;s all the things that are conducive to the rivers that are available to lead them , chemische , chemische pollutants , abfluss .
and if it &apos;s got through the system , and this is the water supply chain , as it &apos;s hereingekommen .
the system is so healthy , it cleans the water .
so not only a farm that doesn &apos;t feed a farm that &apos;s a success of their predators , but a farm that literally is a wasser-aufbereitungsanlage , and not only for those fish , but also for you .
because if the water herausfließt , it versinkt in the atlantic .
a drop in the ocean , i know , but i &apos;m going to take it , and that should also do it , because this one , as usual is also .
you might say it &apos;s a recipe for the future , could be able to talk about the future , whether we talk about barsch or fleischrindern .
what we need now is a radical new conception of agriculture , from one where the food is actually taste in food .
but for many people , it &apos;s a little bit of radical .
we are not realisten , we genießer . we &apos;re lover .
we love wochenmärkte . we love little familienbetriebe . we &apos;re talking about regional food . we eat .
and if you claim that the things that the future are , someone &apos;s good news , someone &apos;s somewhere on and says , &quot; hey people , i love pinke flamingos , but how are you going to feed the world ?
how are you going to feed the world ? &quot;
can i be honest ?
i don &apos;t like this question .
no , not because we &apos;ve been producing enough calories to feed the world more than just feed .
a billion people are going to be starving today .
one billion -- that &apos;s more than ever before -- because of krasser inequalities in the distribution , not the gesamtproduktion .
well , i don &apos;t like this question because it &apos;s the logic of our nahrungssystems over the last 50 years .
füttere getreide on the ground , schädlingsbekämpfungsmittel , chemicals on earth , chemicals on the earth , and the whole time , the agrarindustrie were simple , &quot; if we feed more people , like awful , how awful can it be ? &quot;
this was the cause . it was the main purpose . it was the business of american farming .
we should call them what it is , a craft in abwicklung , a craft that &apos;s rapidly schnell capital that allows the production to do that production .
this is not a craft , and it &apos;s not agriculture .
our kornkammer is not threatened with abnehmender , but because of the abnehmender resources , resources , because of resources , resources , because of resources , resources .
not through the latest mähdrescher- , but through fertile country , not by fruchtbares , but by fresh water , not by wälder , but by forests , and not through the wälder , but by the fish in the ocean .
you want to feed the world ?
so let &apos;s start with the question : how are we going to feed ourselves ?
or better , how can we create conditions that can enable you to feed themselves ?
to do that , don &apos;t look at the agrarindustrie-modell for the future .
it &apos;s really old , and it &apos;s done .
capital , chemistry and machines are , and it never has a really good thing to eat .
let &apos;s look at the environmental model .
this is that , this is the two billion years of arbeitserfahrung zurückgreift .
look at miguel , farmers like miguel , farmers like miguel , farmers like miguel .
so , unfortunately , the worlds for themselves , they have the wiederherstellen , which is the wiederherstellen , which are only dependent , farmers who are not just numbers , but experts for relationships , but experts in the relationships .
because they are the ones who are experts in taste .
and if i really am , you &apos;re a better chef than i will be .
you know , this is right , because if the future is good , it will be delicious .
thank you . thank you .
if i want to show you this is the sum of the data that we want to consume is the sum of their pieces and instead of thinking about the sum of their pieces and instead of applying to the informationsüberladung that we can think of information as we can use information , and we realize that we have not seen that way .
so what we see here is a typical sterbediagramm after age age .
the program i use here is a little experiment .
it &apos;s called pivot and what i can do with pivot , that i can filter a particular sample , say , tell accidents .
and immediately , i see another pattern that makes you feel .
and it &apos;s because in the mittelbereich , in the mittelbereich here , people are most active , and they &apos;re at the gebrechlichsten .
we can step forward and then the data and see the data and see that kreislauferkrankungen and cancer , the usual suspects , but not for everybody .
now if we go back and age , we say 40 years , or we &apos;re going to see , in the other , we &apos;re going to see that accidents are even the most common people to worry about .
and who sees the weiterforscht that is really interested in men .
so you realize that the reputation of information and data in this way , very much in a lively informationsgrafik .
and if we can do this for raw data , why not for content ?
now what we now have is the titelbilder of every single illustrated , which is ever printed the &quot; sports .
it &apos;s all here . it &apos;s all online .
you can actually test it after my talk in your way .
with pivot , you can put them in a decade .
you can put them in a particular year .
you can jump directly to a specific copy .
now , if i look here , i see the athletes that appear in this copy and the sportarten .
i &apos;m a lance armstrong , so i &apos;m going to show you all the way to do all of the time that i &apos;m going to mention in the lance armstrong .
now if i just want to get a gröberen of a gröberen , i could think , &quot; okay , what if i look at everything with the subject ? &quot;
so i go back and erweitere the view .
now i see greg lemond .
and so you get a sense of this , if you put this kind of information , gezielter , breiter , breiter , reinzoomen , rauszoomen , you don &apos;t have or not simply don &apos;t just do it .
you make something that &apos;s a little bit differently .
it &apos;s something between , and we think it changes the way information can be used .
i want to take this idea a little bit more like a little bit more about what a little bit crazy .
what we &apos;ve done here is , we &apos;ve taken every single wikipediaseite , and they &apos;ve been able to reduce a little summary .
the summary contains a short term and a symbol of the field of that .
i just just show the top 500 of the top of the top .
but even in this eingeschränkten , we can do a lot of things .
immediately , we get a sense of the issues that are on wikipedia .
i &apos;m going to fix the issue .
now , after i voted on the government , i realize that the wikipediakategorien that most of the jahres of the year are the year &quot; people of the year .
this is really important , because this is a realization that &apos;s not in a single wikipediaseite .
this is only just to see if you look at a step , and the whole looks .
and i can put on one of these zusammenfassungen , i can go into the subject of time , &quot; people in the year , &quot; people in the year , and all of the together .
now if i know all these people , i think the majority of these are regierungsbeamte , some of the things that are from science , some of the things that &apos;s come from the economy . here &apos;s my boss . and a comes from the musikbereich .
and interestingly , also , bono is also a ted prize .
so we can jump and look at all the ted prize .
you see , we &apos;re looking at surfing the first time as it is a web , not just from side , but much more .
and so i want to show you what &apos;s going to show you what a little surprise .
i &apos;m just showing you the new york times website .
pivot , this app -- i don &apos;t want to call it a browser ; it &apos;s really not a browser ; it &apos;s really not a browser , but you can bring this zoom-technologie on every single website like this .
so i can go back to a step back , and directly to a specific sektion jump .
so that &apos;s why you just have to look through the look of the websites from websites in this kind of way that can look at all the internet-verlauf in the same way that you can look at .
so i can put in my course in a particular point .
here &apos;s the one of the entire demonstration that i &apos;ve thought about .
and i can sort of give anything that i &apos;ve seen today .
and if i look back and look at everything , i can put my own such-vergangenheit , maybe i look for my such-vergangenheit , and here i &apos;ve been looking for &apos; , or after here , or here for live labs .
and from here , i can go into the side and again .
it &apos;s a metaphor that will be used , and every time it makes the bigger bigger than the sum of the datenteile .
right now , in the moment , we think that data is a curse .
we talk about the fluch of the informationsüberflusses .
we &apos;re talking about the drowning in information .
what if we could turn this situation and the internet on the head so that we &apos;re going to go to a different kind of stuff , start to many things , start to many things , and you can see patterns , and pattern pattern that otherwise would be used to fill it ?
if we can do this , then this will be datenfalle , maybe a new source of information .
and instead of just moving it into information , we can know that .
and if we know about , then maybe we can even get weisheiten .
i &apos;m listening to that . thank you very much .
i grew up with a gehörigen science fiction fiction .
i went to school , i went to school , every day every day every day .
and my nose had always been in a book , a science-fiction-buch , which my thought in other worlds , and in erzählerische , my deep , in my sitzende , unersättliche curiosity .
and this curiosity that i &apos;m always in high school , through the forests , the woods , and &quot; samples &quot; and snakes and käfer and käfer and käfer and teichwasser , everything in the microscope .
i was totally wissenschaftsbegeistert , you know .
it was always trying to understand the world , and the boundaries of the possible direction .
and my love has been able to me , in my environment , because then , in the late 60s , we flew to the moon and we were exploring the deep sea .
in the living room , in our living room , we came in our living rooms with his fascinating shows that we have animals and places and a world of miracles that we never imagined before .
it &apos;s probably perfectly well to jener the science-fiction-rolle .
and i was an artist .
i could draw . i could paint .
and since there &apos;s no video games that übersättigung with computergenerierten movies , the whole of the media , i had to create the images in my head .
we had to do that at all , when we read a book , we took the description of the autors , and projected them on the screen in our minds .
my reaction was to draw the draw and paint worlds , alien worlds , robots , raumschiffen , and all of the things .
in the matheunterricht , i was constantly caught by teachers , like i , hinterm textbook .
the creativity had to go out .
and this was something interesting . what i was about to jacques jacques shows , was the thought that the idea of a unknown world of the earth was here on our earth .
i certainly wouldn &apos;t have a alien world with a spaceship world . that seemed to be pretty unlikely .
but here was a world i actually couldn &apos;t walk on here on earth , and it was equally fascinating and exotic like all of what i had imagined when i had to read those books .
so i decided to be 15 , and i was 15 .
the only thing that was that i lived in a little village in canada , 1,000 miles from the nearest sea .
i didn &apos;t get out of it .
i nervte my father , until he finally finally finally finally finally finally finally had a tauchschule in buffalo , new york , right on the other side of the border where we lived .
i made my tauchschein in a pool of the ymca in buffalo in buffalo , new york .
but the ocean , but a real sea , i got two years later to face two years later , when we moved to california .
since the 40 years , the most inzwischen , i &apos;ve got about three hours of water under water . 500 hours of it in tauchbooten .
and i learned that the world of the deep sea , even in the flacheren oceans , so rich of life is how we really can &apos;t really imagine .
the imagination of nature knows not limit , very , unlike our own , kläglichen human imagination .
for today , i have a tiefste of the day , i see the deepest awe for what i see on my dives .
and my love for the ocean is holding the same intensity as the same thing .
when i was a profession , it was the filmmaking .
this is the best possibility to tell my inner , to tell stories , with my need to create images .
as a child , i &apos;m constantly comicbücher , and so .
so movies were films , images and stories . the street combined .
now , of course , the stories i was aussuchte , from the science-fiction-bereich , &quot; terminator , &quot; &quot; &quot; aliens , &quot; &quot; aliens , &quot; and &quot; abyss . &quot;
in abyss , i could have my vorliebe for the unterwasserwelt and the diving with the filmemachen .
so , the two loves , and it &apos;s basically my two loves .
something interesting happened to solve , and to solve a erzählerisches problem in this film -- and we had to create this kind of liquid wasserwesen -- we had to create a liquid wasserwesen -- we have to animation on computergenerierte animation , cg .
what was came out , the first computergenerierte soft-surface-figur , which was ever in a film .
the movie didn &apos;t have a cash , right , he was just playing his right , yet i noticed something that &apos;s the audience , the audience on the world , like hypnotisiert , who was out of the magic .
but according to arthur clarke , the law is not bekanntlich technology and magic .
so they saw something magic .
and i thought that i was incredibly exciting .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that has to be involved in the filmkunst . &quot;
so we went to &quot; terminator 2 , &quot; my next film , still a lot .
together with ilm , we made the guys out of liquid metal . the success of the success of this effect would be .
and it worked . again , we had a magic , and the effect in the audience was the same . but we have a little bit more money .
from these two experiences , was a whole new world , a new world of creativity .
so i started a company , working with my good friend , stan , who was the best make-up- and creature-designer , and she was called &quot; digital domain . &quot;
the basic idea of this company , it was the phase of analog processes with visual druckern , and start with digital produktionen .
so we did that , and we also have a wettbewerbsvorteil for a competitive .
but in the mid- &apos; 90s , we realized that we were in the creature- and character-design -- what we did was that we &apos;ve actually created the company that we &apos;ve actually created , too slowly .
i had written this piece of a piece of visual effects and computergenerierter effects in a new way , with the realistischen of human effects , with the realistischen characters that were made using the cg , and the hauptfiguren should be all the cg , and the world should be cg .
but the messlatte keeps the same beautifully back to my company , and i told myself that we don &apos;t have to be able to do that .
so i got this and made this other movie over the great boat , the commercial .
i &apos;ve been verkauft this as &quot; + &quot; and juliet on a ship , and it was a liebesfilm epischen ausmaßes , a little film .
but i was going to actually be the real air force of titanic .
i did the film .
this is the truth . the studio didn &apos;t know .
i &apos;ve convinced you , by saying , &quot; we &apos;re diving to the wreckage . we can film the real year .
we &apos;re going to show it in the eröffnungssequenz of the film .
this is immensely important . it &apos;s a good aufhänger for marketing . &quot;
and i persuaded them to finance a expedition .
sounds crazy . but this is going back to that again , that your imagination can create a reality .
and then we created a reality , a reality , where i &apos;m in a russian tauchboot wiederfand , four miles below the surface of the north atlantic , and i &apos;m going to be able to take the real titanic through a bullauge .
this was not a movie , no hd , that was real .
so that really has really been really .
and the preparation has been enormous . we had to build cameras and scheinwerfer and everything .
and i noticed how much these tiefseetauchgänge , a weltraummission .
well , they were also hochtechnisch and bedurften umfangreicher .
you &apos;re going to go in these capsule , then you go into these dark , feindselige environment , where no hope to rescue , if you don &apos;t get it back .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s just as if i was in a science-fiction-film .
this is really cool . &quot;
i was obsessed with the erforschen of the deep sea .
anyway , from the part , who has been working with curiosity and science . it was a adventure , it was curiosity . it was imagination .
and it was a experience that i couldn &apos;t give me .
because , you know , i could imagine a creature , for this , for which we could make a visual effect . but i couldn &apos;t imagine what i would see outside of the auditorium .
some of the following expeditions , i &apos;ve seen nature in thermalquellen , and sometimes things that i &apos;ve never seen before , and things that had no yet before , and the science of the science had ever seen before , when we saw them , nor did not have words .
so it &apos;s got really umgeworfen , and i wanted to go .
and so i met a little unusual decision .
after the success of &quot; titanic &quot; i said , &quot; okay , i want to put my hauptberuf as a filmmaker in the ice , and i &apos;ll be vollzeit-forscher for a while . &quot;
and then we started talking about tauchten , and they were exploring with roboterfahrzeugen .
we went back to the wreckage of the titanic .
we took small robots that we built was a fiberglaskabel abwickelten .
our intent was , hineinzutauchen and complaining the inner &apos;s inner &apos;s innere .
nobody had the inner system of the ministry of the financial system . you don &apos;t have any means of it . so we developed the technology .
and i &apos;m now , &quot; on the deck of the titanic , in a tauchboot , and see planken that this brettern is pretty dreadful and i know that once the band had played there .
and i fly through a little peek through the gänge of the ship .
i just bediene it , but my consciousness is within the vehicle .
it felt like i was physically within the schiffswracks of the titanic .
this was the surrealste form of a déjà-vu that i ever experienced . because before i was a corner , i always had a corner of the room in the lichtkegel of the car , because i was at least monatelang , when we were doing the film .
the set was a really passionate copy of the baupläne of the ship .
so that was a very strange experience .
she made this telepräsenz-erlebnis that you can use such roboterhafte and so on the whole thing in the vehicle , in the other form of existence .
it was really immensely , really needed , really , really , really , really needed a profound experience .
and also , a little bit of a little bit of what might happen in some decades , if you have cyborg-körper to study something , or other things , in all sorts of post-humanen , i can imagine as a science-fiction-fan .
and we started to see what we saw in the bottom , really appreciate , for example , these tiefseequellen , where we saw these incredible animals , and they are basically alien , but here in the world .
they live with the help of chemosynthese .
they don &apos;t exist in a way of a sonnenlicht system , how we do that .
and so you see animals that are directly directly to a 500 degree , you &apos;re heißen that they can survive there .
and i was also interested in weltraumwissenschaft , which was again , that was again , again , was again .
and so i ended up with the space and the richtige for nasa and in nasa-sachverständigenrat &apos;s sit and right , durchlaufen , durchlaufen , the biomedizinische of mission of mission , and they &apos;re going to be drum , and then they go to the international weltraumstation and nehmen our 3d-kamerasysteme .
that was fascinating .
but the end was that i was going to put out on the deep sea floor .
i took them with and verschaftte them with the world &apos;s world : astrobiologen , planetenwissenschaftler , planetenwissenschaftler , people who were interested in these kinds of extreme situations , so you can take them up , and they can take their own samples and so forth .
we were drehten , but actually , science , i actually , science , genauer .
so the circle of my existence as a science-fiction-fan , at the time , when a kid , and the implementation in reality .
so that &apos;s what i learned is that i learned a lot .
i learned a lot about science . but i &apos;m certainly now , you know , a director has to have a designer , a leader , a leader of a schiffskapitän or so .
i don &apos;t understand much of leadership before i got these kinds of expeditions .
because at one point , i had to say , &quot; what do i do here ?
why do i do that ? what &apos;s going on ? &quot;
these blöden films are not going to make us a cash .
we &apos;re going to play the cost of the cost of the cost of a ruhm no trace .
all of you think i think is between &quot; titanic &quot; and &quot; avatar &quot; davongelaufen &quot; and i would have irgendwo to the nägel on a towel .
i all have these films that was a very small audience for a very small audience .
no glory , no honor , no money . what are you doing ?
you &apos;re doing it around the task of the task , to be the herausforderung , and the ocean is the herausforderndste environment that &apos;s because you are in the entdeckerrausches because of the strange connection that produces a little group of people in a team .
because we &apos;ve done all of this with only 10 to 12 people who worked on the years , sometimes we were two to three months of the lake .
and in this community , you realize that the most important thing is the alarm you have to have a doctor , because you have a job that you can &apos;t explain to one other .
if you go on land and say , &quot; we had to do it , the fiberglas , the schallschwächung , and the fact that you &apos;re working on the see , and the other things that you can &apos;t do is not just explain the other , and that &apos;s like police , who have some common , and you know that you can never explain it .
there &apos;s a connection , a gegenseitiger respect .
so when i came to my next film , &quot; avatar &quot; avatar &quot; to turn the same leadership , which is that you were able to turn his team on and turn out of the exchange of his respect .
and this really changed the dynamic dynamic .
so i was again , again , with a little team on unbekanntem terrain . we went &quot; avatar &quot; with a new technique that hasn &apos;t been yet before .
i think that &apos;s really exciting .
a challenge challenge .
and we were given for a period of four years ago .
and it changed my way to make movies , completely .
there were people who were thought we would have this ozeanwesen really well , and we &apos;ve got to put them on the planet .
for me , it was more a more subtle way to do my job , the real process that has changed in the outcome .
so what can we do from all the end ?
what lessons we have ?
i think first of the time , the curiosity is the curiosity .
it &apos;s the most powerful human property .
our imagination is a force that can create a reality .
and the warning of the deaths of the brain is more important than all the lorbeer of the world .
i come to the young filmemacher , who say , &quot; give me a advice , how i can do something like this . &quot;
and i say , &quot; don &apos;t worry .
it &apos;s all the other thing for you . don &apos;t do it yourself , bet , but take risks on you . &quot;
nasa has this lieblingssatz : &quot; failure is not an alternative . &quot;
but in the art , and in the art , it has to be a alternative , because there is no one vertrauensvorschuss .
no important endeavor , the innovation , the innovation was ever .
you have to be ready to take risks on .
this is the idea i &apos;d like to give you to you with the way . failure is a choice , but it &apos;s not a choice . thank you . thank you .
today i &apos;m talking to you about energy and climate .
and this is something that &apos;s a little bit because my vollzeitbeschäftigung at foundation is the foundation to make vaccines and phenomenal , to invent the things that we invent and deliver to make the poorest billion people in the world .
but energy and climate , is extremely important for these people , in fact , even more important than any other on the planet .
klimaverschlechterung means that their saaten is not growing over many years , and it &apos;s too little too little . the things will change so much , how it can &apos;t change their fragile environment .
this leads to hungersterben . it leads to uncertainty . it leads to twitter .
so , a climate change for you .
also , the energiepreis for you is very important .
the fact is that if you could reduce the price of the price , it would be energy in the most efficient .
now , the energiepreis is like the time .
in fact , the fortschrittsgesellschaft is based on energiefortschritten .
the kohlerevolution writer drove the industrial revolution in the 20th century , and in the 20th century , we have a rapid case in the elektrizitätspreis and so we have refrigerators , we can make modern materials and make a lot of things .
so we are in a wonderful situation with electricity in the rich world .
but if we &apos;re going to reduce the prize -- let &apos;s make the price of the price -- we make it up on a new barrier and this barrier with co2 together .
co2 heats the planet and the equation for co2 , it &apos;s pretty clear .
they summieren the ausgestoßene co2 , which is conducive to the temperaturerhöhung and this temperaturerhöhung has some very negative implications . effects , the natural ecosystems that changes the natural ecosystems can &apos;t adapt to the rapid changes and therefore all the systems .
now , the exact relationship between a co2-anstieg and the whole resultierende and where the other ones are lying and where there are some of these , but not very many .
and there &apos;s certainly a lot of thinking about how bad that will be , but they &apos;re extremely bad .
i asked the top-wissenschaftler times , &quot; we need to get into close zero ?
it &apos;s not enough , or a quarter ? &quot;
the answer is : until we get close to zero , the temperature will continue .
that &apos;s why it &apos;s a big challenge .
it &apos;s very different than say , we have a 3.5 m truck that has to be a 3 bridge , which is to take a 3 bridge . you can then sort of a ship underneath it .
this is going to go down to the bottom , at zero .
well , we &apos;re like a lot of kohlenstoffdioxid , about 26 billion tons of billions .
everybody &apos;s americans have about 20 tons of tons , people from poor countries , less than one .
in the average , it &apos;s about five tons of data on the planet .
and somehow we have to move changes that we &apos;re taking up the zero .
it &apos;s been a constant .
only different economic changes have ever been affecting it , and we have to go from rapidem to reducing the way and to a reduction in zero .
this equation has four factors . and you have this thing to the left -- co2 that you want to move towards zero , and that will be abhängen by the number of people who have to use the number of people who use the average energy for every person to use the energy and the co2 that will be a unit of energy .
so let &apos;s look at each other , and we think about it , and we think about how we get this .
probably probably one of those numbers have to come close to zero .
now this is a fundamental algebra , but we &apos;re going to go through it .
first we have the population .
today &apos;s life billion billion people live in today &apos;s billion people living today , live people live in today &apos;s life .
and it &apos;s going to be able to move nine billion zu. that are heading to 9 billion .
if we &apos;re very successfully with new vaccines , the gesundheitsvorsorgung and reproduktionsmedizin , we might be able to reduce 10 percent to 15 percent , but we &apos;re going to see a slope on 1.3 .
the second factor are the services that we use .
the reason that we eat food , we eat , clothing , clothing , heating .
these are very good things and armutsverringerung means that services to make any of any of any land on the planet .
it &apos;s great that this number is rising .
in the rich world , in the upper billion , we could make abstriche and less use , but in the average , that number will go every year and thus , and they &apos;re going to be more than their double , the number of services that are available to the services of the services that are available to the services of the services that are available to the
here &apos;s a very fundamental service . there &apos;s a very fundamental service , so you can read the homework ?
and these students don &apos;t have it , so they go out and read their schulaufgaben under the straßenlicht .
now , under efficiency , the e , the energy per service , there &apos;s a good news .
we have something that doesn &apos;t have a rising , not the level of that .
because of different successes in the lichtsektor , through other autotypen , through new methods , there are a lot of services in the häuserbau , which is a lot of services , whose energy use some of their energy efficient , and that &apos;s a lot of money to reduce 90 percent .
in other words , like the manufacturing , 105 , 05 , &amp; -- &amp; gt : &amp; , 05 : 05 , or dem , or dem , or luftverkehr , the resources for improvements .
all the way we &apos;re optimistic , if we &apos;re going to get a reduction in order to get a factor , or maybe even a factor of a factor of a factor of a factor .
but in the first three , we &apos;ve gone from 26 billion , 13 billion dollars from 13 billion tons , and that &apos;s just enough .
so let &apos;s look at the fourth factor -- and this will be a key thing -- that &apos;s the amount of co2 that will be a unit of co2 .
it turns out the question is , if you can get this on zero .
if you burn coal , no .
if they burn gas : no .
almost every single biggest system for the electricity , except renewables , renewables and nuklearenergie .
so what we have to do on a global level is to create a new system .
we need energiewunder .
now if i use the term &quot; wonders &quot; i don &apos;t mean the impossible .
the microprocessor is a miracle . the computer is a miracle .
the internet and its services is a miracle .
people here have to perform the evolution of the developing world of this miracle .
normally , there &apos;s no deadline that you need a miracle to a certain date .
it &apos;s normally just one , you can just get a day and some people .
in this case , we need to give up vollgas and have a miracle in very short time .
now , i wondered how can i really make this really amazing ?
there &apos;s a natural illustration , a demonstration that the idea of the people here ?
i remembered myself in last year when i got mosquitoes and sort of liked the people .
the idea was really greifbar , you know , there &apos;s people who live with mosquitos .
for energy , i noticed this .
i decided that the world &apos;s welfare freilassen my diesjähriger beitrag would be here .
so here are a few natural fireflies .
you &apos;ve told me that they don &apos;t bite bite . in fact , you don &apos;t get to leave the glass .
now , there are all kinds of spielereilösungen like this , but they don &apos;t get all too much .
we need solutions to be a bit of a lot of potential and layers of a lot of time , and it &apos;s a lot of directions , where people are looking for , i really see that really five , that can be able to do this big .
i have tides , geothermal , fusion and east coast .
this may be a moderaten beitrag , and if you expect a better way , but my argument here is that , but my argument here is that we have to work on all of those five , and we can &apos;t give them any of them because they all have a einschüchtern of the same problems .
let &apos;s look at the burning fossil fuels , burning from coal or natural gas .
what you have to do there , may be simple , but it &apos;s not . you would have to be able to get all the co2 out of the schornstein , and then the burning of the burning , and then lagern and hope , and then they &apos;re going to stay there .
there &apos;s a few of these pilotprojekte that are going to be a 60 percent -- 80 percent level , but it &apos;s going to be very difficult to get a very difficult place , and it &apos;s a tremendous challenge , but the biggest problem is the lagerzeitfrage .
who will make it happen ?
who can guarantee something which literally , as a lot of billions of food that you can imagine from nuklear- and other things ?
this is a lot of volume .
so this is a tough pill .
next : nuklearenergie .
it has three big problems . the cost , especially in hochregulierten countries are high , the question of security is really not going to be wrong , despite the human instinct that the fuel is not used for weapons .
and what do you do with the trash ?
because even though he wasn &apos;t very big , there &apos;s a lot of concerns .
so three very difficult problems that might be solvable , and that &apos;s why you should work .
the last three of the five i &apos;ve got .
it &apos;s the renewables that they &apos;re called often .
and also -- although it &apos;s great , you don &apos;t need a fuel -- you have some disadvantages .
one is the most energy crisis that uses these technologies are more than the kraftwerken of kraftwerken .
these are energiefarmen , you &apos;re talking about many quadratkilometern , more than a normal power plant .
and also , these sources are the same thing that we put on the same thing .
the sun doesn &apos;t seem to shine all day , it doesn &apos;t seem every day and also the wind blows up .
and so you have to dependent on these sources , a way of having a way of getting energy in times , in times , if you don &apos;t get available .
so there &apos;s great preisherausforderungen . and there &apos;s challenges in the transmission . if we say , in the middle of the country , it &apos;s not just the technology , you need to use the technology that the energy is going to be the energy of where we need from where all the way from where we need .
and there &apos;s the lagerungsproblem .
and to show the dimension , i &apos;ve got all kinds of batteries , the angeschaut , handys , handys , handys , handys , handys , handys , handys , handys , handys , handys , which is the batteries that we &apos;re using , that all batteries that we &apos;re now producing , less than 10 minutes of the gesamtenergie .
so we need a big breakthrough , something that is going to be a factor of 100 better than the human being at time .
it &apos;s not impossible , but it &apos;s not so easy .
this is what happens when you try to take these unterbrochenen sources over to say , 20 percent of the other than 30 percent .
if you want to go to 100 percent to be able to sustain it , you need incredible amounts of .
now , where should we go : what is the right approach ?
&quot; manhattan project ? how do we get to the goal ?
what we need is a lot of companies that are working on this . hundreds .
in each of these five areas , we need at least 100 people .
they &apos;re going to say , &quot; they &apos;re crazy ! that &apos;s good .
i think there &apos;s a lot of group here in ted group that has already been engaged .
bill is a lot of companies have been a companies , among other things that esolar a esolar solarthermaltechnologien .
vinod khosla investment in dozens of companies are doing great things and interesting opportunities , and i &apos;m trying to support that .
nathan myhrvold and i fund a company that might be , maybe , maybe surprisingly , the nuclear approach .
there are some innovations in the nuklearbereich ; modular , flüssig .
the development has stopped in this industry in some time , so it &apos;s not a big surprise that some of a good concepts .
the terrapower-konzept means you have a part of the urans , which is a percent , which is a percent , which is , we decided to burn the 99 percent of the u238 .
this is a pretty crazy idea .
but in fact , you &apos;ve been thinking about it , but you could never work , but since it would work , but it &apos;s a modern supercomputer , you can see it , you know , yes , you know , the right materialienherangehensweise , it looks like it &apos;s the case .
and because you &apos;re taking these 99 percent burning , it &apos;s a lot better than that .
in fact , you take the garbage , and you can even use the waste of current use of information that &apos;s using it .
instead of just breaking it to the head , burn it . a great thing .
the uranium is going to be graduell , a little bit like a candle .
you see that there &apos;s a kind of column , often as &quot; the &quot; wandernde wave . &quot;
it really is really the treibstoffproblem .
here &apos;s a picture of a place in kentucky .
this is the waste , the 99 percent . you have the part that &apos;s been burned today , so it &apos;s called aufgebrauchtes uranium .
the triebe u.s. u.s. military for hundreds of years .
and if you &apos;re ozeanwasser and just filtriert , you get enough fuel for the rest of the planet .
you know , there &apos;s a lot of challenges , but it &apos;s a example of many hundreds of ideas that we need to get forward .
let &apos;s think about how we should measure our success .
how should our testimony ?
now , let &apos;s go to the goal that we have to do , and then we talk about the zwischenschritt .
many talk about a 80 percent reduction in 2050 .
it &apos;s really important that we get there .
the rest of the rest of the other percent are produced in poor countries , and still a bit of agriculture , hopefully will be waldrohdung and cement and cement and cement .
so to reach these 80 percent , the developed countries , including countries like china , their elektrizitätsgeneration completely .
the other note says , if we use the null-emissionen technology , whether it &apos;s in all developed countries in all developed countries , and we &apos;re on the way to get the rest .
this is great .
this is going to be a key feature of this .
when we go back to where the 2020 should look like this ?
it should be able to contain the two elements .
we should use the effektivitätsmaßnahmen to bring the way down to the way , the less we get emittieren , the less the co2-summe will be the co2-summe and it &apos;s the temperature .
but actually , this note of things we &apos;re doing companies that are not completely to the big reduktionen , just as just as much , or even less important , like the other , the one of the innovation that are necessary for the innovation .
these are the breakthroughs we need to track with vollgas and we can measure it , in firmenzahlen , in pilotprojekten and regulierungsänderungen .
there &apos;s a lot of great books to this .
the al gore book &quot; we have the choice and david mckays , &quot; sustainable energy without . &quot;
they really go through and create a frame that can be taken into this , because we need to take it from all of the pages .
there &apos;s a lot of things that have to come together .
this is a wish .
a very konkreter wish that we invent this technology .
if you just look at one wish for the next 50 years , i could pick up the president , and i could choose the president , and i love this wish , which is the lautet , which is the lautet , halbierter energiepreis , without co2 , i &apos;m going to take that wish .
this has the biggest impact .
if we don &apos;t get this wish , the dig between long-term , between the united states and the kurzfristig , between the united states and china , between poor and rich and the rich and almost all of life is very much worse .
so what are we going to do ?
for what are i appelliere ?
we have to put ourselves for more .
if countries are in places like koppenhagen , you shouldn &apos;t just talk about co2 .
they should discuss these innovationsstrategie , and they would be shocked , in the lächerlich of the ridiculously geringen that are going to be spent on these innovative .
we need marktanreize , co2 taxes , cap &amp; amp ; / something that creates a preissignal .
we have to spread the message .
we have to have dialogue and further and do things that are going to happen from the government .
it &apos;s a more important wish , but i think we can fulfill it .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you . thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank you ! thank
thanks very much . just to understand something better -- for example , you can give us a notion of this investment of this investment ?
bill gates : to get the simulation on a supercomputer , all the great scientists , and we have some of the materials in a russian new way , and even if we tested our materials in a russian reactor , to make sure it &apos;s sensible to work , it &apos;s only in the 100en million .
the hard step is the building of the first reaktors , to find another billion , the regularien and the place that actually build the first one .
the first time , when it &apos;s done , when it &apos;s like promised , it &apos;s all clear , because the process is that the energiedichte is so different than we know it .
to understand it , it means to build deep into the soil , like a vertical column , this verbrauchten urans , that verbrauchten and then starts the process and then starts going on .
bg : right . now , you have to rethink the reactor &apos;s the reactor , so there &apos;s a lot of people and lots of people who go wrong , and this thing where you open it up and herausbringt things like it , or sachen . that &apos;s not good .
if you have very cheap fuel , you can put it for 60 years -- think of a column -- they &apos;re using bury , without the full of the death .
and it &apos;s sitting there and it &apos;s brennt 60 years , and then it &apos;s done .
a nuklearreaktor , which is a solution to the garbage .
bg : yeah . now what happens with the trash : you can leave him -- there &apos;s much less waste with this method -- then it take it and put it into the next reactor and burn it down .
and we start by taking the garbage that already exists in these kühlbecken or trockenbehältern , and that &apos;s our startbrennstoff .
so what this was a problem is what we &apos;ve been doing in our lab and so that will dramatically reduce the müllvolumen dramatically during this process .
but while you &apos;ve been talking about different people of this world over these choices .
where is the biggest interest , so what really does ?
bg : now we &apos;re not going to go on a place , and there &apos;s a lot of interesting offenlegungsregeln for everything that &apos;s &quot; nuclear &quot; nuklear , india , india , china , and i &apos;ve been here and i &apos;ve met the energieminister and talked about how this is what i &apos;ve been to fit .
i &apos;m optimistic . you know , the french and japanese have something to do .
this is a view of a thing that was made .
this is a very important step , but it &apos;s like a faster and some countries have built these built , therefore , everyone has a fast reactor , a kandidatat for our first .
in your imagination : &quot; take a really good place to go into the life ?
bg : now we need one of these skalierbaren , stromgenerierenden things that are very inexpensive , we have to invent 20 years to invent and then 20 years to the other .
this is the deadline of the deadline that we have to have to have that we have to have .
and , you know , terrapower , when everything comes out , and that &apos;s a big wish , it could be easy to keep it .
and luckily , there are now dozens of companies , and we need hundreds of time , which is the amount of processing that the average work that can work for their pilots , for their pilots .
and it would be best if it could make multiple , because then you could use a mixture .
anyway , we need a solution .
we were also taking the big possible breakthrough , is this the biggest thing you know ?
bg : a energiedurchbruch is the most important .
it would be without the umweltherausforderung , but it makes it even more important .
in the nuclear sector , there are other innovative companies .
you know , we know whose work doesn &apos;t know how well as these , but there &apos;s the modular method that &apos;s a different approach .
there &apos;s a liquid reaktortyp , which seems to be a little bit difficult , but maybe the saying that &apos;s the talk about us .
and so there &apos;s a lot of time that &apos;s a million energy as a kohlemolekül , and therefore , if you can deal with the problems , and therefore , if you can deal with the problems , and the cost of the radiation , the potential , the potential , the implications of the country , so the implications of the country and other things , almost in
if that doesn &apos;t work , what ?
we need to initiate notfallmaßnahmen , to try to keep the erdtemperatur stable ?
bg : if you &apos;re going to get too much , it &apos;s as if you &apos;re eating a heart , and you get a heart attack . what do you do ? you might need a herzoperation or something .
there &apos;s a forschungsrichtung called geoengineering , which is providing with various techniques to open the warming , so we could save 20 or 30 years to get us to get us out of us .
this is just a versicherungsmethode .
you hope that we don &apos;t need that .
some people say , you should not only work on insurance because you might be doing it , so you continue to eat , because you know that you &apos;re going to save the herzoperation .
i don &apos;t know if the smart &apos;s mind is if you have the importance of this problem , but there &apos;s a discourse in geoengineering , if you should have that , or the things that are coming up or that innovation needs to be able to get .
klimaskeptiker : have you got a or two sentences for the ones you might have to do ?
bg : well , unfortunately , life life , the skeptics in very different camp .
the ones that make the scientific arguments are very little .
say that there are negative implications that have the clouds to do with clouds that are happening ?
there are very , very few things you can say at all , that there &apos;s a chance of a million people .
the hauptproblem is similar to the aids .
you make the mistakes now , and you &apos;re paying for it much later .
and so the idea of what you have to invest in , in something that &apos;s not going to be able to invest in something that &apos;s not enough to invest in something that &apos;s not so clear , and it &apos;s the ipcc report that &apos;s not going to look at the worst , and there &apos;s people in the rich world that go to go and say ,
the fact is that this uncertainty should be worrying .
but my dream here is that if you can do it economically , and the same time , the skeptics can go to the co2 , then the skeptics , i &apos;m not saying that it &apos;s not a co2 emittiert , i wish that it &apos;s going to accept it , but i &apos;m going to be more cheaper than the previous method is . &quot;
and that would be your answer to the björn argument that if you &apos;re all the time , all the other goals , all the other goals of suffering and energy , the armutsverringerung , the armutsverringerung , the armutsverringerung , the armutsverringerung , the armutsverringerung , money , money to invest money , as there are better things that we can do .
bg : now , the actual raw spending for the research -- say the u.s. should spend 10 billion dollars a year than you do today .
amongst other things , other things don &apos;t have to suffer .
you come to big geldsummen , and here &apos;s a reasonable people can disagree when you have something that &apos;s not economically , and trying to finance that .
it &apos;s because you &apos;re very short , just a short front of a kostendurchbruch and funding only the flow , and i think we should try to be more things that have potential to be very much more .
if the abstrich you get , a very high source is , then only the rich is .
i mean , each of us could spend five times so much for our energy without changing its lifestyles .
for the bottom two billion , but it &apos;s a disaster .
and even selbst , selbst .
his new layer is now , &quot; why is the research not going to do more ? &quot;
it &apos;s still going to be , because of his former stories , with the skeptiker-camp , but he understood that that &apos;s a very clever group , and therefore he takes the forschungsargument .
and this is a gedankengang , i think i think of appropriate .
the research , it &apos;s just crazy how little unterstützt .
bill , i think i &apos;m talking for almost all of people here if i say , i hope that you wish to be true . thank you very much .
bg : thank you .
a few years ago , at ted , stellte skillman skillman a design-wettbewerb called &quot; the marshmallow-herausforderung . &quot;
the idea is pretty simple . vierer-teams have to have the highest structure with 20 spaghetti , about three tape , about a meter and a marshmallow .
the marshmallow has to be on top .
and , although it really seems really simple , it &apos;s actually really hard because it &apos;s very hard to do very quickly .
and so i thought that this is an interesting idea , and i &apos;ve got it into a design-workshop .
it was a giant success .
since then , i &apos;ve been studying about 70 million globally , with students , foundation and architects , and there &apos;s something about the aufgabe , which is allowing the depth of the nature of collaboration , and i want to share some of them with you .
usually , most people are not going to get their people to get their own .
they talk about it , as it &apos;s going to look like , it &apos;s rangeln , it &apos;s rangeln , it &apos;s a rangeln .
and then you invest a little time in planning and organization . you pick and put spaghetti .
they invest a lot of their time in the zusammenbau constantly strukturen of the ständig constantly strukturen .
and finally , before you have no time , taking the marshmallow , and they put it back on top , and they put it back and forth it back and go back to the top , and then you put it back and forth , &quot; bewundern .
but then , what happens is , almost , that &apos;s what the ta-da is &quot; ta-da &quot; because the weight of the marshmallows is that the whole thing is folded and einstürzt .
there &apos;s a series of people who have much more &quot; uh-oh &quot; -momente than others , and under the worst are fresh .
they lie , they cheat , they &apos;re confused and producing dürftige shapes .
and of course , there are teams that have a lot of the way of doing a lot of &quot; ta-da &quot; -gebilde and among the best , fresh absolventen .
and this is pretty amazing .
as peter , they don &apos;t just get the highest towers , but the most interesting structures of all .
what you might ask is : how does this happen ? why ? what is about that ?
and peter david : &quot; not the children spend time at the most young time . &quot;
they don &apos;t invest in a time .
but there &apos;s another reason .
and that &apos;s what bwl-studenten were trained to find a right plan , ok !
and then it &apos;s too clear .
what happens when you put the marshmallow on top , you don &apos;t have time and what ?
it &apos;s a crisis .
sounds familiar with what ?
what kindergartenkinder is different , that they start to start building the marshmallow and build a prototype , and we &apos;ve got successful prototypes , and with the marshmallow of the top , so they have the opportunity to fix their own prototypen prototype .
so , konstrukteure , this kind of collaboration as a core of a iterativen .
and with each trial , the children get immediate feedback , and what &apos;s not .
so the performance is to work with prototypes , right now , but let &apos;s see how different teams .
the average likelihood is about 50cm , bwl-studenten , the lawyers that are halfway out of it , lawyers , but not much more , kindergartenkinder are better than the adult .
who is most of the most successful ?
architects and engineers , luckily .
three , the highest i &apos;ve seen .
and why ? because they understand triangles and sich-selbst-verstärkende geometrical patterns are the key to build the key structures .
ceos is something about average . but here it &apos;s interesting .
you get a exekutive administrator on the team , they will be better .
it &apos;s incredible . you can see and see , &quot; this team will win . &quot;
you can predict the predictions . why is that ?
because they have special skills of the prozessbegleitung .
they &apos;re taking the process , you understand him .
and this team , the globe and on the work , the output is going to improve the intellectual utility .
spezialisierte skills and prozessfähigkeiten and their combination .
if you have 10 teams , the typical , you get about six to the top structures .
i tried something more exciting .
i thought , let &apos;s get the pokereinsatz .
so i offered a 10000 dollars on software for software for the winner .
what do you think about these design-studenten ?
what was the result ?
this is what happened . not a team had a stabile structure .
if anybody built a 2,5cm high construction , he would have worn home .
so it &apos;s not interesting that high rates have a strong effect ?
we were afraid of the exercise with the same students .
what do you believe ?
now they understood the advantage of the ceiling .
so , the same , bad team of one of the best .
they are produced the highest construction in the same time .
there &apos;s a lot of lessons for us , about nature and succeeding .
you might ask : why would somebody actually invest in a time of time ?
the reason is , i &apos;m creating digital tools and processes to help teams , and help teams , cars and videospiele effects .
and what the marshmallow-challenge is doing is it helps you to identify through assumptions of assumptions .
because frankly , every project has been a marshmallow .
the challenge gives a common experience , a shared language , to build the right prototype .
and this is the value of this experience , this kind of primitive practice .
and those of you who are interested in , can marshmallowchallenge.com .
it &apos;s a blog where you see how to build the marshmallows .
there &apos;s a schritt-für-schritt-anleitung there .
you find crazy examples of all the world , like people in the system and raffinieren .
there are also weltrekorde .
and the basale lesson , i think , is actually a verbindender sport .
it demands that we all have our senses on the task , and that we can use our thinking of how our feelings and our do , in the challenge that we &apos;re in .
and sometimes , a little prototype of this experience , it &apos;s all the experience , which is needed to bring us from a uh-oh , &quot; to bring us a &quot; ta-da . &quot;
and this can do a big difference .
thank you .
we do as if we have a machine here , and we have a machine here we have a machine here .
a big machine , a cool , ted-artige machine , and that &apos;s a time machine .
and everybody in this room has to be in this room .
and you can go into the past , you can go into the future ; you can &apos;t be in here and now , now you can remain .
and i wonder what you would choose because i &apos;ve been asked my friends in recently , and they were going to put all the time in the past .
i don &apos;t know . they wanted to go back to time before it was there were cars or twitter , or &quot; america &apos;s superstar . &quot;
i don &apos;t know .
i &apos;m convinced that you &apos;re somehow going to be able to get to wunschdenken .
and i understand that .
i &apos;m not part of this group , i have to say .
i don &apos;t want to go into the past , and that &apos;s not because i &apos;m a 95 percent -- i &apos;m a dish .
it &apos;s because the ability to go back to this planet , go forward .
so i want to go into this machine , and i want to go into the future .
this is the greatest time that it has ever been on this planet , whatever , what scale you put , health , wealth , mobility , opportunities , sinkende , sinkende .
there was never a time before that .
my ur-großeltern died all over the time they were all .
my grandparents gear that number those numbers on 70. drängten .
my parents are the 80 80 on the fersen .
so there was better at the beginning of my todeszahl .
but it &apos;s not about people like us , because this is a bigger thing .
a child who &apos;s born in new delhi is born , as long as the richest man on the world of 100 years ago .
think about it . that &apos;s an incredible fact .
and why is this ?
smallpox . the smallpox have been killed on the planet .
they have the demographics on earth in a way that it doesn &apos;t have a war .
they &apos;re gone . they &apos;re gone .
we have them bezwungen .
in the rich world , diseases have diseases that have millions of us only yet , just a few other one .
diphterie , röteln , kinderlähmung -- kinderlähmung ...
does anybody know even , what &apos;s the one that &apos;s going on ?
vaccines , modern medicine , our ability to feed billions of people , that &apos;s a successes of scientific method .
and from my perspective , the scientific method is to try to try to look at whether it works , it changes it , if it doesn &apos;t do that , one of the greatest achievements of humanity .
so that &apos;s the good news .
unfortunately , it &apos;s all the good news , because there &apos;s a couple of other problems , and they were often mentioned in a lot of other problems , and they were often mentioned in a lot of other problems .
and one of them is that despite all of our achievements , a billion people on the world every day every day .
this number is rising , and it &apos;s very quickly , and that &apos;s embarrassing .
and not only that , we have to do our imagination that we have to do this world .
drinking , drinking water , rainforests , rainforests , oil , they go away , and that soon , and if we &apos;re not going to disappear from this mess , we &apos;re going to disappear .
so the question is : can we do that ? i think .
i think it &apos;s obvious that we can produce food , the billions of people will feed , without the country that they live in .
i think we can set this world with energy that they can &apos;t walk at the same time .
i think that really , and no , that &apos;s not a wunschdenken .
but this is what i &apos;m holding on at night , one of the things that sit me at night , we never have a lot of progress that we &apos;ve never seen as much as now , never before .
and we &apos;ve never been able to do it , it &apos;s not able to be able to fill it in the position of einzusetzten , as we can today .
we &apos;re at the cusp , amazing events , amazing events on many areas , and yet i really think that we have to go over , 300 years ago , to find a time where we &apos;ve got to have a time where we have progress in that stuff , in which we have more than those things in terms of more than now .
people are putting in their faith , and that &apos;s what they can &apos;t get out of it .
not the truth is that the truth is going to get free .
and listen , everybody has a right to your mind ; even a rather even contribute to progress , progress .
but you know what you don &apos;t have right ?
they don &apos;t have a right to their own facts . &apos; tschuldigung , don &apos;t have .
and i &apos;ve got a while to figure out .
about a decade ago , i &apos;ve got a article on a impfungen for a new york city , &quot; a little article .
and i was amazed to go on resistance , resistance towards the end of what &apos;s the most effective thing in the history of humanity .
i didn &apos;t know what i should do , so i just did what i do , i wrote a article , i was driving .
and soon i wrote a article on a artikel , nahrungsmittel food .
the same thing , only taller .
people were playing mad .
so i wrote a article about this , and i couldn &apos;t understand why people thought that would be frankenfood , why they believed that molecules on a certain rather instead of a übergriff kind of herumzuschieben that was a übergriff of nature .
but you know , i do what i do . i wrote the article , i went on .
i mean , i &apos;m a journalist , journalist , i &apos;m a journalist , journalist , i &apos;m a journalist .
we type , we rich , we go out , we &apos;re going to eat .
but this article was worried , and i couldn &apos;t figure out why , and finally i found it .
and this is because these guys who were crazy to me really were all the ones that were really fanatiker at all .
these were people people people , people people were anständige people .
they were just like people in this room .
and this was so so confused , and that &apos;s what i did so ?
but then i thought , you know what , you know , are we .
we &apos;re at a point where we don &apos;t have the same relationship with progress as we have .
we talk about zwiespältig .
we &apos;re talking about ironisch , with small people , &quot; progress . &quot;
okay , there &apos;s reasons for reasons , and i think we know what causes that .
we have the trust in institutions , in authority , and sometimes in science , and there &apos;s no reason why that should be that way .
you can just call a couple of names , and people are going to understand .
chernobyl , bhopal , the challenger , vioxx , weapons , mass , us-präsidentschaftswahl 2000 .
i mean , you know , you can choose your own list .
there are questions and problems with people that we thought they were always quite thought .
ask them questions , urge you to make evidence .
take nothing to compete .
but now comes &apos; em : if you get evidence to adopt this evidence , and we &apos;re not good at all .
and i can say that , that &apos;s what we &apos;re now in a epidemic of fear , as i never saw them , and hopefully never see .
about 12 years ago , a story was published , a terrible story that autismus-epidemie the autismus-epidemie , mumps , and röteln vaccine in connects .
very scary .
and the same study of studies were conducted to see if that was true .
as a lot of studies should be done , that &apos;s a serious issue .
the data came in .
the data came from the united states , from england , from sweden , from sweden , from canada , and they were all right , no correlation , no connection , no connection .
it doesn &apos;t matter . it doesn &apos;t matter , because we believe in anecdotes believe we believe what we see what we see , what causes us to feel .
we don &apos;t believe in a bündel documents of a regierungsangstellten , which is us , and i understand that , i think we all do .
but you know what ?
the result of it was devastating , the katastrophal of the air .
the united states of the fact , the united states is one of the only countries on the world where the impfrate is going to peak .
this is skandalös , and we should be ashamed .
it &apos;s terrible .
what &apos;s happening is that we could do that .
well , i understand that . that &apos;s what i do .
because anybody here have any indigenous ?
have an one in the audience in the audience ever die ?
not very often .
it &apos;s not happening at this country , but they have a long time on the world in the last year .
these are many deaths by connecting in the workforce , 20 per hour .
but because it &apos;s not here , we can make it verdrängen , and people like jenny can walk around and botschaften like jenny and analphabetismus of platforms like oprah and larry king of the oprah .
and you can do it because it &apos;s not enough and correlation .
you don &apos;t understand that these things seem to be equally and almost never the same thing .
and this is something that we need to learn , and it &apos;s very quickly .
this guy was a hero , jonas salk .
he befreite us from one of the worst geißeln of humanity .
no fear , no qualen , kinderlähmung , puff .
the guy in the middle is not so much .
he &apos;s called paul offit .
he &apos;s just a rotavirus-impfstoff .
it can save the lives of 400- , 500,000 children per year in the developing world .
pretty good , right ?
well , it &apos;s good , except that paul &apos;s herumläuft and vaccines say , and says , how precious they are , and that people should just stop .
and that tells us that actually .
paul &apos;s paul is a terrorist .
when paul in in a public anhörung , he can &apos;t tell you without advanced broccoli .
he gets to home at home , because people like to tell him that they know where their children go to school .
and why ? because paul &apos;s made a vaccine .
i don &apos;t need that , but vaccines are essential .
take it back , they go back to the disease , terrible disease , and that &apos;s happening .
we have the masern now .
and it &apos;s going to be worse , and pretty soon , kids will die again , because that &apos;s just a question of numbers .
and they &apos;re not going to die in the workforce .
what about kinderlähmung ? let &apos;s take that . why not ?
a kommilitonin of me sent me a few weeks ago , and i said it &apos;s a little bit of a little bit .
nobody ever said that before .
she would not be fighting a kid . no one .
fine .
why ? because we don &apos;t have kinderlähmung . and you know what ?
we had no kinderlähmung yesterday in this country .
now , i don &apos;t know , maybe morning someone in lagos in lagos in lagos , and fly straight straight up in the moment .
and in a few hours , he &apos;s going to be a car , and he comes to long beach , and he will go to a dieser ted-dinner ted-dinner today .
and he doesn &apos;t know he &apos;s infected with a lähmenden condition , and we don &apos;t know that , because the world works .
this is the planet that we live in . don &apos;t do it as if it &apos;s not .
we love to do it in lie . we love that .
do you have all of the things that we &apos;ve all taken out of this ?
echinacea , a little antioxidantium that helps you to help you .
i know they did that because half the americans will do every day .
they take the stuff , and they take a choice , and it doesn &apos;t matter how often we figure out that they are useless .
the data is constantly all .
they get their urine . more they never do .
this is okay , you want to have 28 billion dollars for the dark numbers .
i agree to you .
dark &apos;s dark . dark . dark .
why do we do this ? why do we do this ?
now , i think i understand -- we hate the drug industry .
we hate a strong government . we don &apos;t have a trust in the system .
and that &apos;s what we should . our health care system is .
it &apos;s cruel to millions of people .
it &apos;s absolutely amazing cold and seelentötend himself , which it can afford .
so we run out of it , and where we go ?
we walk into the arms of the placebo-industrie .
this is great . i love the placebo-industrie .
but you know , it &apos;s really serious , because the stuff is crap , and we spend billions of dollars for that .
and i &apos;ve all got all kinds of little requisiten here .
none of them -- gingko , betrug , echinacea , betrug , acai , acai , acai , because i don &apos;t even know what that &apos;s , but we spend billions of dollars for it , it &apos;s a cheating .
and you know what ? if i say that , the people of the people , and say , &quot; what &apos;s going on ? let &apos;s do what they want .
so they feel good . &quot;
and you know what ? they have wrong .
because it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s the gesundheitsminister , who says , &quot; um , i &apos;m going to mammography the evidence of my experts , &quot; or any krebs-quacksalber , who wants to treat his patients with kaffe-einläufen .
if you &apos;re looking at these way to be doing and magic and science , they get a place to go to a place where they don &apos;t want to be .
they get to thabo mbeki in south africa .
he brought 400,000 his people around , because he insisted that red beete , knoblauch and zitronenöl , as a antiretroviral effektiver , and zitronenöl of the antiretroviral drugs we know that they can go on the course of aids .
hundreds of thousands of unnötiger unnötiger in a country that &apos;s worse than any other disease .
please don &apos;t tell me that these things don &apos;t have consequences .
they have them . they &apos;ve always got them .
now , the hirnloseste epidemic , in which we &apos;re in is this , that &apos;s this is a fighting between the befürwortern gentechnisch and the bio-elite .
this is a idiotische debate . it &apos;s got to stop .
it &apos;s a debate about words , about metaphor .
this is ideology , not science .
all we eat , every reiskorn , every branch , every branch of each other , every rosenkohl , was changed by people .
you know , there was no mandarinen in paradise .
there were no cantaloupe-melonen .
there were no weihnachtsbäume . we &apos;ve done this .
we &apos;ve done it in the last 11,000 years .
and some of it worked and not some .
we are actually losgeworden what &apos;s not working .
now , we can do it . and of course , there are risks . but we can do something like vitamin a difference , and that stuff can help millions of people , millions of people , to make millions of people .
you don &apos;t want to do it ?
i have to say , i don &apos;t understand .
we changed food .
why do we do that ?
now , what i &apos;m talking about is too many chemicals , these pesticides , hormones , hormones , hormone , we don &apos;t want a huge amount of light with one thing that &apos;s wrong .
we don &apos;t want to make companies .
we don &apos;t want to have companies that companies have grown .
and you know what my answer is to all this ?
yeah , you have right . we fix this .
it &apos;s true , we have a huge amount of information , but that &apos;s not science .
that has nothing to do with science .
it &apos;s right , morality , morality .
you know that science is not a company .
it &apos;s not a country .
it &apos;s not a idea ; it &apos;s a process .
it &apos;s a process , and sometimes he doesn &apos;t work , but the idea that we should not allow science to do their work , because we have a real sophisticated way , and it &apos;s worth millions of people from the flourishing .
you know , in the next 50 years , 70 percent are going to grow more food than the moment . 70 percent .
this investment in africa in the last 30 years .
embarrassing embarrassing .
they need that , and we don &apos;t give them .
and why ? it &apos;s a civil food .
we don &apos;t want people to encourage people to eat this verrottete stuff like for example .
the cassava is something that &apos;s a half of a billion people .
it &apos;s about like a potato .
it &apos;s just a bündel calories . it &apos;s mies .
it has no nutrients , it doesn &apos;t have a protein , and scientists have just building this out .
and then people could eat the food and wouldn &apos;t be blind .
they wouldn &apos;t be able to starve , and you know what ?
it would be nice . it wouldn &apos;t be chez panisse , but it would be nice .
and everything i can say : why are we fighting that ?
i mean , let &apos;s ask ourselves , why are we going to fight that ?
because we don &apos;t want genes to herumschieben ?
it &apos;s not about genes . it &apos;s not about chemicals .
it &apos;s not about our ridiculous passion for the hormones , our way to grow our food supply , better food , animal food .
it &apos;s not about rice krispies , it &apos;s about getting people alive , and it &apos;s going to get the highest time to understand what that means .
because you know what ?
if we don &apos;t do that , if we continue to make it happen , we believe in something that we don &apos;t believe , i don &apos;t think we want guilty .
there &apos;s no other description for what &apos;s happening here .
it &apos;s selfish , it &apos;s ugly , it &apos;s not worthy , and we have to really stop that .
so after that incredibly funny conversation , you might say , &quot; you want to go into this ridiculous machine and go into the future ? &quot;
anyway . this is what i want to do .
right now , it &apos;s in the moment , but we have an incredible opportunity .
we can do this time on everything we want .
we can hinbewegen them where we want to hinbewegen them , and we will move them where we want to move .
we have to lead this conversations , and we need to think , but if we go into time , and we &apos;ll be going to go into the future , we &apos;ll be able to be happy .
i know we can , and it &apos;s a little bit of me now , is what the world needs now .
thank you . thank you .
thank you . thank you .
since i &apos;ve been interested in the placebo-effekt , i think it &apos;s a great deal for the placebo-effekt , it &apos;s a great deal to be , unless you look like i &apos;m a deception to be able to do something that &apos;s really a täuschung thing , if someone &apos;s only believes in that . &quot;
with other words , zuckerpillen have shown in some studies , the placebo-effekt , and it &apos;s just because the person thinks of what &apos;s going on , and for example , if the patient only believes , if the patient only believes , you know , the patient is just enough of the body that you call the placebo-effekt .
one deception is going to be a deception because someone can get it .
so we also want to understand each other , i want to show you a powerful , very simple .
and i &apos;m going to show you how it works . this is a trick who has at least at least for the 1950s in every single night for children .
i have taken him from cub magic of the pfadfinder in the 1970s .
i &apos;ll just get it for you and then explain it .
and then i &apos;ll explain why i &apos;ll explain it .
so , you see what happens .
the knife that you can do ; my hand you can study .
i &apos;m going to put the knife in my feet .
i put my sleeve back .
and to make sure that nothing in my sleeve or out of him , i &apos;ll just get my wrist right here .
this is what you can see is that there &apos;s no time to move at any time . so i can &apos;t walk here in my sleeve or come out in my sleeve .
and the goal is just simple .
i &apos;m going to open my hand , and hopefully , if everything is fine , the knife will stop the knife .
it actually sits on its place that i can shake it without the knife .
nothing is going to be in my sleeve or comes out , not a trickserei . and you can study everything .
ta-da !
now , this is a trick that i often beibringe little kids that are interested in magic , because you can learn a lot about deception , if you &apos;re closer , even though it &apos;s a very simple trick .
probably a lot of you know , many of you here in the room here .
it &apos;s how he works .
i hold the knife in my hand .
i say i &apos;m my wrist to make sure that none of my ärmel disappears or a herauskommt , and that &apos;s a lie .
the reason i &apos;m mein my wrist is that it &apos;s the actual secret of illusion .
now , where i &apos;m going to put my hand from you , so you see it from the back , and it &apos;s moving from the back of the back , and just like he was in a position where he &apos;s so ausgestreckt .
great trick ?
there &apos;s somebody sitting there , who didn &apos;t have childhood .
so he &apos;s here . right . right .
and if i &apos;m umdrehe , the finger changes his position .
and now , you might talk about why it &apos;s a deception , why not the reason , because the mind is only three to the bottom , they don &apos;t get the mind , they don &apos;t count , one , two , three , three , three , three , but it &apos;s a group .
but this is actually not really , and then i open my hand .
of course , it will hold there , but not by the magnetism of my body , but through a trick , through my zeigefinger , that &apos;s now .
and if i close my hand , the same thing i &apos;m going to do is to get out of this movement that the fingers will fall back .
i take this hand away . and here &apos;s the knives .
this trick can you show your friends and neighbors . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you .
now what has this got to do with the placebo-effekt ?
so , a year ago , or something , i read a study that really had really been really close to me .
i &apos;m not a doctor or a researcher , and so that was an amazing thing .
it turns out , if you can offer placebo in a single white pill , in the form of a aspirintablette , is just a round , white pill that has a particular kind of design .
but if you &apos;re the shape you &apos;re going to put the shape in the face , for example , in a smaller pill , and it &apos;s a little bit of a letters that is actually messbar effectively effectively .
and that &apos;s not any of any of those than any pharmazeutische ... it &apos;s just zuckerpillen .
but a white pill is not as good as a blue pill .
what ? that made me really crazy .
it turns out it &apos;s not that it &apos;s not all .
if you take a little bit of other , you &apos;re still more effective than any species .
a colored capsule that &apos;s yellow and the other red , is better than a white capsule .
also the other way of the car is a role .
a pill every single day , not as good as three pills -- i can &apos;t remember the exact statistics . i &apos;m sorry .
but the key thing is ...
... also , that the dosierungen is playing a role .
and the shape is playing a role .
and if you want to have the ultimate placebo-effekt , you have to grab your needle .
right ? a syringe with a wirkungslosen -- a couple of milliliter substance that you have a patient .
this is a very strong picture of mind . this is a lot more powerful than a white pill .
this chart is really -- i &apos;ll show you another time if we have a box .
so the fact is that the white pill doesn &apos;t look as well as the blue pill , which doesn &apos;t work as well as a capsule that doesn &apos;t really work as well as the needle .
and none of it has any really serious property . it &apos;s just our faith that &apos;s a stronger effect .
i wanted to know if i could use this idea for a magic .
i take something that is obviously a deception and let &apos;s look at it .
we know what a trial is that you have to grab your needle when it should go to the thing .
this is a 18 inches long , it &apos;s very , very spitz , and i &apos;ll start a little bit of a little bit of a fuss .
this is really my meat . it &apos;s not damians spezielles meat .
this is my skin . this is not a special friend of hollywood .
i &apos;m going to put this needle in my skin in my skin and walk through the other side .
if you &apos;re übel -- if you fall down to the ohnmacht -- i have a couple of friends at a few friends at night , and some people who i didn &apos;t know , and i &apos;ve become a woman almost powerless .
so i &apos;m going to suggest if you &apos;re fast , then you look for the next 30 seconds , or , you know , i &apos;m going to do the first white device here .
you can see it in the same way , but you can also wegsehen if you want .
so , it &apos;s like , right here , where my meat starts , at the bottom of my arm , i &apos;ll just do a little einstich .
sorry . does it do that ?
and now just a little bit of my skin and on the other side of the other side .
now we are actually in the same situation that we had to messertrick .
about about .
but now you can &apos;t count my fingers , right ?
so , i &apos;ll show you . this is one , two , three , three , four , five .
well , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , well , well , yeah , well , well , well , yeah , well , yeah , well , well , well , yeah , well , well , well ,
i know what people think if you see that .
they say , &quot; okay , that &apos;s not so stupid and durchsticht himself , just to get a few minutes to talk to us . &quot;
well , then i &apos;ll show you .
what &apos;s this going out of ? pretty well .
yeah , i know .
and people say , &quot; okay . i don &apos;t really see that right . &quot;
people are now in the nebenräumen .
let me show you that close .
this is really my skin . that &apos;s not a special way of hollywood .
this is my meat , and i can do this .
sorry . if you &apos;re übel , look away , look at them , look at it .
the people back , or the people who can see that later on the video , you &apos;ll see that later , you see , well , it &apos;s really a little bit of 50 , but it &apos;s really a little bit of a hole , and it &apos;s a hole , if it really was really real , it would bleed . &quot;
okay , let me give you a little blood for them .
yeah , here &apos;s it .
normally i would take the needle now .
i would put my arm , and show you that there are no wounds .
but i think it &apos;s in this frame and with intent , to make a real real thing , i &apos;ll just go up the needle just and go from the stage .
we &apos;ll be able to meet a couple of time next .
i hope you &apos;re going to be very excited . thank you .
everybody talks about happiness .
i have some people who count the number of books that have been published with &quot; happiness , &quot; and they were published by about 40 , and there were much more .
there &apos;s a tremendous wave of interest in the workforce .
there &apos;s a lot of glücks-coaching .
everybody would love to make people happier .
but despite all of these kinds of work , there are several cognitive community , there are several cognitive dropping that it can &apos;t possibly be impossible to think about happiness .
and my talk today is basically the hauptsächlich of these cognitive fall .
it &apos;s true for laien , which is thinking about their own happiness , and it &apos;s true for scientists that are thinking about happiness because it turns out that we are just as much as any other .
the first of these traps is a widerstreben , complexity .
it turns out that the word is very simple , not a useful word , because we &apos;re going to use it to many different things .
i think there &apos;s a particular meaning that we could do it , but in large , and it &apos;s something that we have to do is going to be able to be able to do , and we &apos;re going to have to assume the complicated view , we &apos;re going to have to think of what &apos;s a well-being .
the second theory is a hierarchy of experience and memory : essentially , it &apos;s between happy in his life and happy his life , or happy with his life .
and these are two very different concepts , and they &apos;re both zusammengeworfen in the notion of happiness .
and the third is the konzentrations-illusion , and that &apos;s the fact that we can &apos;t think about a fact that &apos;s well-being , the well-being of the well-being , without the meaning .
i mean , this is a real cognitive thing .
there &apos;s just no way to get it right .
now i &apos;d like to start with somebody who was a frage-und-antwort-sitzung , who had a frage-und-antwort-sitzung , who had a story , and &#91; unclear &#93; , and it was a very serious -- he was a symphony of a symphony , and it was absolutely beautiful music , and at the end of the recording , there was a fürchterliches of the aufnahme .
and then he added , really , really , really , really , really , really , the whole experience of the whole experience .
but it didn &apos;t .
what was ruined with the memories of the experience .
he had had the experience .
he had had 20 minutes of herrlicher music .
she doesn &apos;t stabilize because he was ruined with a memory ; that memory was ruined , and the memory was all he had to get .
what really says that is that we might think about us and other people think of the sense of two types of self .
there &apos;s a erlebendes itself that lives in the present and the present , is capable of experiencing the present , but just the present .
it &apos;s the erlebende itself that &apos;s the doctor anpricht -- you know , if the doctor says , &quot; do it hurt you ? &quot;
and then there &apos;s a erinnerndes itself , and the erinnernde itself is that , and the history of our lives , and it &apos;s been the arzt , which is the doctor , which is the question , &quot; how did you feel about the question ? &quot;
or &quot; how was your journey after albania ? &quot; or something like that .
these are two very different units , the erlebende itself and the erinnernde itself , and the two to the durcheinanders of the begriffs of happiness .
now , the erinnernde itself is a storyteller .
and this really starts with a fundamental reaction on our memories -- it starts instantly to start .
we &apos;re not only telling stories when we do it , tell stories .
our memory tells us stories that is called what we &apos;re going to be in our first place .
and let &apos;s give them micht with an example .
there &apos;s an old study .
these are real patients that have a painful experience .
i &apos;m not going to go into the details . it &apos;s not more painful , but it was painful when this study was done in the 1990s .
they were asked to be all the 60 seconds to report on their pain .
and here are two patients . these are their records .
and they asked , &quot; who has more than two ? &quot;
and this is a very simple question .
patient b has increased more than a gelitten . his darmspiegelung was longer , and every minute of pain , the patient had a patient , patient had a patient , and more .
but now there &apos;s another question : &quot; how much thought that patient did that they were playing ? &quot;
and here &apos;s a surprise : a surprise .
and the surprise is that patient is a much worse erinnrung of the darmspiegelung that had a patient to be a patient .
the stories of the darmspiegelungen were different , and because a very important part of the story is how they end up .
and none of this stories is very erbaulich or great -- but one of them is that cold ...
but one of them is clear worse than the other .
and the worse is the worse , where the pain was at the end of his peak . it &apos;s a bad story .
how do we know that ?
because we asked these people to their darmspiegelung , and also a lot later , &quot; how bad was the whole thing ? &quot;
and she was much worse for a lot of b in the erinnrung .
well , this is a direct conflict between the erlebenden itself and the erinnernden itself .
from the view of the erlebenden himself had a very short amount of time .
now , what you could do with a patient , and we &apos;ve done a clinical trials , and it &apos;s been made , and it &apos;s actually been done , and it &apos;s actually going to work with the patient &apos;s darmspiegelung by simply sending the tubing in it without doing it with him .
this will lead that the patient suffering is , but only a little bit less and much less than before .
and if you do this , you &apos;ve got a couple of minutes , you &apos;ve got a schlechter of the patient , and you have a bewirkt of the patient &apos;s own , much better than you can get a better way of thinking about his experience .
what does a story ?
and that &apos;s true for the stories that makes the memory of us , and it also is true for the stories that we invent .
so a story of wodurch are more engaging , achievement , and end .
end , very , very important , and in this case , the end result .
now , the erlebende itself is going to be continuously continuously .
it has the world of the erlebens , one after the other .
and you ask : what happens with those moments ?
and the answer is really simple . they &apos;re forever losing .
i mean most of our lives -- and i have this thing -- you know , the psychological present of the psychological present , you know , there &apos;s about 600 million of them , and what &apos;s about 600 million of them , and there &apos;s a month about 600 million . most of you don &apos;t leave .
most of you are completely ignored by the erinnernden itself .
and yet , they get the sense that you count that what &apos;s happening in the world &apos;s population of the erlebens .
it &apos;s the finite resource that we consume for that world .
and how we chose it would be important , but that &apos;s not the story that we pick up for us .
so we have the erinnernde itself and the erlebende itself , and they &apos;re really quite different .
the biggest difference between you is the deal with time .
from the erlebenden itself , if you have a vacation , and the second week is exactly the first time , the first person is so urlaub doppelt vacation .
this is how it works at all this work .
for the erinnernde itself , a zweiwöchiger vacation is a zweiwöchiger vacation as the einwöchige vacation , because there &apos;s no new memories .
you have not changed the story .
and this is actually the critical variable that &apos;s a erinnerndes itself , which is a erinnerndes itself itself , has very little influence on this story .
now , the erinnernde itself is more than to remember and stories .
it &apos;s actually the decisions , because if you have a patient , we have two darmspiegelungen in two different surgeons , and then you say , the wählt of the brain is that the wählt that has the memory that &apos;s the memory , and that &apos;s the surgeon that will be selected .
the erlebende itself doesn &apos;t have a voice in this choice .
actually , we don &apos;t choose between the races . we choose between memories .
and even if we think about the future , we don &apos;t think of our future as a game .
we think about our future as a vorausgesehene memories .
and basically , you can look at the same thing , you know , as a tyranny of the erinnernden itself , and you can think of yourself as one , the kind of erlebende itself that &apos;s kind of erfahrungen itself that doesn &apos;t need the erlebende itself .
i have the impression that if we make a holiday , that &apos;s a lot of the case , which means we &apos;re going to make a holiday weitestgehend , and we &apos;re doing our holiday in the services of the erinnernden itself .
and this is a little hard to do , i think .
i mean , how much zehren we do from our memories ?
this is one of the explanations that &apos;s going to be given for the dominance of the empire itself .
and if i think about this , i think , on a holiday that we &apos;ve done in antarctica , the clearly of the best vacation i had ever had , and i think , quite often , in the relationship that often i think of other people &apos;s minds .
and i probably have probably of my memories of this dreiwöchige journey , i would say about 25 minutes long , over the last four years .
now , if i had the folder to have the ordner open , i would have spent another hour .
well , these are three weeks , and that &apos;s a half of a million .
there seems to be a tough .
now , i like a little bit of a extreme , you know , how little appetit i &apos;ve got to do on the zehren of memories , but even if you do more of them , there &apos;s a real question . why are we spending a lot of weight in the verlgeich that we &apos;re going to do ?
so i want to think about a thought .
imagine your next vacation , you know that at the end of the beach , all of the images are being pulled and get a amnestisches drug , so you &apos;re going to be remembered .
now , would you choose the same vacation ?
and if you choose to choose a different vacation , there &apos;s a conflict between their two and you have to think about how you decide to this conflict , and that &apos;s really not at the time , because if you &apos;re in the sense of time , you get a response , and if you think of the sense of memories , you might think of a answer
why we pick up the urlaube , which is a problem that &apos;s a problem that provides us with a choice between the two types of self .
now , the two ways of the self are two terms of happiness .
there are two concepts of happiness that we can deploy , one of a self .
so you can ask : how happy is the erlebende itself ?
and then you would ask : how happy are the world &apos;s population in life ?
and they &apos;re all -- happiness for the future is a pretty complicated process .
what are the emotions that can be measured ?
and by the way , we &apos;re now capable of getting a pretty good idea about the happiness of the erlebenden itself itself .
if you ask the fortune of the erinnernden itself , it &apos;s a very different thing .
this is not about how happy is living .
it &apos;s like happy or delighted , the person who &apos;s in your life .
very different term .
anybody who &apos;s not going to be working out of the erforschung of happiness , and i &apos;m also a lot of researchers on well-being that have been vermasselt the study of happiness for the study of the robot in the world that kind of thing .
the distinction between the happiness of the erlebenden itself , and the satisfaction of the erinnernden itself has been recognized in the last few years , and now you &apos;re now bemüht the two separat .
the gallup organization has a global survey that are asked more than half a million people about what they &apos;re thinking about their lives and over their experiences , and there were other efforts in the direction .
so we started to learn about the happiness of the two species of self .
and the main lesson we have to do , i think , is that they &apos;re really differently .
you can know how happy someone is with his life , and it teaches you not really much about how happy he lives and vice versa .
just to give you a sense of the correlation , which is about .5 about it .
what &apos;s going to happen , and you would meet somebody , and you would say , oh , his father is a zwei-meter-mann , how much would you know about his size ?
now , you would know something about its size , but there &apos;s a lot of uncertainty .
they have so much insecurity .
when i tell you that somebody &apos;s life on a scale of ten , they have a lot of uncertainty about how happy it is with his erlebenden itself .
so the correlation is low .
we know something about what the happiness of the glücks-selbst .
we know that money is very important , goals are very important .
we know that happiness means being comfortable with people that we like , at least with people who like that .
there are other pleasure , but it &apos;s dominant .
so if you &apos;re the happiness of the two species of self , they &apos;re going to be very different to the end of the very end .
the implication of what i &apos;ve said here is that we really shouldn &apos;t be able to imagine happiness as a substitute for well-being .
it &apos;s a completely different notion .
now , very briefly , a very short reason that we don &apos;t realize are very obvious to think about happiness , that we don &apos;t think we &apos;re going to think about the same things if we think about life and if we actually live in life .
so if you ask the simple question , how happy people are not going to get the correct answer .
if you ask this question , you think that people have to be happier in california if they say , say , in ohio life .
and what happens is that if you think about life in california , think of the difference between california and other places , and that difference is , we say , in climate .
well , it turns out that climate is not very important for the erlebende itself , and it &apos;s not even very important for the nachdenkliche itself that &apos;s deciding how happy people are .
now , because the nachdenkliche itself is responsible , you can end up at the end -- some people might be able to move to california .
and it &apos;s kind of interesting to track what happens with people who are looking for california , in hope , happier .
now , your erlebendes itself isn &apos;t happier .
we know that .
but one thing will happen . you &apos;ll think they &apos;re happier because if you &apos;re thinking about it , how awful the weather is going to be reminded , and you &apos;re going to feel that you &apos;ve got the right choice .
it &apos;s very difficult to think about well-being , and i hope , i &apos;ve got a sense of how hard it is .
thank you . thank you .
thank you . i have a question .
thank you .
now , when we got a few weeks ago , you &apos;ve got to me to have some interesting weeks that there was a pretty interesting result that came out of this gallup poll .
is this something you can actually see us , because you have a few minutes left now ?
daniel kahneman : sure .
i think the most interesting thing that we found in the gallup survey is a number that we didn &apos;t have to find absolutely .
we found that in terms of the happiness itself .
if we looked at how feelings we have a lot .
and it turns out there &apos;s a income from 60,000 dollars in a year , for americans , and that &apos;s a very large sample of americans , about 600,000 , but it &apos;s a great repräsentative phone , under a income of 600,000 dollars in a year in a year .
60,000 60,000 .
dk : 60,000 .
60,000 dollars in year , people are unhappy , and they become increasingly threatening , the poorer they will .
we get a absolutely flat line .
i mean , i &apos;ve seen so flat lines .
what happens is that money is a erlebnis-glück , but that scarcity is a erlebnis-glück , and that scarcity &apos;s a sure of money , and we can measure this , and we can measure this , very quickly .
in the sense of the other self , the erinnernden itself , you get a different story .
the more money you can pick up the regular .
that &apos;s not for emotion .
but danny , in all of america , it &apos;s about life , freedom , the pursuit of the pursuit of the brain .
when people take this seriously seriously , i mean , it feels all to put it on your head , everything we believe in terms of the example of the example , for example , to steuerpolitik and so on .
there &apos;s a chance that politicians have a country to do a befund like seriously , and it would make it out there ?
dk : you know , i think it &apos;s recognition for the role of the glücksforschung in politics .
the recognition will slowly be slowly in the united states , not a question , but in the united kingdom , they &apos;re just happening in other countries .
people are in the way they should think of happiness if they think of politics .
it will take a while , and people will discuss the people whether they want to explore erlebnis-glück or whether you want to explore lebens-bewertung , so we have to take this discussion .
how you can grow very differently on how you think about how you think and believe it , or if you think about the erinnernde itself or whether you think of the erlebende itself .
this is going to affect politics , i think , in the next years .
in the united states , you have to measure the erlebnis-glück of the population .
this is , i think , in the next one or two decades , or two of the national statistic .
now , it seems to me , this is going to be at least at least the most important political debate to the next few years .
thanks to the invention of the invention .
thank you , danny kahneman .
i &apos;m jane . i used to serve video games .
i &apos;ve been growing up now for 10 years , and my goal for the next decade is to make it easy to save the world in reality , as you &apos;re in online-spielen .
i have a plan for it . i want to convince more people , including all of you , more time with playing the play and tollerer games .
now we spend three billion hours a week with online-spielen .
some of you might think , &quot; that &apos;s a whole lot of time for games . &quot;
maybe a little too much time when you think of how many problems we have to solve in the real world .
but actually , i &apos;m in the institute of the institute of the future , is exactly the opposite .
three billion hours per week are not nearly enough to solve the most fundamental problems of the world .
in fact , i convinced that if we want to survive the next century on this planet , we need to increase this time .
i calculated that the oil is going on at 21 billion hours per week .
so this may seem a little bit more abwegig , so i can do it , so if we can do it , climate change , climate change , climate change , climate change , climate change , climate change , i think , we need to try to play games for at least 21 billion hours a week to the end of the next decade .
no , i really don &apos;t really make it seriously .
why ? this image describes exactly the same , why i believe that play is so vital for survival of the human species in the future .
this is a portrait of photographers called the photographer .
he wanted to capture feelings playing the games . so he &apos;s got a camera vor .
this is one of the classic ausdrücke in games .
if you &apos;re not a player , then maybe you might have some of the nuancen in this picture .
you probably see this intuitions for urgency , something fear , but also äußerste focus , to get into the solution to the solution of a real problem .
if you play , you see some nuances here , which is looking at the top of the eyes and the mouth , the eyebrows show the eyebrows surprise .
this is a player that &apos;s on the verge of a sogenannten epischen .
oh , oh , you know . ok . so we have some players here .
a epischer victory is a result that &apos;s so positive that they didn &apos;t know that it was possible .
it was almost beyond the imagination .
and if you do it , they &apos;re shocked that they &apos;re actually capable of making something like this . this is a epischer victory .
this gamers represents a moment ago recently a epischen victory .
and this is what we have to see on millions of faces on the world all over the world , if we take the hürden of the next century in the next century , the face of all the widrigkeiten , the entgegen of all the widrigkeiten , the entgegen of the rande .
well , unfortunately , we see this face in real life , if we &apos;re looking at hard problems .
i refer to it as &quot; in life i &apos;m bad , and it &apos;s actually my face , you see ? yes ? ok . ok .
i am , i am like i am a bad thing .
this is a graffiti in my former home in berkeley , california , where i was in my doktorarbeit untersuchte , and we &apos;re better than in the real life .
this is a problem that many players have a lot .
we think we &apos;re not so good at the reality .
and i don &apos;t just mean less successfully , even though that &apos;s what this is heard .
we &apos;re doing more in spielwelten , i mean , well , i &apos;m talking about motivation , something bedeutsames , inspired collaboration .
if we &apos;re in a spielwelt , i think many of us are turning into our best version , anytime and immediately , are the problem to do the problem as necessary as necessary as necessary , it &apos;s going to try to get out of the fehlschlag .
and in reality , if we fail , if we go on obstacles , we often feel different .
we feel overwhelmed . we &apos;re feeling besiegt . we feel threatened , maybe maybe depressed , frustrated or zynisch .
these feelings never have we play games , they don &apos;t have them .
and this is what i wanted to study was as a graduate student .
why is it impossible to think , you couldn &apos;t do anything ?
how can we take those feelings into reality ?
so i looked at games like warcraft of warcraft , which is the ideal environment for the gemeinschaftlichen .
and i &apos;ve noticed some things that make the epic in online-welten in online-welten .
so , first of all , if you &apos;re in one of these online-spiele , especially in the world of warcraft , there &apos;s a lot of different characters that are willing to be a weltrettende mission , and it &apos;s instantly immediately .
but not only a mission , but a mission , the perfect thing to look at is the current level of level level in game in game right right ? right ?
so they create this .
you never get a job that you can &apos;t solve .
but always on the edge of their capabilities , so they have to go to the edge , but there &apos;s no unemployment in world of warcraft .
you don &apos;t sit around and it turns out . there &apos;s always something important to do something important .
and there are tons of collaborators .
where they go , hundreds of thousands of people who work with you to make their epic mission .
we don &apos;t have that in real life , that feeling that there are a fingerschnipsen of haufenweise mitarbeiter .
and also , there &apos;s this epic story , this inspiring history , why we are and what we are .
then we get this whole positive feedback .
they have determined from &quot; level , &quot; and &quot; + plus-one 1 is &quot; is &quot; &quot; stärke , &quot; or &quot; + &quot; + &quot; + &quot; + &quot;
this constant feedback is not in real life .
when i leave this stage , i don &apos;t speak : + 1 and + + + + + + + + + + + 1 1 idea , 20 crazy idea .
i get the real life of this feedback .
so the problem of the world &apos;s problem &apos;s problem of warcraft is that it &apos;s so severe to stand at the edge of a epischen sieges , that we would rather spend our entire time in this spielwelten .
they &apos;re just better than the reality .
and now , all of the world &apos;s world &apos;s world &apos;s world of zusammen together , and that the virtual problems of problems could solve problems .
it &apos;s not something bad .
it may be very nice .
but to see it in the context , vor million years ago , our first primatenvorfahren began to go .
the first one is a aufrechte .
ok , so if we talk about how much time we spend with games , makes it just , when you have time to go back to the scale of human flourishing , which is extraordinary .
but also , appropriate , because it turns out we &apos;re using this whole time of play the way we actually change the way we &apos;re capable of .
we &apos;re developing into collaborative , and we &apos;re going to be able to make sure .
this is the truth . i believe .
and look at this interesting statistic , the recent statistic , the recent university of carnegie university , the average young man in a country with potent spielkultur to a starker of 10.000 verbringt with starker hours of allows to starker hours of verbringt verbringt to the 21st of a starker period of time .
so 10,000 hours is a very interesting number , for 2 reasons .
first of all , for children in the united states , the exact genaue of the genaue are the exact genaue of the genaue , which you spend in school , from the fifth grade to the high school , if you never don &apos;t .
so we have a complete parallelbildungsweg , on the young people learn what it means to be a good player , like anything you learn in school .
and maybe some of you have some of you that new book of malcolm , &quot; überflieger . &quot;
so you know his theory of success , the theory of the success of the success of the planet .
it &apos;s based on the great research of the kognitivwissenschaft that if we were to studium 10,000 hours a beliebigen of a massive building to the 21st of the 21st , we &apos;re going to be able to master .
we &apos;re going to be so good at whatever the other people are the world .
so what we have here is a whole generation of young people who are meister-spieler .
so the big question is , &quot; what are the player &apos;s player well ? &quot;
because if we could figure that out , we would have never been able to have gewesenes human potential .
so many people we have in the world that spend at least one hour a day with a online-spielen day .
these are our meister-spieler . 500 million people , which are extraordinarily good in &quot; something .
and in the next decade , we have another billion players , which are extraordinarily well in whatever .
if you haven &apos;t heard it yet , it &apos;s not heard .
the spieleindustrie entwickelt developed energy , and on mobilfunknetzen , instead of working on the breitband-internet , so that there are a lot of blood around the world , especially in india , china , brazil .
you expect a extra billion player in the next decade .
and so we have total billion player .
so i started thinking what it is , what it is to us .
here &apos;s the four things i found . first of all , first .
ok , imagine the way extreme selbstmotivierung .
now , dringlichkeits-optimismus is the urge to do something , to master , a hurdle , and we have a sense of faith that we have a hope for success .
players always believe that a epischer victory can be possible , and it always worthwhile to try and do it .
players sit around .
players are masters in the spiders in the spiders of the spiders .
there &apos;s a lot of interesting studies that we show people like that , after we &apos;ve played people with them , even if you &apos;ve got more trouble .
the reason for that is that there &apos;s a lot of faith to play with someone else .
we trust that someone has been working with us that the rules will become the same goal , that we have the same goal , and to stay with the spielende .
so it allows the zusammenspielen of the growing , trust and each other .
as a result , we build more social relationships .
glückselige productivity .
you know , there &apos;s a reason why the durchschnitts-word of warcraft-spieler of warcraft-spieler 22 hours a week , as a teilzeitjob .
the reason is that if we &apos;re playing , we &apos;re actually getting happier to work , and if we &apos;re doing it , we &apos;re not going to relax .
we know that as human beings work , if we do hard , i do hard , achievement .
and player is always ready to work hard , if you get the right job .
and finally , epic meaning .
players love it , help me to be ausmaße missionen missionen .
here &apos;s a hintergrundinformation to turn the right light into the right light . you know all of you , the biggest world of the world .
the second largest natural measure of the world , with almost 80,000 , is the world of warcraft .
five million people use every month .
they have more information about the world &apos;s biggest zusammengetragen in the internet , as a whole other subject in any other aspect of the world .
it &apos;s creating a epic story .
they create a epic source of knowledge about the world of warcraft .
ok , so these are four superpowers that are going to be a outcome . players are super-mächtige , hopeful individuals .
it &apos;s people who believe that they can change the world .
and the only thing is that you think they can change the virtual worlds , but not the real .
this is the problem that i &apos;m trying to solve .
edward castronova is a volkswissenschaftler .
his work is great . he studied why people are so much time , energy and money in online-welten .
and he says , &quot; we &apos;re not going to be zeugen by a massenemigration of a massenemigration in virtual worlds . &quot;
and this is a economist , so it &apos;s logical .
and he says ...
not like i -- i &apos;m playing games , i &apos;m a little bit more überschwänglich .
so he says , that makes sense , because the player can reach more in more than in real life .
you can make more social social ties than in real life , you get more feedback and reward more and more feedback than in real life .
so he says , it &apos;s completely logical that gamers are more time in the virtual world than in real world .
i agree to agree that &apos;s logical .
but it &apos;s definitely not a optimalsituation .
we need to start to turn the real world into a game .
my inspiration comes from a event , the 2,500 years of zurückliegt .
there &apos;s this ancient cube , from schafsknöcheln . you know ?
this amazing spielecontrollern gave this amazing spielecontrollern .
and that was kind of a sozusagen of people .
and if you &apos;re familiar with the werken greek griechischen , you might know this story , and the story about how they were invented .
now , laut herodotus were spiele , genauer würfelspiele , in the kingdom of lydien during a famine .
there was such a great famine that the king of the lydien was made of an idea .
people &apos;s dying . people fighting .
it was a extreme situation ; you needed a extreme solution .
so they invented loud herodotus , the würfelspiel and vereinbarten strategy , and a national strategy . on a day you would eat . the next day you would play .
and they would be so in the würfelspiel of the würfelspiel , because games are so intriguing and us with befriedigender , glückseliger productivity that they would forget that it was nothing to eat .
and then the next day , you would play . and the next day , you would eat .
and then laut surviving this time , she survived this famine , by this famine , by just playing a day and the next .
the same way , i think , let &apos;s take a deeper .
we &apos;re going to play games to get the world &apos;s suffering .
we &apos;re going to play games to avoid everything that doesn &apos;t work in real world , especially in real life , and we &apos;re looking at what we need to do .
but it doesn &apos;t have to be the end .
this is the exciting .
it was herodotus after 18 years , the famine was not only better than the king was , so the king was beschloss , a final würfelspiel anzusetzen .
they shared the kingdom in two .
they played a würfelspiel and the national debt , and they put the national debt .
they were verließen and made a new home looking for a new home . it just left so many people back to the survival , and then they were looking for the rest of a area that they could thrive .
it sounds crazy , right ?
but the latest dna-beweise show that the etrusker that later the etrusker , the same amount of dna , the same dna as the old lydier .
so scientists recently recently came to the perception that herodotus &apos;s crazy story .
and geologists found evidence of a global abkühlung , which almost almost 20 years ago , which could explain famine .
so that &apos;s a crazy story .
you might have saved your people in games by playing them in games for 18 years and then they had this eingebung and so much about the interconnected and then they learned that they were saving the entire civilization .
so we can also .
we &apos;re playing with a 1994 warcraft .
this was the first strategiespiel in real time of the world &apos;s world &apos;s world &apos;s world &apos;s world war . that was 16 years ago .
it &apos;s been spielten for 18 years , we &apos;re playing at 16 years .
i claim we are ready for our own episches game .
so they sent off the zivilisation of their civilization , looking for a new world , so i &apos;m going to take my 21 billion spielstunden per week .
we should be übereinkommen that half of us have a hour of play a day , and we have solved the problems of the real world .
i know they &apos;re going to ask , &quot; how do we solve problems in the real world ? &quot; and right that question i &apos;ve been doing my work for the future for the future .
we have this debris in our office in palo alto , it &apos;s really sufficient to understand how we should understand the future .
we don &apos;t want to try to say the future before .
what we want is to create the future .
we want to introduce the best outcome . and then people to do this idea of reality .
we &apos;re providing a epic of space and giving people the opportunity to reach them .
i &apos;ll show you three games that i designed to try to do people in their own future .
this is &quot; world without oil . &quot;
the game is from 2007 .
it &apos;s a online-spiel that you have to overcome a ölknappheit .
the ölknappheit is invented , but we have enough online-inhalte , and you &apos;re going to be able to live with them , and they &apos;re going to be nachrichten-filme , if you &apos;re going to be able to live , and you have to live in the game , and then you have to live in real time , if you &apos;re going to be able to live ,
we &apos;ve tested this game with 1.700 players in 2007 . and we &apos;ve been covering it over the last three years .
and i can tell you , it was a fully experience .
nobody wants to change your life because it &apos;s good for the environment or because we should .
but if you &apos;re in a epischen adventure , and you get said , &quot; us is the oil . &quot;
this is an amazing adventure that you go .
find out how they would survive . most of our players have the spiel habits of the game .
so we &apos;ve got to play a bigger game game , increased the other goal , as just as just ölknappheit .
we have the game called &quot; superstruct , &quot; the institute of the future .
now , the calculation of a supercomputers is that people only have 23 years on the planet .
this supercomputer is called &quot; global aussterbungs- , &quot; of course .
the call to the aufruf , anzumelden , we have almost like a &quot; jerry-bruckheimer &quot; -film . &quot;
you know jerry bruckheimer-filme , where it &apos;s the dream-team , you have the astronauts , the scientists , the ex-sträfling , and only they can save the world .
but in our game , instead of just five people , say , everybody is in the dream-team , and it &apos;s our job , the future for energy , food , security , security and the future of social justice .
8,000 player played the game eight weeks .
they found 500 incredibly creative solutions that you can read when they &apos;re superstruct .
and the last game we take on march , it &apos;s a game in collaboration with the world bank .
if you finish the game , you get from the world &apos;s award award , the auszeichnung of the world &apos;s award of the world &apos;s award .
we work with universities in the very few days and shop them to learn social choices .
we have a comic book . we have the level of regionales , wissensvernetzung , sustainability , vision and ingenuity .
i want to invite you all to share with young people , all over the world , especially in entwicklungsgebieten , which is to learn to save their own social enterprises to save the world .
i &apos;m going to go to the end .
i want to ask you something .
what do you think is going on next ?
we have all these amazing gamers , we have games that show us what we can do , but we haven &apos;t rescued the real world yet .
well , i hope you agree with me that players are the gamers of human resources that we can deploy to work in real life , and that games have a big meaning for change .
we have all of these things , glückselige productivity , the ability to move to social webs , dringlichkeits-optimismus and longing for meaning .
i hope that we &apos;re going to play together a great play games to survive on this planet to survive .
and i hope you &apos;ll play with me and play with me .
if i vorausschaue the next decade , i &apos;m sure that we can create every future , and we can play all kinds of games .
so i say , let &apos;s say , let &apos;s start the weltverändernden .
thank you .
i &apos;d like to tell you what i &apos;d like to write a few months ago , a artikels of italian magazine .
i used to write my synonym-wörterbuch griffbereit , but i was ready to have done the bearbeiten of the text , and i noticed that i never have ever been in my life , which is the word &quot; of the &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; disabled &quot; . &quot;
i read you about it .
&quot; disabled , &quot; verkrüppelt , hilflos , nutzlos , nutzlos , lahm , lahm , lahm , lahm , impotent , gelähmt , gelähmt , gelähmt , gelähmt , gelähmt , gelähmt , gelähmt , gelähmt , gelähmt , nachgebessert , nachgebessert , kaputt , kaputt , kaputt , kaputt , siehe , siehe , nutzlos and weak .
antonyme : healthy , strong , a framework . &quot;
i had this list of a friend of a friend , and she had to read it , and i had to read it up until i could go and read it , and couldn &apos;t stop collecting and to go to this überfallartigen wortflut , and hence on the damit of the emotional shock .
of course , this was a ausgefranstes , old synonym-wörterbuch . i just thought that the output has to be pretty old .
but in fact , it was a copy on the early 1980s , when i started elementary school and started to build my own family planning and shape and shape , also in terms of other children and the rest of the world around me .
and god is , i didn &apos;t use a synonym-wörterbuch .
i would have to be very seriously , i would have been born in a world that would be like a person , whose life could be positive , whose life is positively positive , but i &apos;m going to be able to experience the chances and adventure .
so i &apos;ve got to the online-ausgabe of 2009 and expected that i think i think that i think of a ansprechenderen piece of paper .
here &apos;s the aktualisierte version of this eintrags .
they &apos;re not a lot better than you &apos;re doing better .
in particular , i don &apos;t have the last two words under &quot; near antonyms , &quot; &quot; and &quot; healthy &quot; &quot; and &quot; healthy &quot; . &quot;
but it &apos;s not just about the words .
it &apos;s about what we think about people we describe with these words .
it &apos;s about values that put in words , and how we construct these values .
our language affects our language , and how we see the world and the people around us .
many of the altertümliche societies , including the greek and the römer , have really believed that the pronunciation of a fluchs has a big force , because that &apos;s what you can laut , also manifestieren .
so what we want is actually -- a disabled people or a powerful people ?
alone , you have a people who would be asked to call a kid , then , then , and then you get ideas of ideas .
wouldn &apos;t it be nice to open doors ?
a human being open to me , my pediatrician was at the a.i. institute in wilmington .
it &apos;s called dr. pizzutillo . a italo-amerikaner , whose name you can think , most americans couldn &apos;t be correctly . so he was called dr. p. .
and dr. p. ballet was always going to fly very colorful and was for the work with children just like that .
i found the time i spent in this hospital , just great -- except to my physiotherapie .
i had to work together with these thick , unendlich bändern -- the familiar thing to do , in different colors -- and i have these caught more than anything . i hated them . i hated them . i hated them . i hated them .
and imagine , i even had a fünfjähriges kid with dr. p. , and so trying to stop this lane , natürllich without successfully .
and one day he was watching me at one of my name -- these are just simply just ermüdend and gnadenlos -- and he said , &quot; wow , you &apos;re so powerful , you &apos;re so powerful , and you &apos;re so powerful , you &apos;re going to be a day of one of those medications .
and if you can make it , i give you a hundred dollars . &quot;
this was just a simple trick of dr. p. , so i didn &apos;t want to make the übungen of the aussicht of the krankenstation in the dance in the second position , but he actually brought me to see my daily übungs-horror with new eyes , so that &apos;s how it became a new and vielversprechendes experience .
and i wonder today , as much as a lot of my vision of me and kraftvolles young girls , and i &apos;ve been shaped as a starkes girl , and i could imagine myself as a result of a strong , powerful and atlethischen human .
this is just one example of many , how adults can encourage the imagination of a child .
but as the already zitierten examples of the synonym-wörterbüchern , we have to prove our language to our language , we can &apos;t imagine something that we would all want to do : it &apos;s a very important person to see themselves as a powerful human .
our language is hinkt the social changes , which have been caused in many cases .
now , of course , you can say , from the medical view of the medizinischen , the laser-chirurgie of titanium , kniegelenke and artificial hüftgelenke for the grenzen , people really have to be able to use the natural networking , but we have to give you a personal identity , people allow them to be able to be able to be able to create a personal identity ,
so maybe this technological change in the future of the time , that there is always a other truth , which is that every human being can give something very besonderess and very powerful , and that the human ability to adapt to the human being , our biggest plus is .
the human ability to be found -- this is a interesting story , because people are always about widrigkeiten and i &apos;m going to ask you a little bit of a holistic : this sentence for me , and i always felt that i felt very uncomfortable for me to answer that question of people , and i think i &apos;m gradually i understand why .
this sentence from the main issue is that success is about widrigkeiten , or happiness from the idea that i &apos;m going to be able to get the möglichen of the experience of the experience that i would be so successful , because i could get the potential of a life with a a life , or whatever people perceive me with my disability .
but the truth is that we &apos;re changing . we are not going to be the challenge , whether they physically , physically emotionally or even both of both of the other .
and i claim that that &apos;s good .
widrigkeiten are not an obstacle that we have to have to have to get out of our lives .
widrigkeiten &apos;s just to live our lives .
and i tend to see widrigkeiten as my shadow .
sometimes i sometimes realize that he &apos;s very present , sometimes it &apos;s hardly to see , but it &apos;s constantly at me .
and i want to use the impact of the impact of the kampfs of a human worker .
there are in life and challenges , and the challenges are only alllzu and every person that &apos;s going to go around and the question isn &apos;t , whether we are getting widrigkeiten or not , but how we get it clearly .
so we &apos;re not just for that , the people we love to preserve , and it also helps them to get to the clearly right .
and we can &apos;t have our kids , if we give you the sense that they can &apos;t adapt to themselves .
you have to separate two things : one of the medical fact that i &apos;m going to be able to be able to be able to be able to do , and to the other position of that , i &apos;m not going to be disabled or not .
and to be honest with the only real disability , the only behinderung , with the fact that i had to put on the face of the time , is that the world is constantly changing , you can describe this particular definitions .
in our desire , the people who are doing the heart , and they &apos;re doing the kalte , and they have the kalte , the most innovative of the quality of the quality of the quality of life that you expect , we have to have to have to have that someone is actually disabled .
maybe the concept is the concept that only achtet , which is a broken thing , which is in a broken , and how we fix it , for every single disability than the death toll .
if we treat a person , and not all its forces and possibilities and opportunities are able to be able to look at the natural struggle that you might have to have to have , one more disease .
we degradieren a people who has a value .
so we have to look beyond the patologie and focus on all of the human possibilities .
but the most important thing is that it &apos;s between our sense of our belief and our great erfindergeist , a connection .
we should not be able to do this herausfordernden times , or in denial , we should not try to avoid them , but it &apos;s going to take them under the carpet , but it &apos;s about to see the widrigkeiten opportunities .
i think it &apos;s a very much about to ensure that we don &apos;t have to overcome widrigkeiten , but that we &apos;re open to them , they &apos;re going to hug them , they &apos;re going to go up to the schopf , and maybe even to use a kampf-ausdruck and maybe dancing .
and maybe we do it , widrigkeiten as a natural , stimmiges and useful and nützliches and feel like your presence through their presence .
we celebrate the 200 . and the last year , we &apos;ve seen it from a hundred years ago , and when he wrote about evolution , darwin , in my eyes , in a very true of human character .
i would like to be this as well , not the most powerful of its kind of suffering , and also the most fundamental of his species , but that &apos;s the best way to adapt to the best .
we can &apos;t come from creativity .
not only is the only piece of piece that we know that the ability to survive and aufzublühen , from the fight of human spirit is to move through conflict .
so , again , change , and the reality are the grandest skills of the people .
and maybe we know what wood is we &apos;re going to be geschnitzt if we &apos;re really going to be really .
perhaps , it &apos;s the sense of widrigkeiten , a sense of the ichs , a sense of our own force .
we can do something to us .
we can have a new meaning that &apos;s going to go through the heavy times .
maybe we can see widrigkeiten as change .
widrigkeiten , widrigkeiten , for a change we haven &apos;t yet yet .
i think the biggest damage that we &apos;ve been able to have is to believe we should be normal .
now , you know , who is normal ?
there &apos;s no normal .
there &apos;s the common . the typical thing . it &apos;s not the normal . and they would have to really know the poor person , if they really want to be really ?
i think i &apos;m not going to be .
it would be great if we can gegen the paradigm against the normalität or the strength , to be able to use a little bit of a choice , and so we can use the forces of very many kids , and they &apos;re able to bring to a very special and valuable skills to bring their own .
and then we found that we have people from the members of our societies to be a problem : useful and a contribution .
there &apos;s evidence that the neanderthals are older people and low-income people with a schweren and people who have been carrying , and that might be because the lebenserfahrung in the überlebenskampf of these people were wertvoll in the society that was wertvoll .
they don &apos;t have the broken and useless , they were being treated as something special and valuable treatment .
a few years ago , i was in the city where i grew up in a lebensmittelmarkt in the red zone , in the northeastern pennsylvania , and i was sitting there in a scheffel tomatoes .
it was summer , and i had shorts .
and i hear like a guy behind me , &quot; well , if that &apos;s not aimee mullins . &quot;
and i turn around and see this older man . i had no idea who he is .
and i was like , &quot; sorry , sir , do we know ? i can &apos;t remember you . &quot;
and he said , &quot; well , you know , you don &apos;t remember that .
when i first saw it , i got her mother from your mother &apos;s mother . &quot;
oh , so that &apos;s .
and of course , it &apos;s got to be click .
this was dr. kean , a man that i just showed me from my mother , because i knew , of course , is really , really , really , really , at my birthday two weeks .
the doctor for pränatale diagnostics in the holiday , and so my parents &apos; parents &apos; man who brought me to the world , not at all .
and since i was born without wadenbeine , and my feet had to be on and i just had some toes on this and a few toes on the other side , he had the überbringer , that strangers had to be the bad news .
he said to me , &quot; i had to say your parents , never going to be able to go and never be able to live with other children , or that you never have a independent life , and then you &apos;ve just got a lie to me . &quot;
the really extraordinary thing i did , i didn &apos;t think about the buchstabier-wettbewerb of the parade in the second grade , whether i had to go to the parade at the parade , and he had to errungen my scholarship , and he used this ausschnitte to teach his students , medizin-studenten from the hahnemann medical school and the hershey medical school .
and he called this part of his kurses x factor , the potential of human health .
you can &apos;t just emphasize enough to be able to be the number of one of those things for the quality of a human .
and dr. kean told , he said , &quot; i &apos;ve learned that children get something to be something , and even if you get a little bit more of a support , if you get children , children can get a lot of time . &quot;
you see , dr. kean has changed .
he understood that the medical diagnosis , and how someone can do that , two different things .
and i &apos;ve been thinking of my thinking about the time when you had been asked me at the age of 15 years , if i had my prosthetics from flesh and bones , i would have no second .
i wanted to be normal .
if you ask me that today , i &apos;m not sure .
and this is what happens is because i experienced something with my legs and not despite this experience .
and maybe this transition thing i could have this change because i &apos;ve been so many people who have doors open to doors , instead of having people who wanted me to do me or to bring me a picture of me .
you see , it takes only one person who demonstrate you can manifestieren your forces , and they &apos;re through .
if you allow it to somebody , your own inner powers , the human mind is so empfangsbereit -- if you do that , and you &apos;re going to open up the door , you &apos;re a door , you &apos;re a very good teacher .
they bring them to open doors .
the real meaning of the worts &quot; educate &quot; is &quot; wurzelt &quot; wurzelt &quot; educe . &quot;
it means something that is a solution that is the potential of potential .
again , which is the potential we want to be ?
in the &apos; 60s , in britain , in britain , in britain , the gymnasien were umgewandelt in gesamtschulen .
they call this &quot; streaming trials , &quot; we call this as &quot; tracking . &quot;
the students will be broken .
and the a student will be mündlich harder , getting better teachers and so forth .
you have a dreimonatigen of a dreimonatigen period with a &quot; a &quot; moment &quot; the note &quot; very good , &quot; it was told they were very clever , and they were very clever , and after these three months they &apos;ve written really einser .
and of course , it would be able to hear the heart of hearing that the vice president was being told , they were just sufficient .
and it was also the three months .
but only those who are still in school -- except by the students who had the school .
the very important thing that was the study was not eingeweiht .
the teachers didn &apos;t know that something has changed .
they just said that there was the einser-schüler and that the students are the students with the note , and they have a little bit taught to them and they have a little bit of .
the only disability is a gebrochener mind , who was broken , who was broken , has no hope , no hope , and he finds nothing more schön. , kindliche our natural , kindliche neugier. and our innate capacity of imagination .
but if we can do it , the human spirit , continue to hope , continue to find yourself and other people around them , and other people around them , and then we put our forces really , we &apos;re putting our forces really positively .
if a mind , about these qualities , we can create a new reality and new forms of transportation .
i want to end with a poem that was written by a persischen poet called hafiz , and the poem is , &quot; &quot; every child , the god of the name , not the god of the name , not the god of the name , not the god of the name , but the god , he &apos;s only wiederholt , and the ständig , he &apos;s always
come on , dance with me . thank you very much .
how would you be better than you are at ?
suppose i said that through a few changes of your genes , a better memory might have -- more , more and more specific and faster .
or want to fitter , more of the force .
would you want to be attractive and more ?
how would it be good for good health ?
or maybe you &apos;re one of those who always have more creativity after more creativity .
which would you like most of the most ?
what would you like to have if you could just have one ?
creativity .
how many people would choose creativity ?
raise your hands . let me see that .
a few . probably about this as many people here are here .
that &apos;s very good .
how many would be a good memory ?
a few more .
how would it be ?
a few less .
what about longevity ?
ah , the majority . the lsehe i like to be as a doctor .
if you could only have one of them , it would be a whole other world .
is it all of it ?
or is it possible to be possible ?
evolution is a andauerndes issue on the ted conference , but today i want to give you the view of a doctor &apos;s theme .
the great geneticists in the 20th century , t.g. dobzhansky , who was a kommunikant in the russian eastern church , wrote a paper , with a post , which is not a aufsatz , no sense of the evolution of evolution . &quot;
now , if you &apos;re one of those who are not accept the evidence for biological evolution , you can take a look at the persönlichen -- and maybe you can take a look at the persönlichen -- and maybe you can take a look at the kathryn , because nothing that will make any sense of this talk will make any sense of you .
but if you look at biological evolution , you think about this : is it just about the past , or is it also about the future ?
it &apos;s for other geltend or it &apos;s it ?
this is another view of the tree of life .
in this image , i &apos;ve laid a bush as a center of the verzweigungen in all directions , because if you have the margins of the tree of life , all the existing spezien of these twigs have been in evolutionary , they have survived ; it has a environment and strength .
the human part of this busches , far on the end , of course , that &apos;s what we &apos;re most interested in .
we were talking about a shared ancestor about 10 or eight million years ago .
in this period , there were maybe 20 or 25 different kinds of hominids of hominids .
some are gone and went .
we &apos;ve been for about four years of years .
it seems like we &apos;re right now , as we were right now , as a remote share of the tree of life , but actually , the most fundamental part of the world are the fundamental mechanisms of our cells .
and it &apos;s clear that we can pull out of this , and the mechanisms of a shared bacterium to produce the protein of the human genome system , which is used to treat the power of the brain ?
this is not like humaninsulin ; this is the same protein , which is the number of chemisch ununterscheidbar of what &apos;s coming out of the pancreas .
and we &apos;ve been talking about bacteria , it &apos;s that each of us are more bacteria than it causes cells to be able to do that in the rest of our body ?
maybe 10 times richer .
i mean , think of antonio damasio to your brain , you think about the bacteria ?
our gut is a wonderfully gastfreundlichen environment for these bacteria .
it &apos;s warm , it &apos;s dark , it &apos;s very comfortable . it &apos;s very comfortable .
and you &apos;ll all have the nutrients that you could only want to make without any time of an individual .
it &apos;s really a easier way to bacteria with gelegentlichen unterbrechungen , jeodch unterbrechungen , forced to ausgang .
but else , you &apos;re a wonderful setting for these bacteria , as they are important for their lives .
they help boost the cells of essentiellen , and they protect them against certain diseases .
but what &apos;s going on in the future ?
we are in a kind of evolutionäres balance in the form of a species ?
or are we going to be something else -- something that &apos;s even better to be able to adjust the environment ?
now let &apos;s go back to the time of 14 trillion years ago -- the first solar system of living -- the first evidence of living -- the first evidence of living -- the first evidence of organisms -- the first anzeichen of organisms -- the first mehr-zelligen organisms , maybe as much as 800 or a billion years ago , and then the human species that schließlich in the
in this huge sense of the universe , the life is just a short , life on earth ; the animal kingdom , like a single fat , and the human lifetime , a little notenverzierung .
we were .
this also represents the unterhaltungswert of this talk , which is why i hope , d , you &apos;ve got a city of logic .
now , when i was a neuling on college , i had my first biologiekurse .
i was fascinated by the elegance and beauty of biology .
i fell in the force of evolution , and i made something very fundamental , in most of the existence of life , in most of the existence of life , each cell , and all the genetic information is going to run in both of the cell .
but at the time , as a mehrzelligen organisms , started to change things .
sexual sexual reproduction is now .
and it &apos;s very important : with the advent of sexual reproduction that &apos;s the genome , the rest of the body will be entbehrlich .
in fact , you might say that the unausweichlichkeit of the death of our body in the evolution in the same moment , the sexual reproduction .
now i have to confess , if i was a college-student , i thought , well , for example , sex per death , death for sex -- it seemed quite reasonable to the time , but with every year , it &apos;s to have to get to my first word for you .
i &apos;ve come to understand the feelings of george researchers , which was in las vegas to read his show in the &apos; 90s .
and one night , there is a pat on his hotelzimmertür .
he opens the door .
it &apos;s a beautiful spärlich spärlich .
she looks at him , and she says , &quot; i &apos;m here for super-sex . &quot;
&quot; this is wonderful , &quot; george george , &quot; i &apos;m going to take the soup . &quot;
i came to the conclusion that i was going to be a goal of the other goal of evolution -- not inevitable , just different .
i &apos;ve tried to preserve the body .
i wanted to keep us healthy .
i wanted to have health care for a disease .
i wanted to have a long time and healthy life .
evolution is all about the weitergabe of the genome to the next generation , and anpassung generation generation .
from a evolutionary standpoint , they &apos;re entwickelt , and i &apos;ve been developing booster rockets to send the genetic fracht into the next stage of orbit to the oceans .
i think we all would like to understand the mood , the woody woody all of the expression of expression , when he said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to be immortality through my work .
i want to get to it by not getting die . &quot;
evolution doesn &apos;t necessarily mean the longest life .
it doesn &apos;t necessarily have the biggest größten , the strongest or the fastest , and not even the smartest .
evolution are the creatures that are going to adjust the best to their environment .
it &apos;s the test of survival and succeeding success in success .
on the bottom of the ocean &apos;s bacteria , the thermophil are the thermophil , and it &apos;s the hot double , if fish there would be a lot of fish , but they have a gekochte of the result of the result of the result of the result of the result of the result .
so what does it mean , if we look at the look at the look , what happens in evolution , and how we think about the space of the human being in evolution , and particularly how we vorausschauen in the next stage , i would say that there &apos;s a series of opportunities .
the first is that we can &apos;t get a cell .
we &apos;ve got a kind of balance .
and the reason that it would be , in fact , that &apos;s first , we &apos;ve got a lot of genes to get the otherwise otherwise , and we had been out of the population .
and second , we have a species that we &apos;ve managed to make it happen in us , we &apos;re going to adjust ourselves in our way , we &apos;re in our position , we &apos;re going to adjust ourselves in the way we &apos;ve got to adjust it into it .
and by the way , we wander and zirkulieren and mix so that they can &apos;t say no longer , that isolation is needed to be stattzufinden .
a second possibility is that it &apos;s a evolution of traditional species , of course , is the auferlegt of the nature of nature .
and the argument that this is the wheels that the wheels is slowly slowly but they &apos;re unerbittlich .
and so far as the isolation is , if we &apos;re going to be able to colonize the species , it will be able to be able to get it and make the changes of the environment , the evolution of natural way .
but there &apos;s a third opportunity , a verlockende , fascinating and terrifying possibility .
i call it neo-evolution -- the new development that &apos;s not simply , but it &apos;s led to as a individuen. of us as a individuen. in the decisions we do .
now , how could it happen ?
how could it be possible that we do this ?
let &apos;s think of the reality that people are today , in some cultures , in some cultures , are making their offspring .
they &apos;re , in some cultures , the choice , to have more men than women .
it &apos;s not good for society , but it &apos;s the one that &apos;s going to decide that the individual and the family .
so think of it , if it &apos;s not only possible to choose your child &apos;s gender , but also to the body , to use genetic adaptations that disease diseases and prevent disease .
what if you could make the genetic changes to try or eliminating or alzheimer &apos;s disease or the reduce to eliminate the reduzieren ?
would you not want to make these changes in their genes ?
if we &apos;re vorausblicken , these kinds of changes are possible .
the human genome project started in 1990 , and it took it took 13 years ago .
it cost $ 2,7 billion dollars .
the following year when it was done , they could do the same thing for 20 million dollars in drein to four months .
today , you can transform a sequence of three billion each of the human genome to a price of 20,000 and a half a week .
it will not take a long time to be the reality that it will be 1,000 to the 1,000 dollars of human genomes , and it will be more accessible to everyone .
a week ago , the national academy of the engineering academy of the engineering academy of the francis arnold , two scientists , the independent workers developed evolution to work faster and to wünschenswerte protein in a more efficient way -- which frances arnold arnold , &quot; direkte evolution . &quot;
a couple of years ago , the lasker-preis lasker-preis was verliehen for his research for his research , a erwachsene hautzelle , and by the manipulation of only four genes , the cell to go to a red cell , a cell in a cell -- a cell in the situation that &apos;s a cell in your body .
these changes are in the come .
the same technology , which is the human insulin in bacteria , viruses can make viruses that can make viruses that aren &apos;t just protection from themselves , but also the immunity of other viruses .
believe it or not , it &apos;s an experimental study in gear , which is influenza by side of the cells of a tabakpflanze .
can you imagine something that comes out of tobacco ?
this is all reality and in the future will be able to be more possible .
so you just imagine two other little changes .
you can change the cells in your body , but what if you could change the cells of your mind ?
what if they could change the sperm and eizellen or the newly befruchtete to give their children to give a better chance to give a better chance to give a gesünderes life -- the diabetes , the hämophilie , the hämophilie of cancer , the risk of cancer ?
who doesn &apos;t want to be healthier ?
and then the analytical technology , the same engine , the same engine that can enable the changes to avoid disease , could also enable allow us to adopt a verabschieden of super-attribute , hyper-kapazitäten memory -- the better memory .
why don &apos;t have the schlagfertigkeit of a ken jennings , especially if you can expand it with the next generation of the watson-maschine ?
why not the fast muskelfasern that are going to allow you to get them faster and longer ?
why not live longer ?
these are going to be unwiderstehlich .
and if we &apos;re in a position , we can pass it on the next generation , and we can actually bring the attribute , we will be able to bring into the attribute evolution .
we &apos;re going to have a process that has 100,000 years , and we can get it on a thousand years ago -- and maybe even in the next 100 years .
these are choices with which their grandchildren , or their grandchildren , are going to be done .
using this decisions to shape a society that &apos;s better that is more likely to be in ?
or will we choose very disparate attributes that we have to have for some of us , and not for others ?
are we going to be a society , and uniformierter is , or robuster and vielseitiger ?
these are the types of questions we need to be facing .
and most of all of all , we will be able to develop the wisdom , and the wisdom is that we need to make this decisions ?
in the good like bad , and early days , when you might think , these decisions are going to be on us .
thank you . thank you .
i want you to imagine a portable robot that gives you to give you the übermenschliche , or another , the rollstuhlfahrern and go back to the aufzustehen and go back to the rollstuhlfahrern .
we call berkeley bionics , call this robot exoskelette .
they &apos;re not something else to be than something that you can put in the morning and that helps you increase the pace of the way , and that will help you your balance and you will help you .
that &apos;s actually the true of human and machine .
but not only that -- so it fuse and connect them with the universe and other devices out there .
it &apos;s not just a crazy idea .
now to show you what we &apos;re working on , we start to talk about the american soldiers , which is about 100 pounds on the average , about 100 pounds on his back , and it &apos;s the request that they should carry more gear .
of course , this leads to some very important complications -- rückenverletzungen , 30 percent of it -- chronic rückenverletzungen .
so we thought that we would take us to this challenge , and create a exoskelett that would help the problem with this problem .
so let me now introduce you to now -- or the human universal of load .
soldier : with the hulc-exoskelett , i can carry 200 pounds over verschiedenartiges terrain , many hours long .
his flexible design enabled to allow it to engage deeply deep , and to bring into highly wendige movements .
it feels what i want to do where i want to go and get my strength and ausdauer .
we are as much as our industriepartner device that we can imagine , this new exoskelett in this year .
so it &apos;s true .
let &apos;s look at our minds to the wheelchair , something i &apos;m particularly passionate about .
there are 68 million people , the world &apos;s largest in the wheelchair .
this is about one percent of the population .
and that &apos;s actually a conservative estimation .
we talk about very young people who are rückenmarksverletzungen with spinal cord that in the course of their lives -- when the rollstuhl , the 40er -- the rollstuhl , and the wheelchair is the only option .
but it &apos;s also about the aging population , whose number of people .
and so the only option -- if it comes to a hirnschlag , or other complications -- is the wheelchair .
and so it &apos;s been the way since 500 years since i have to say , very successful .
so we thought that we could start to write a completely new chapter in the realm of mobility .
let me introduce you now , this is a elegs boxtel , which is a rückenmarksverletzung ceremony that has a rückenmarksverletzung ceremony that didn &apos;t have been able to walk past 19 years ago , and now that &apos;s been there for 19 years .
thank you .
as i said , amanda carries our elegs .
it has sensors -- it has sensors -- it has sensors -- it has sensors -- it has sensors -- it has sensors -- it has sensors .
his completely non-invasiven sensors in the crutches , the signals on our onboard-computer , who &apos;s attached to your back .
here &apos;s batteriepackungen , the motorantrieb is on their hips , as as on their hüften , they &apos;re going to move forward into this fairly geschmeidigen and very natural advantage .
i was 24 years old , and in bestform , as a monströser purzelbaum während while a skiabfahrt mich .
in the fraction of a second , i lost every time , and every movement of my beckens .
not a long time , a doctor in my krankenzimmer and he said , &quot; amanda , you &apos;ll never go again . &quot;
and this was 19 years ago .
he steel every fünkchen hope of hope from my consciousness .
the anpassungsfähige technologies have been able to learn about ermöglich , again , to go back to climbing and drive the hands of the hands .
but nothing was invented that would go back to me .
thank you .
as you can see , we have the technology , we have the platforms to meet us and to discuss with them .
it &apos;s in our hands , and we have the whole potential to change the lives of future generations -- not only for the soldiers , or amanda , and all of the people here , but for all of the people .
thank you .
home at home in new york , i &apos;m ceo of the entwicklungsabteilung of a non-profit organization called robin hood .
if i don &apos;t choose poverty , i bekämpfe as a gehilfe of a feuerwehr-hauptmanns in a volunteer .
now , in our town , in the volunteer , where volunteers has been given hochqualifizierte , you have to be pretty early on the brandstelle to be able to mitmischen .
i remember my first fire .
i was the second volunteer on the brandstelle , so i had quite good opportunities to be able to get the best opportunities .
but it was still a race against the other volunteers to get the verantwortlichen hauptmann and figure out what our problems would be .
when i found the hauptmann , he had just been in a very serious conversation with the hausbesitzerin , which certainly had one of the worst days of their life .
it was in the middle of the night , and she was in the schlafanzug and barefoot under a umbrella of schirm out in the strömenden rains , while their house in the flammen .
the other volunteers who was coming up with me -- we call it lex -- the hauptmann of the first indian -- was the first hauptmann as first and was asked to save the dog of the hausbesitzerin .
the dog ! i was sprachlos in front of envy .
there was some lawyer or vermögensverwalter , who was able to tell the rest of his life , he was able to save a living house to save a living house , just because he was five seconds faster than i was .
well , i was the next .
the hauptmann winkte winkte me .
he said , &quot; well , you have to go into the house .
you have to go up to the top , and you have to get a pair of shoes a few shoes . &quot;
i swear .
now , not exactly what i hoped , but i went to -- the stairs , the hallway , the hallway , the flur , the real feuerwehrmännern , which is the same time that i &apos;ve been doing that , in the way that the bedroom was pretty finished to bring a pair of shoes .
i know what you think now , but i don &apos;t have a hero .
i went back to the back , where i was at the front door and met the beloved dog .
we wore our treasures out of the hausbesitzerin , where , not surprisingly , his biggest more attention than mine .
some weeks later , the feuerwache of the hausbesitzerin , where they were sich for the brave person in the rescue of their house .
one of those things are proposed , the ones have a couple of peaceful points , someone had some pair of shoes .
and in my profession , in my nebenberuf , as a freiwilliger , i &apos;m a witness of generosity and kindness in the big scale , but i also see the altruism and the muts of individuals .
and you know what i learned ?
they &apos;re all important .
so if i look at this room in this room , and people who have already achieved a beachtenswerten success , or on their way to that , i want to offer you to remind you , don &apos;t you know .
wait for you to do it , a difference in the life of another , until you &apos;ve reached your first million .
if you have something to give you something , you &apos;ll give it .
you can put it in a suppenküche , where you put a park in the neighborhood , in the neighborhood , in the neighborhood , you know , in the neighborhood , you know , in the neighborhood , you know , in the neighborhood , you know , in the neighborhood , you know , in the neighborhood , you know , in the neighborhood , you know ,
they &apos;re a mentor .
not every day , we will offer us a chance to save a human life , but every day offers us a day to change one .
so you just put them ; they save the shoes .
thank you .
bruno guissani : mark , mark , come back .
thank you .
i &apos;m just going to come back from a community that &apos;s known the secret of the human race .
a place where women are going to lead the zepter , with sex &quot; hello &quot; hello &quot; and the game is determined -- where &apos;s a serious issue .
and no , it &apos;s not burning or san francisco .
ladies and gentlemen , their impact .
this is the world of wild bonobos in the pacific of congo .
bonobos are together with chimpanzees our closest living .
this means we have a shared ancestor , a evolutionary grandmother that lived about six million years ago .
now , chimps are known for your aggressivität .
but unfortunately , we have this aspect of human evolution in the human evolution .
but bonobos show us the other side of the coin .
while chimpanzees were schimpansen , fear of großen , the bonobo-gesellschaft of ermächtigten will run by ermächtigten females .
they have really got what came out , because that leads to a very ausgesprochen society , in the lethal violence of violence , not seen .
but unfortunately , bonobos are the least known among the primate .
they live in the deep depths of the kongolesischen , and the observation is hard to accessible .
the congo is a paradox -- a country of extraordinary biodiversity and beauty , but also the heart of darkness -- the arena of a violent argument that has been gefordert for decades and almost as many lives of the world .
it &apos;s not surprising that these destruction are also not going to be on the bonobos .
and the decline of the baumbestandes lead to the decline of the baumbestandes , that you can &apos;t even fill a stadium with the verbliebenen bonobos -- and even there are not sure we &apos;re not sure to be honest .
and yet , in this country of violence and chaos , you can hear a verborgenes laugh , the trees would see the trees .
who are these related ?
we know it as a love of war , because they have häufigen , also bisexuellen sex , with wechselnden partners , and rules and the rules and social media .
i don &apos;t say that , that would be the answer to all humanitarian problems -- because the life of the bonobos consists of more than the kama sutra .
bonobos -- like people -- love to play their lives long .
game is not just kinderspiele .
for us , and it &apos;s essential for the quality of relationships and the care of the tolerance .
we learn to trust and the rules of the game .
game steigert creativity and resilience , and it &apos;s all about the power of diversity -- diversity of diversity -- diversity of the diversity of behaviors diversity on the diversity of connections .
and if you look at bonobos at the game , you see the evolutionary origins of human origins , dance and rituals .
play is the kitt that we beieinanderhält .
now i don &apos;t know how you play , but i want to show you some unique images from the wild .
first of all , a ballspiel auf -- and i don &apos;t think about fussball .
so here we see a young female and males in a verfolgungsspiel .
look at what it makes .
this may be the evolutionary origin of this : &quot; you know , you get him to the eggs . &quot;
just that i think i like him , it &apos;s not true .
yeah , yeah .
so sexspiele are common , both in bonobos as humans .
and this video is really interesting because it &apos;s really interesting , because it shows the ideenreichtum that you &apos;re bringing to new elements -- like the testicles -- and also how the game both both trust both and help and help them , while it &apos;s a while , while it &apos;s a great deal of fun .
but the game is a formwandler .
game is a formwandler and it can adopt a lot of forms of which some of those are some of which some of those things are , phantasievoll , curious -- maybe the other thing to discover the other .
and i want to show you , this is fuku , a young female , and she plays with water .
i think just like you &apos;re going to play alone , and we loten our inner and the outer worlds .
and it &apos;s this playful curiosity that makes us surveys , and interacting . and the unexpected grandchildren that we form is the real nährboden of creativity .
this is just a little vorgeschmack vorgeschmack on the insights , the bonobos we have in our past and present .
but it also makes a secret for our future , a future where we need to adapt to the world of challenge , through larger creativity and druch cooperation .
the secret is that the game of the key is the key to those skills .
with other words , play is our anpassungsjoker .
to adapt to us all the world of a world of world , we need to play .
but we &apos;re going to do this out of our spieltrieb ?
game is not silly , not silly , is not silly , isn &apos;t that , not silly , is not silly .
it &apos;s essential .
for bonobos and people alike are not from the teeth and claws alone .
now if it &apos;s barely complete , maybe maybe the nötigsten .
and so my primatenkameraden , and let &apos;s give us this gift of evolution and together , as we play the creativity of the kameradschaft and the wonder .
thank you . thank you .
i want you to imagine two pairs , the mid- 1979 , at exactly the same day , at exactly the same moment , every zeugt baby , every baby boomers .
so two pairs , every zeugt baby .
now i don &apos;t want to spend too much time to imagine the zeugung , because if you &apos;re all the time , you don &apos;t listen to me .
just imagine that just for a moment .
and in this scenario , they imagine that in a case of the sperm chomosom , which is the x chromosome of the mysterious record .
and in the other case , the sperm is a x chromosome that &apos;s true of the x chromosome .
both are überlebensfähig , both of them .
we &apos;re going to go back to those people .
in most of my activities , i &apos;ve got two hats .
under a hat , i &apos;m a story with anatomy .
i &apos;m a student , and in this case , i investigate how people with anatomy umgingen -- meaning of human body -- how they &apos;re dealing with körperflüssigkeiten , with körperflüssigkeiten umgingen , with körperkonzepten foods .
the other hat i &apos;ve been dreaming in my work is the smell of patientinnenanwältin -- or , as i say , as a impatients -- from people who are patients who are patients from doctors .
in this case , i &apos;ve been working with people who have körpertypen , the social norms in question .
so i &apos;ve been working with people who are siamesische twins , two people in a body .
i &apos;ve worked with people working with zwergenwuchs -- so people who were smaller than common .
and many times i worked with intersexuellen people whose gender atypisch -- so people who don &apos;t have the average male or female körpertypen .
and as a general , we can use the word for the word .
intersexualität comes in lots of different shapes .
i &apos;m just going to give you a few examples of the kinds of types of geschlechtsvarianten of geschlechtsvarianten that not the male or female standard .
in a case , you might have someone with a xy chromosomenbasis , and the sry gene of y chomosoms , the protogonaden that we &apos;ve all have to have fötalen , and we have heranwachsen .
and therefore , the testicles are in the fötalen stage .
but because this individual lack the receptors , to see the testosterone , the body doesn &apos;t react to the testosterone .
and this is called androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so much testosterone , but no reaction .
as a consequence , the body develops , the body has been able to go to the typical female .
if the kid is born , it looks like a girl .
she &apos;s a girl . it &apos;s going to be a girl .
but it takes times until they &apos;ve grown up and their breasts , but not to get their period , until someone comes out here , that &apos;s something different .
and they do a few tests and finding out that they were instead of eierstöcken and uterus , in reality , and that you have a y chromosome .
and it &apos;s important to understand that you could think that person could be a male , but they don &apos;t really .
women , like men , have something that you &apos;re called adrenalindrüsen .
it &apos;s in the back of our body .
and the nebennieren places are the nebennieren , which are the virilisierende hormones .
most women , as i -- i believe -- i believe a typical woman -- i don &apos;t know my actual chromosomenaufbau , but i think i probably have the typical -- most women like me , i &apos;m actually going to talk about the typical .
we &apos;re producing androgen and we talk to androgene .
the consequence is that someone like me , that more androgenen than a woman who was born with a woman , and a androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so gender is really complicated ; intersexuelle are not only in the middle of the spectrum of gender -- in some ways , you can be over the whole range of whole range of bandwidth .
another example : a few years ago , i received the phone call , as a young , he had a girlfriend , he had a girlfriend , had sex with his girlfriend , lived in his girlfriend , and he had just figured out that he had eierstöcke and a uterus .
he had a extreme shape of a angeborenen nebennierenrindenhyperblasie .
it has xx tech chromosome , and in the womb , his nebennieren were so strong that it &apos;s basically a male hormonumgebung .
and as a consequence of his genitalien , his brain was made his brain , the brain was part of the hormonenspektrums .
and when he was born , he saw a boy from a boy -- nobody was .
and it was only when he was 19 years old , it was enough medical problems , actually , because he innerlich the doctors that he was in the interior .
okay , just a quick example of a variante .
some people with xx chromosomes , creating something that is called ovotestis , which is wobei eierstockgewebe .
we don &apos;t know exactly why this happens .
so gender can occur in many different varieties .
the reason why children with this kind of body -- whether it &apos;s zwergenwuchs or siamesische twins -- from surgeons often -- from surgeons to be angepasst , because it &apos;s not because it was their physical health of advantage .
in many cases , these people are completely healthy .
the reason why many ways are often used many species of different interventions , because they threaten our social categories .
typically , our system is based on the idea that a certain flu shrimp with a particular identity .
so we have the concept that a woman is to have an identity identity ; one black person is to be , is supposedly , supposedly , a african anatomy in terms of their own story .
so we have this terribly vereinfachende idea .
and if we &apos;re confronted with a body , which actually makes us something very different , so we &apos;re looking at that kategorisierungen in that .
so we have a lot of romantic ideas on individualismus ideas .
and our nation is really a very romantic concept of individualismus .
now you can imagine , how amazing it is , if children are born , the two people in a body are in a body , are the two people in a body .
where i &apos;ve experienced most of the time , the südafrikanische läuferin läuferin was semenya last year , whose gender in berlin weltmeisterschaft in berlin .
many journalists accused with me , &quot; what test you &apos;re going to do , that tells us that caster semenya , or maybe anything ? &quot;
and i had to explain the journalists that there &apos;s no test .
now we know that gender is a lot of time that we have to admit that nature is not a line between male and female , or female and female and female ; we are the trennlinie that &apos;s worth of .
so we have a situation where the further our science is , we have to have the kategorien that we had to do with stabile categories , which was very simple , which very simple institutional renewable uses to create permanent identitätskategorien , much more unschärfer than we have .
and it &apos;s not just in terms of gender .
it also tells the same race , which is as much more complicated than our terminologie supply .
in our betrachtungen , we &apos;re going to do all kinds of areas in our own areas .
so , for example , we &apos;re in the fact that we have at least 95 percent of our dna with chimpanzees .
what are we going to start with the fact that we &apos;re only going to tell us from them through a few nukleotide of nukleotide ?
while we continue our science , we come into a zone of the unbehagens , where we have to acknowledge the simplistischen categories that we had too much .
we see that in all sorts of human life .
one of the areas that we see in the beipiel , in our culture , in the united states , the fighting the beginning of the beginning and the end of the life .
we have hard talks about what point is going to be a body , so that he &apos;s a different right thing as the civil life .
we have very difficult input -- maybe not as public interest in medicine -- about the question of someone else &apos;s dead .
our ancestors had never been hard to fight with the question of when someone was dead .
they have someone a feder under the nose , and when you moved back , they haven &apos;t been buried .
if you don &apos;t get more moved , you &apos;ve buried them .
but now we are in a situation where we are people to go out of people who are taking people from people to draw and other people .
and as a result , we &apos;re looking at the present time with the really hard question when someone dead is dead , and that &apos;s what makes us really hard to do that we don &apos;t have a very simple categories like that .
now you might think that all of the stuff would have been doing a whole bunch of categories as i would really make me happy .
i &apos;m political progressiv , i verteidige people with unusual bodies , but i have to admit it &apos;s a nervous way .
the fact that these categories are really much more insecure than we thought , makes me .
and it makes me harder to be able to do that democracy .
so to tell you from this anspannung , i have to first have been first bekennen that i &apos;m a big fan of the children .
i know they were rassisiten , i know they were sexisten , but they were great .
i think they were so tapfer and very , very radical , and so radical , in which they were doing all the schmalzige musical dabei dabei 1776 1776 , and it &apos;s not because of the music that &apos;s absolutely forgotten .
it &apos;s because of what &apos;s happened with the gründungsvätern .
the founding the founding is , in my view , the original aktivisten activists , and that &apos;s why .
what they were zurückwiesen was a anatomisches concept , and it &apos;s taken it through another , which was radical and beautiful , and 200 years for us .
as you remember , our own lives of monarchy , and monarchy was in a very vereinfachten concept of anatomy .
the herrscher of the old world had no concept based on dna , but they had a concept of the geburtsrechts .
they had a concept of blauem blood .
they were the notion that people had to do the political power , which is the political power , because of the vererbten blutlinie from the großvater to the son and so on .
the founding founding wiesen wiesen that it &apos;s made through a new anatomisches concept , and this concept said that all people have been built .
they nivellierten the area and decided that it &apos;s seen similarities , not the differences , and that was very radical .
now they did this , because it was part of a aufklärerischen system where two things were together in the two things .
democracy grew up , but at the same time , it &apos;s also written the science .
if you look at the history of the founding human history , it &apos;s clear that many of you were interested in science , and they were interested in a concept of a naturalistischen world .
they went away from the erklärungen art , and meadows things like a supernatural concept of power , back to where the transmission of a very vagen idea of transportation is based on a very vagen fear of geburtsrecht .
it moved to a naturalistischen concept .
and if you look at the unabhängigkeitserklärung of independence , you talk about nature and the god of nature .
they don &apos;t talk about god and the nature of god .
they talk about the power of nature to tell us who we are .
and as part of that , they were handelte by the anatomischen similarities .
and so they have a really wonderful way of the future civil rights .
they don &apos;t think about this , but what they did for us , was great .
so what happened next after then ?
for example , women , women who are the wahlrecht anstrebten , the concept of the founding tracking that says that we have a uterus and eierstöcke , that we shouldn &apos;t have the gebärmutter , that we shouldn &apos;t have the most significant thing that we should have , right , the right to have the right to be right , etc . &quot;
and women argumentierten the successful .
next came to the successful civil rights movement , where we saw people like sojourner truth who &apos;s spach about it , &quot; am i not a woman ? &quot;
we find men in the marschierenden rows of the bürgerechtsbewegung that say , &quot; i am a man . &quot;
again , people are using different color that were launching based on anatomical individual differences in anatomischen differences , again .
we see the same thing at the behindertenrechtsbewegung .
of course , the problem is that we start to look at all the similarities , we need to ask in question , why we &apos;re going to sustain certain trennungen .
now , we would like to give you a certain amount of trennungen , which is seen , in our culture .
i want to take a fish for a fish , not the same rights as humans .
i don &apos;t want to say that we should take the anatomy from anatomy .
i don &apos;t want to say that 5-jährige is the right to do , your informed consent or to get married .
so there &apos;s some of a anatomical trennungen that makes sense for me , and we think i should keep .
but the challenge is to try and figure out what it is , and why we &apos;re going to keep them and believe it .
so let &apos;s come back to these two creatures that have been gezeugt the beginning of the talk .
we have two creatures , both of the mid- &apos; 70s , at exactly the same day .
imagine one of them , maria , maria , three months ago , three months verfrüht , so she &apos;s born at a 1 conference .
on the other hand , on the other hand , is born in the geburtstermin , so he &apos;s born at a march of 1980 born , born in 1980 .
because of the fact that maria was born , the maria were born , they have all sorts of three months ago -- the right to have the right to do the right to do the right to drink .
heinrich has to wait for all this , not because it actually has a different biological age , just because of the zeitpunktes of its birth .
we &apos;re also finding other merkwürdigkeiten in what their rights are .
well , you know , the amount of money , you know , it &apos;s male -- although i told you that he &apos;s been männlich -- because you &apos;re going to be able to make it , that maria don &apos;t have to worry about .
maria , maria can &apos;t be in all the states that &apos;s right now , the same amount of the heinrich in all states , and that &apos;s the right to marry .
heinrich can marry a woman , but maria can only get married in a few states today .
so we have these dauerhaften categories that are in many ways , and questionable .
and for me , what will we do , because our science in the realm of anatomy makes us think that we have to admit that a democracy could be on anatomy , auseinanderfallen ?
i don &apos;t want to give science science but at the same time , sometimes it feels like science makes the science .
so where are we going to go ?
it seems like our culture , our culture would take a kind of pragmatic attitude : &quot; well , we have to pull somewhere , so we have to pull them out . &quot;
but a lot of people are doing a very strange position .
so for example , texas in a point , that a man means to marry you don &apos;t have y chromosome , and a woman means to marry a y .
now , in practice , people are not tested in the practice .
but it &apos;s also very bizarre , because of the story i told you about the androgenrezeptor-defekt .
if we look at the founding of the modern democracy , dr. martin luther king , he offers us in his &quot; dream talk , &quot; i have a kind of a solution .
he says , we shouldn &apos;t be people to look for their skin , but after the property of your character , &quot; judge , and go about anatomy .
and i want to say , &quot; yes , that sounds like a really good idea . &quot;
but how do you do that in practice ?
how are you people to have people from their charaktereigenschaften ?
i want to point out that i &apos;m not sure that we should be sure that we should be in the right place in terms of people , because i have to admit that i have a series of retriever of retriever that are probably likely to be more of a lot of people who are more than some people i know .
i want to dazusagen that i probably have some bright labradorhunde of the fähiger , the fähiger , the fähiger , sustainable and human decisions to meet their sexual relationships as some of the sexual relationships that i know .
so how are we going to put the question after the properties of the character ?
it turns out to be really difficult .
and part of me , what if the contents of a personality would be something that would be in the future -- using the air that could be made visible ?
really , really , really , we really want to go into this direction ?
i &apos;m not sure where we go .
what i know is that it really seems to think about the idea that the united states is führend to be able to make minds about democracy .
in our effort to democracy , we did our thing right , and i think we would make our cause well .
we don &apos;t have the situation where it &apos;s the case of the case of the case , where a man who &apos;s going to be attracted to other men , it &apos;s ready to be a geschlechtsumwandlung , where he &apos;s going to be able to stay alive .
the conditions of this kind of exist in us .
i &apos;m glad to say that we have this dance -- a surgeon with a few years ago , who had a few siamesische twins with himself to separate them to make it a namen , to make a name .
but when i asked him , and it asked him why he had this food -- was his answer that in his country , these children would be very bad , and therefore he had to do it .
i said , &quot; well , you &apos;ve got political asylum in the way instead of a surgery to separate them ? &quot;
the united states offer incredible opportunities to be people who are the ones that they &apos;re going to change about the state of the state will change .
so i think we need to be able to get more .
well , just to get away , i want to notice that i &apos;ve talked a lot about the fathers .
and i want to think about the opportunities for democracy or maybe , if we had a ausgesehen , if we had more involved .
and i want to say something that is radical , and i think that there might be different kinds of insights , which might be different kinds of insights , which are capable of the anatomy of anatomy , insbesonders , if people are hallucinating .
for years , i &apos;ve been interested in intersexualität , i &apos;ve been interested in research for research in the realm of the research .
and one of the things that i really found interesting is the difference between men and women in ways to think about how they think and the world .
what we &apos;ve learned from kulturübergreifenden studies is that women , in the average -- not every , but in the average -- more complex social relationships and the care of people who are in the group that are within the group .
and so , if we think about this , we have a interesting situation .
years ago , when i made a graduate student , i asked myself to feminism , and i knew myself as feminist , as a feminist , so it &apos;s a really fine question .
he said , &quot; tell me what &apos;s on feminism . &quot;
and i thought , &quot; well , that &apos;s the dumbest question i &apos;ve ever heard .
feminism is about gender about gender , which is why it &apos;s not the feminism of feminism .
but the more i thought about his question , to do so , i thought that there was something weibliches in feminism .
this is supposed to be something , in the average , which is a female of male brains from male relationships , and aufmerksamer for the schutzbedürftige for the schutzbedürftige .
so where the founding of the founding members of the state was possible , as individuals , it &apos;s possible that if we were able to einbrächten more mothers in this concept , we &apos;re not just a concept of bekämmen , not just how to do , but how we can &apos;t care about each other .
and maybe it &apos;s what we &apos;re going to go to the future , if we &apos;re going to be able to think about anatomy , less about the individual bodies , which is to think about identity and more about relationships .
so when we try to make people a perfektere connection , we think about what we can do for each other .
thank you .
i &apos;m jessi , and this is my suitcase .
but before i show you what i &apos;m going to do is , i &apos;m going to make a very public confession , and that &apos;s : i &apos;m obsessed with outfits .
i love it , every chance of a chance to find another farbenfrohes , verrücktes , and also , and recently , and also recently .
but i don &apos;t buy anything new .
i get all my clothes out of the second hand on flohmärkten and in second-hand-shops .
ooh , thank you .
second-hand-shopping allows me to reduce the impact of my garderobe on the environment and also the geldbörse .
i meet all kinds of great people ; my dollars is serving a good purpose ; i see it quite a unique , and it makes it a lot of personal schatzsuche .
i mean , what am i going to find today ?
will it have my size ?
am i gonna like the color ?
will it cost less than 20 dollars ?
if all the answers , i feel , i feel like i won .
i come back to my suitcase and tell you what i &apos;ve been doing for this exciting week here at ted .
i mean , what does anybody do with a lot of outfits with ?
so i &apos;m going to show you exactly what i brought .
i brought seven to seven to a few months , and that &apos;s all .
the unterhosen for exactly the moment is all i &apos;ve done in my suitcase .
i &apos;ve got anything i wanted to wear , if i just went to palm springs .
and since you &apos;ve heard of me , as the woman who &apos;s at ted in your underwear -- is that i &apos;ve found a few things .
and i &apos;d like to show you my favorite outfits for this week .
sounds good ?
while i do this , i &apos;m going to tell you some of the lessons that i believe or not , from those abenteuern , nothing is learned to be new .
let &apos;s start with sunday .
i call the strahlenden tigers .
you don &apos;t have to spend a lot of money to make great look great .
you can almost always look for great appearance for less than 50 dollars .
this whole outfit , including the jacke has brought me to me , and it was the most expensive piece that i &apos;ve been in this whole week .
monday : paint is something very powerful .
it &apos;s almost impossible to be bad gelaunt , if you &apos;re wearing hellrote pants .
if you &apos;re happy , you &apos;re sending other happy people .
tuesday tuesday : the anpassung is going to be totally überbewertet .
i spent a lot of time in my life trying to try and be myself and i &apos;m going to go to the same time .
just be , you know , who you are .
if you &apos;re going to surround the right people , they don &apos;t just understand it , they will also appreciate it .
wednesday : hug your inner child .
sometimes i say people , i would like to be like &apos; &apos; em &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; 70s or i can remember it .
i like to go and say , &quot; thank you . &quot;
thursday : confidence is the key .
if you think you &apos;re looking at something very well , it &apos;s almost like almost like this .
and if you think it &apos;s not going to look good , you probably have a right .
i grew up with a mother that &apos;s going on the day that day .
but only as i got 30 , i really understood what that means .
and i &apos;ll just summarize you for you .
if you believe that you &apos;re inside , and the outside one is a wonderful person , there &apos;s nothing that you can &apos;t do .
so there &apos;s no excuse for anyone here in this audience .
we should be able to rocken everything we want .
thank you .
friday : a universal truth -- five words : golden pailleten fit .
and finally , saturday , a unique , unique style , is a great way of doing a great way of telling the world a great way to tell a word without a word .
it was always upset , and over this week , when i got to me , in this week , i just started to come out of the week , just because of what i was wearing . and i had great conversations .
obviously it &apos;s not going to fit all in my tiny suitcase .
so before i go home to the brooklyn , i &apos;ll go all the way back .
because the lesson that i &apos;ve been trying to learn myself is that it &apos;s okay to go .
i don &apos;t have to emotionally emotionally not emotionally , because the next thing is going to be a different background , farbenfrohes , strahlendes , strahlendes , strahlendes outfit , which is just to wait for me , if i have a little love in the heart , and it &apos;s search for a little bit .
thank you very much .
thank you .
good afternoon , all together .
i have something i want to show you .
think of this as a bildpunkt , as a flying bildpunkt .
this is what we call in our lab , wahrnehmbares design .
let me tell you a little bit about this .
now if you take this picture -- i &apos;m originally italian , and every boy in italy , with this image in his room , but the reason i show you this is a very interesting thing in the last year .
now , some time , it was that if you wanted to win a formula , they would take their budget , and they took their money on a good driver and a good car .
and if the car and the driver &apos;s good enough , then they won the race .
now , today , you need a race , actually , something like this here -- something that &apos;s going on in real time , some thousands of sensors , and then you can take information to the car , and then you take this information from the system , and then they then use this car and make things in real time and things that are collected in real
this would be , in ingenieurteams , a echtzeit-kontrollsystem call .
and it &apos;s basically , it &apos;s a system that &apos;s made of two parts -- a spürenden part and a reagierendenteil .
what &apos;s interesting is the echtzeit-kontrollsysteme start in our lives .
our cities were over the last few years , just with networks and electronics .
they &apos;re going to become computers in the world .
and as computers in the parking , you start to react on others , and they &apos;re driven and driven .
if we herrichten cities , it &apos;s actually a big thing .
by the way , i just want to mention that cities are only two percent of the earth &apos;s land , but 50 percent of the world population .
they &apos;re 75 percent of the ocean -- cause to 80 percent of co2 emissions .
so if we do something with the cities , it &apos;s a big thing .
over the cities , pull all this kind of view and drive into the same position of everyday lifetime .
this is a exhibition that &apos;s paola antonelli for moma in the year , in the year , in the summer .
it &apos;s called &quot; the magic . &quot;
now , all of our objects , our environment , start to talk to us .
in some sense , it &apos;s almost like any atom out there are outside , a sensor and a antreiber .
and the change is radically the interaction that we have to have people with our environment .
in a sense , it &apos;s almost as though the old dream of michelangelo ...
you know , as a michelangelo , it &apos;s called the moses , and it &apos;s called the hammer and it ihn it , and they still can see a little place of moses -- and said , &quot; perché non parli ? why don &apos;t you do ? &quot;
now today , our environment starts to respond to the first time .
i &apos;m just going to show you some examples -- again , with the idea that we see and power .
let &apos;s start with the point .
now the first project i &apos;d like to introduce you is in truth of the first of our lab .
it was a long time ago in italy .
and what we &apos;ve done , was actually a new kind of network that was deployed all over the world -- this is a mobiltelefonnetz -- and we can use a mobiltelefonnetz -- and anonyme information from this network , which are actually accumulated out of the operators , to understand how the city works .
the summer was a happy summer -- 2006 .
it was as italy , the italien .
some of you remember , it was as italy , and then he was playing in france and then the end of the zidane , the kopfstoß .
and no matter how to get back at the end of the end .
now look at what happened on this day , just during the watch that happened in the network .
this is the city here .
you see in the middle of the kolosseum , the fluß tiber .
on the morning , before the game .
you see the timeline .
early on , people here and there , the calls and move .
the game starts . silence .
france does a portal . italy makes a portal .
halbzeit , people who make a brief phone , go to the bathroom .
second halbzeit . the end of the normal .
first of all , second , second .
zidane , in a moment of kopfstoß .
italy wins . yeah .
now , in this night , they went into the center of the center .
they saw the big rash .
the next day , all the way to go to the center of the siegerteam and the prime minister of the day .
and then all went down .
you see the image of the millennium circo massimo , where since the roman time , people have to go to celebrate -- to have a big party , and you see the place on the end of the day .
now , this is just one example of how we can feel the city today , in a way that we couldn &apos;t do it in a way .
another example of being , here &apos;s not about people , but to use things that we use and consume .
now , today , we know all about our things .
this is a map that shows you all the chips that &apos;s actually made of a building as they came together .
but we know just little about where the things go .
so we actually designed some little marker markers to track the garbage as he can go through the system .
so we started with some volunteers that &apos;s a year ago , in seattle , the things that they have to do -- different types of things that you can see -- things that they would be out of it .
then we have the small chips , the little brands , the little geklebt , and start to pursue it .
here &apos;s the results that we &apos;ve just got .
from seattle ...
after a week .
with this information we realized that there &apos;s a lot of ineffizienzen in the system .
we can do the same things in doing that much less energy .
the data wasn &apos;t available before .
but it &apos;s a lot of unnützer transporte and complicated things .
the other thing is that we believe that if we see every day that we &apos;re going to throw out the cup we &apos;re not going to go away , you &apos;re still going to go on the planet .
and the plastic that we still still still go every day .
and if we were able to show the people , then we can move a behavior .
so this is the reason for this project .
my colleague , assaf biderman , could you be able to do a lot more about the sense of behavior , and the many other wonderful things you can do with , but i want to talk to the second part that we &apos;re at the beginning and that &apos;s the most fundamental of our environment .
and the first project is something that we did a few years ago in zaragoza , spain .
it started with a question of bürgermeisters , who came up and said that spain and südeuropa have a nice tradition in public water than the architecture of architecture .
and the question was : how could you bring technology and combine new technology ?
and one of the ideas that were being used in a arbeitskreis ermittelt , and they imagine these tubes and valves , magnetventile , klappen , who open up and close .
they cause the wasservorhang with water water from water .
if these bildpunkte , you can write it , you can get patterns , images , text .
and you can get him to move and open up to them , to make them durchspringen , as you can see on this picture .
well , we &apos;ve launched the mayor of belloch .
it &apos;s very like him .
and we got the mission to design a building on the fly .
we called it the digital water .
the whole building was made out of water .
there &apos;s no doors or windows , but if you &apos;re approaching it , it will open up and turn it into it .
the roof was also covered with water .
and if it &apos;s a windy , if you want to reduce the spritzen , you can actually leave the roof down .
or you could close the building and the whole architecture , you know , this days , if you put the roof , you get images of people who were there and say , &quot; they have the building . &quot;
no , they don &apos;t have the building , it &apos;s just that architecture disappear .
here you see how the building works .
you see the person who &apos;s wondering what &apos;s going on inside of the inside .
and here you see me , when i was trying to test the sensors that the water that doesn &apos;t get wet .
well , i should tell you what a night was happening when all the sensors .
but actually , it was a lot of fun fun .
all the children from zaragoza came to the building , because the way they were playing with the building was very different .
no longer that would open up to you , but a building that keeps still breaks and holes , and they had no more pausen , you had to get without getting wet .
and that was , for us , very exciting , because as a architects , engineers , thinking about how people think about how people , the things that we design .
but the reality is always unpredictable .
and this is the beauty of creating things that are used and interact with people .
now , here &apos;s a picture of the building with the physical bildpunkten , the bildpunkten of water and the projection .
and this is what we brought on this project that i &apos;m going to show you now .
imagine that these bildpunkte could actually start to fly .
imagine you could have little helicopter that fly through air , and each of you with a little bildpunkt with a little bildpunkt with wechselndem light -- almost like a cloud that can move through the space .
here &apos;s the video .
imagine a helicopters , like the front you saw earlier that &apos;s going to move out with others .
you can have these cloud .
you can have a kind of flexiblen screen or display , like this -- a smooth formation in two dimensions .
or , but a lot of it in three dimensions , where the light is changing , it &apos;s not the position of the bildpunkte .
you can play with different species .
imagine the screen could just be in different types of different types of different types or sizes of different types of wood .
but then the whole thing could be a 3d cloud of bildpunkten , which you can do and move through the way you can move out of the way that you can look at many .
this is a real flyfire-steuerung flyfire-steuerung , which herabsinkt the herabsinkt to form a gleichmäßiges v .
if you turn the lights on it , it looks like that , so as we saw it before .
imagine that every single one of people will be run .
it could have a single bildpunkt bildpunkt , who comes from people , from the movements of people or the dergleichen .
i want to show you something here .
we worked with roberto bolle , one of the best balletttänzer of our time -- the étoile at the metropolitan theater in the new york and the scala in milan -- we have his movements in 3d design to use it as a impuls for the flyfire .
this is what you see here .
on the left-hand side , they see the bildpunkte , the different eingefangenen .
it &apos;s a echtzeit-3d-scan and a bewegungsaufnahme .
so you can empathize the whole movement .
you can do that all the time .
but then once we all have bildpunkte , you can play with it and play with color and play play .
that &apos;s what we want to do as a possible practice for the flyfire .
i want to show you the latest project that we &apos;re working on .
it &apos;s something that we &apos;re working on the olympics in london .
it calls the cloud -- the cloud .
the idea is , again , imagine that we &apos;re going to change the people to do something and change the environment -- almost like we call it , wolkenbewegung , how to move a scheunentor , but with a cloud .
imagine everybody can give a little donation for a bildpunkt .
i think that the remarkable thing that has been the last decades of the last decades is that we are from a physical world to a digital world .
it has all over , knowledge , and makes it accessible through the internet .
today , we can -- and the campaign obama -- and the campaign came out of the world -- we can move from the digital world to the physical forces of the physical world .
that can be in our case that we use it to make it and create a symbol .
this is what &apos;s built in the city .
but tomorrow , it can be to put us on the challenges -- think about climate change or the co2 emissions -- how can we move from the digital world to the physical world .
so the idea is that we actually actually do people with engage in which they do things together .
the cloud is a cloud of bildpunkten , in the same way , as a real cloud of the particles .
and these particles are water , as our cloud is a cloud of bildpunkten .
it &apos;s a physical summit in london , but with bildpunkten .
you can move around and make different kinds of experiences .
you can actually look at it from the bottom , the most important moments of olympia 2012 and the same time , and it &apos;s as kind of connection to the community .
so both the physical cloud in the sky and something on the top of the top , you can go , like londons neuer .
you can walk .
and a kind of digital leuchtturm in the night -- but as a allerwichtigstes , a new kind of experience for all the experience to go to the top .
thank you . thank you .
as an artist , i &apos;m very important to me .
through my work , i &apos;m trying to express that people are not from nature and that everything are connected .
the first time i was in the first time in the antarctica , where i saw my first night .
i was ergriff by awe .
my heart raste , i was schwindelig , as i tried to figure out what was happening .
the container about me herum ragten feet out of the water . and i was only amazed that this is a snowflake on a different wildlife , year after year .
and eisberge eisberge are born as an organism or by turning out from eisschollen .
every one of a iceberg has its own individual personality .
they interact with their surroundings and their experiences .
some people are starting to aufzugeben and klammern to the bitter end , while others don &apos;t have any longer withstand and in a anfall dramatischer leidenschaft .
if you look at a iceberg , you think they &apos;re isolated , separately and alone , as we often see people often .
but the truth is far away from it .
as a function , i atme his vorzeitliche atmosphere .
while the iceberg , he puts up mineralstoffreiches drinking water , which is a lot of life .
i go to my desk on my desk , as i would make portraits of my ancestor , in the consciousness that you &apos;re in these individual moments that are going to be so close to this way .
it &apos;s not a death when you melt ; it &apos;s not a end , but a fortführung of your life cycle of the life .
a part of the ice in the eisbergen i &apos;m photographiere is very young -- some thousand years old .
and part of the ice is more than 100,000 years old .
the last images i &apos;d like to show you , show a iceberg that i &apos;ve got in kekertsuatsiak in greenland .
very rarely , you actually will actually witnessing an image of a rollenden iceberg .
here you see it .
on the left-hand side , you see a little boat .
this is about five feet long .
please notice it on the shape of the iceberg and where he &apos;s on the wasserlinie .
you can see here , he starts to roll , and the boat has moved to the other side , the man is there .
this is the average size of a grönland-eisbergs .
it turns out of 120 feet out of the water , or 40 feet .
and this video is in real time .
and just so , showing you the iceberg of his personality .
thank you .
my life is really extraordinary , really extraordinary , of working on some amazing projects .
but at the coolest , i &apos;ve ever been working on , it was the dude .
his name is tempt .
tempt was one of the leading graffitikünstler of the &apos; 80s .
then one day , he came back to walk back and said , &quot; paps , my legs . &quot;
and that was the outbreak of the .
tempt is completely paralyzed .
he can only use his eyes .
i was going to him .
i have a company that design and animations , so graffiti is a complex part of what we &apos;re in the art and achten .
so we decided to have tony -- tempt -- and his thing .
i met with his father and his brother and his brother , and he said , &quot; we &apos;ll give you this money , we &apos;ll give you this money .
what are you going to do with this ? &quot;
and his brother said , &quot; i just want to talk to tony .
i just want to just go back and i asked him , &quot; wait a minute , i don &apos;t -- i &apos;ve got stephen hawking -- cannot not communicate with those devices ? &quot;
and he replied , &quot; no , only if you &apos;ve heard the higher gesellschaftsschicht , and a remarkable insurance insurance is , you can really do that .
so the normal people are not accessible . &quot;
and i said , &quot; how are you going to be ? &quot;
anybody saw the film &quot; and taucherglocke , &quot; ? &quot;
so they communicate -- so you &apos;re running your fingers .
i staunte , &quot; very archaisch , how can this be ? &quot;
so i came with the need , just a check , and instead i posed a check , i didn &apos;t have the kind of thing that i had to know how i should be einlösen .
i &apos;m going to go to the place and his father and his father -- with the words , &quot; well , my proposal is : tony is going to be a device , and we &apos;ll find a way of going to make it back to his art .
because it &apos;s a farce that someone who &apos;s still carrying all that . &quot;
so i spoke to a few months later at a conference .
i met these people from grl , graffiti research , and they have a technology that allows them to go to every light on every surface and then draw with a laserpointer that just took the negative area .
so you &apos;re moving around and make them kunstinstallationen like this .
they say all things that are going up there , a life cycle .
it starts with the testes , then the schimpfwörter , then the bush-verleumdungen and the last people are doing the way in the last century .
but there was always a life cycle in their presentations .
so i went to dinner and she was struck by my wife and we thought , &quot; well , second , if it &apos;s the technology to make it , we can use a way of control that tempt can make a laser control , so that it can make a laser steuern that would be brilliant . &quot;
this was the dawn of the journey .
and about two years later , a year later , after a lot of organization and lots of organization and lots of things , and it &apos;s all about things , we &apos;ve got some things .
first , we have the insurance doors , and actually have a device that can get a device with the er that he can communicate -- a stephen hawking-maschine .
that was incredible .
and it &apos;s really extremely funny -- i call him yoda , because you talk about him , or get a email , and you &apos;re going to be a email , and you &apos;re like , &quot; i &apos;m so unwürdig , this dude is incredible . &quot;
and we also have seven programmers from all over the world -- literally from all of the corners of the world -- to us home .
my wife , my kids , my kids , and i &apos;ve gone into garage , and those hackers and programmers and programmierer and anarchisten and anarchisten have our house .
many of our friends thought that we were beautiful to do that and we were zurückkämen and all images on the walls , we were wären .
but for two weeks , we &apos;ve been programmed , we went to strandpromenade in venice , my children were involved in venice , my dog , and we created this .
it &apos;s called eyewriter and you can see the description .
this is a cheap sonnenbrille that we bought on the strandpromenade of venice , something kupferdraht and a few things out of the sand and the elektronikhandel .
we took a ps3-kamera , they have a led-licht , and now we have a device that is accessible to a led-licht -- you can build it out -- you can build it yourself , we put the code free , the software can download free .
so we have a device that is completely disconnected from constraints .
no insurance can be versicherung , can querstellen , querstellen , can be querstellen .
it &apos;s not a hospital .
every gelähmte can now be able to communicate with your eyes or draw .
thank you . thank you .
thank you very much , that was incredible .
so at the end of the two weeks , we went back to tempts .
i love this picture because it &apos;s the room of someone else , and that &apos;s his room .
now , there &apos;s all this rummel of the great unveiling before the great unveiling before the great unveiling .
and after a year of planning , two weeks , programmierarbeit programmierarbeit , nudelparties programmierarbeit and durchgemachten nights , drew the first time after seven years .
and this is a remarkable picture because this is his life support , and he looks about his life .
we have his bed net for that he can see .
we have a wireless set of a wall of the parkplatztes .
and he was going to do it again , in the beisein of his family and friends -- and you can just imagine what a feeling was in the parking lot .
so lustigerweise had to be in the parking lot of einbrechen , we were actually feeling zurecht as a part of the sprüher-szene .
and then he finally got to end up with an email , and i &apos;ve got the first time for the first time in seven years .
i &apos;ve got the feeling i got under the water and finally , someone else has moved down and i put my head down , and i can breathe . &quot;
isn &apos;t that ?
this is something like our kampfschrei .
that keeps us all over the drug and let us continue .
and we have to get a lot of work on this device .
it &apos;s a amazing device , but it &apos;s a zaubertafel alike .
and someone who has a memorable potential potential , the whole lot of things .
so we are in trying to figure out how to make it better , faster and stronger .
since this time we have received all sorts of recognition .
we won a few awards .
remember , it &apos;s free , nobody &apos;s paying us .
it comes out of our own pockets .
so that was , &quot; oh , that &apos;s fantastic . &quot;
armstrong twitterte over us , and then in december , has the time-magazine honored than one of the 50 best best inventions of 2010 , which was really neat .
the coolste thing is -- and the schließt thing the whole thing -- that this april april in the inner-city moca moca in the inner-city of los angeles will give a show of the streets of the streets .
and there are probably so much the toughest representatives of the straßenkunstszene -- banksy , shepard , shepard fairey , shepard fairey , caws -- all these guys are going to be there .
tempt is part of the show that &apos;s pretty wild .
so basically , if you &apos;re going to do something that &apos;s impossible , it &apos;s possible .
everything was in this room -- this stage , this computer , this microphone , the eyewriter , the eyewriter -- everything was impossible .
do it possible -- you all do here .
i &apos;m not a programmers , and i had never had a little bit of augenerfassungstechnologie , but i just got something , and i &apos;ve got to umgeben with amazing people so that we could put together something on the legs .
and this question should be on every single day , and you have to do something about them , and you have to do something that needs to be done , if not , when i don &apos;t , and if not , if i don &apos;t , who ?
thank you . thank you .
so i write for children , and probably america &apos;s most of america &apos;s most commonly gelesener .
and i say people always say that i don &apos;t want to go like a scientist .
you can have me as a farmer , or leather , but nobody ever voted .
today i want to tell you about the circles and the end .
well , a epiphany is for usually something that you find because you &apos;ve got it somewhere .
you &apos;re all about the block and it takes it as a revelation .
this is a painting of a circle .
one of my friends have made it -- richard bollingbroke .
it &apos;s the kind of complicated circle of what i want to tell you today .
my circle started at the time in the &apos; 60s , in stow , ohio , where i was the klassenschwuchtel .
i was the one who was in the jungentoilette of the green and blue , until a teacher saved my life .
they saved my life by using the toilet across the lehrerzimmer .
it did they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did , they did
she did it for three years , long , for it , for three years , it did it long .
and i had to go away from the city .
i had a thumb , i had 85 dollars , and it struck me to san francisco -- i found a lover -- and then in the &apos; 80s , i found it to be a work at aids-organisationen .
about three or four years ago , i received a call from this teacher , woman , who said , &quot; i have to see them .
i &apos;m sad that we &apos;ve never met each other as adults .
can you go to ohio , and please come along with the man , from which i know you &apos;ve found it .
and i should mention that i &apos;ve got bauspeicheldrüsenkrebs , and i want to ask you to go . &quot;
now , the next day we were in cleveland .
we looked at it , we laughed , we were looking , and we knew that they have to be in a hospice .
we found one for them , we took them up , and we &apos;re taking us to them , and we gave us to her family , because it was necessary to be necessary .
it was something that we knew .
and just as the woman who wanted me to know as adult as an adult , she said , she turned out to be a box of ash and got into my hands .
what happens was that the circle was the circle , it was a circle -- and the revelation of the revelation i &apos;ve been talking about .
the revelation , the death is a part of life .
it saved my life saved , and my partner and i retteten your own .
and you know , this part of life needs everything that &apos;s needed .
it takes truth and beauty , and i &apos;m so glad that this is so often today .
it takes just -- he needs love , love and delight and it &apos;s to give us to give those things .
thank you .
imagine a big explosion , while you &apos;re looking at 1,000 feet .
imagine a plane fully voll .
imagine a triebwerk , the klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack power .
this sounds scary .
well , i had a unique space on this day ; i sat on 1d .
i was the only one who could talk to the flugbegleitern .
so i looked at it , and they said , &quot; no problem , we have a couple of birds . &quot;
the pilot had already been the machine , and we weren &apos;t so far away .
you could see manhattan .
two minutes later , three things later , at the same time .
the pilot was the machine after the machine of the hudson river .
that &apos;s not the route .
he switches the engines .
imagine a geräuschloses airplane .
and then he said three words -- the emotionslosesten words i ever heard .
he says , &quot; bereitmachen squared &quot; to the song &quot; bereitmachen . &quot;
i didn &apos;t have to talk to the bordpersonal .
i could see it in your eyes , and i was , the life that was a lot of life .
i want to tell you three things that i learned about this day .
i learned that in a moment , everything else is different .
we have this lebensplan , we &apos;ve got these things we want to do in life , and i thought about all the people i wanted to reach out of a hand and didn &apos;t work , all the fences that i wanted to do , all the experiences i wanted to do , and never made the experience .
while i was thinking about that , i thought , &quot; i was saying , &quot; i &apos;m bad weine . &quot;
because if the wine is here , and the person is there , then i open it .
i don &apos;t want to move more organic in life .
and this urgency , this goal , has really changed my life .
the second thing i learned about this day -- and that was when we washington the george washington verfehlten , so much about haaresbreite -- because i thought , there &apos;s a thing that i really enjoyed .
i had a good life .
in my own humanity and with my mistakes , i strebte , i &apos;ll be better to be better in everything i &apos;m anpackte .
but in my humanity , i &apos;ve given my ego space .
and i bedauerte the time i wasted bedeutungslose things for bedeutungslose things , with people who mean something .
and i thought about the relationship with my wife , to friends .
and then , when i was thinking , i decided to go to the negative energy from my life .
it &apos;s not perfect , but it &apos;s much better .
i didn &apos;t have two years anymore with my wife .
it feels great .
i &apos;m not trying to do more , right ; i &apos;m happy to be happy .
the third thing i learned -- and while the internal clock , &quot; 15 , 14 , 13 , 13 , 13 , &quot; herunterzuzählen . &quot;
you can see the water coming out .
i said , &quot; please flieg in the air . &quot;
i don &apos;t want to see this thing in 20 parts , how you know it from classical .
while we &apos;ve got , i had this sense , human , to be a mensch .
almost as we would prepare for our lives .
but it was very sad .
i didn &apos;t want to go ; i love my life .
and these sadness in a mind is really in a thought , which is that i just wish to write one thing .
i wish i could see my children grow up .
about a month after i visited a auftritt , erstklässler -- erstklässler , not much more künstlerisches talent ...
... still .
and i &apos;m feiere , i think of like a little child .
and in the world , it &apos;s making a sense of me .
i realized that i was realized by the dots of the other people who are just about to be a great father .
more than everything , everything else is , my only purpose in life is a good father .
i was told that miracle , that day not die .
i received another gift , which is to see the future , and to go and live differently .
my name for all of the things that fly today is : imagine the same thing happening on your flight -- please -- but think it &apos;s going to be , and how would you change ?
what would you do that she would do because they think they would be forever ?
how would you change your relationships and the negative energy in it ?
and more than anything else , they are the best parents you can only be ?
thank you . thank you .
the idea behind the stuxnet computer-wurm is pretty straightforward .
we don &apos;t want to build the bomb .
the most important site for the development of nuclear weapons is the uran-anreicherungs-einrichtung in natanz .
the gray boxes that you see here , these are echtzeit-kontrollsysteme .
now , if it comes to the systems that we can control systems , which is drehzahlen and valves , then we can actually do a lot of problems with the centrifuge .
these gray boxes don &apos;t walk with windows-software ; they &apos;re based on a completely different technology .
but if we can do it , a effective windows-virus windows-virus is a laptop einnistet , which is used by a wartungsingenieur , to konfigurieren this gray box , then we are in business .
and this is the planning behind stuxnet .
so we start with a windows-dropper .
the nutzdaten are going to be the graue , and the iranische zentrifuge and the iranian kernenergie-programm verzögert -- mission .
this is a breeze , right ?
i want to tell you how we &apos;ve figured out .
when we started to stuxnet our research in front of six months ago , was completely unknown , which was the purpose and purpose of the konstrukts .
the only thing we knew is very , very complicated , which is the windows- part of the body , the dropper- , he made thousands of thousands of unzähligen zero- .
and it seemed to be a little bit of vorzuhaben , with these gray boxes , this echtzeit- kontrollsystemen .
the erregte of our attention and we started a labor- project where we built our environment with stuxnet , and we had this gathering .
and then something funny happened .
stuxnet , like a laborratte , which doesn &apos;t really liked our cheese -- schnüffelte , but didn &apos;t want to eat it .
that made me no sense .
and after we had to have been trained with various kinds of cheese , i told me that this is a gezielter attack .
entirely on a particular goal .
the dropper streift actively actively active on the gray box when a special configuration was discovered , even when the special program that &apos;s going on to do that goal .
and if not , you don &apos;t do anything .
so , the really really , really , and we started working on it , almost around the clock , because i thought , well , we don &apos;t know what the goal is .
it might say , for example , a us- american power plant , or a chemieanlage in germany .
so we should look better at what the goal is .
so we extrahierten and we dekompilierten the angriffs- code , and what we found is that he &apos;s in two digital sprengköpfe of digital warheads -- a smaller and a bigger .
and also , we noticed that they were very professional constructed , from people who obviously had all insider- information to the information .
they knew all bits and bytes that they had to attack .
probably you even knew it even the schuhgröße of the maschinenbedieners .
so they knew everything .
and if you have already noticed that the dropper of stuxnet complex and high-tech is , let me tell you , the nutzdaten are a science for itself .
it &apos;s much more than all of us have ever seen .
here you see a clip from this angriffs- code .
we &apos;re talking about -- about 15,000 lines of code .
looks pretty much like altmodische assemblersprache .
and i want to tell you how we were able to get into this code .
so what we were looking at is , as we were systemfunktions- , were systemfunktions- aufrufe , because we know what those do .
and then we started to timern and datenstrukturen and trying to bring these with the real world in relation to the real world in the real world .
so we needed theories about these goals , which we were able to prove it or we could prove .
to start thinking about that , we call it definitely to be hochgradige sabotage , it has to be a hochwertiges goal and very likely to be in iran because there are the most infections .
now , in this area there &apos;s not several goals .
it &apos;s basically the hinaus on the buschehr and auf on the urananreicherungsanlage in natanz .
so i said to my assistant , &quot; i &apos;m a bring list of all the experts in the experts and kraftwerke power of our own . &quot;
and i called them and zapfte her knowledge to know their expertise with the code that we &apos;ve found in the code and we &apos;ve found out of the data .
and it worked very well .
so , it was possible to bring the little digital digital circuit with the rotorsteuerung .
the present is this moving part of the centrifuge , these black objects that you see .
and if you &apos;re manipuliert the speed of this rotors , you actually actually have the rotor to crack the world and then even the zentrifuge .
what we also have is that the goal of the attack actually was actually getting out and have a lot of time to empower -- apparently in the trying to let them break and not to get the ability to get quickly .
the big digital sprengkopf -- we got a glimpse of that , by looking at very much data and datenstrukturen .
so for example , the number of 164 &apos;s future is very , very out of this code ; you can &apos;t miss it .
i started to build scientific literature , and it &apos;s made of how those zentrifugen are built in natanz and found that they are structured in sogenannten , and every kaskade enthält enthält .
so it makes sense , it &apos;s because it &apos;s together .
and it was better .
these zentrifugen in iran are actually divided in 15 .
and guess what we found in the angriffscode ?
a almost identical structure .
so again , the magic is really well together .
and this gave us a big confidence for this , which we saw here .
well , don &apos;t get me wrong , that wasn &apos;t just that i couldn &apos;t just get out of this .
this results were achieved by several weeks of work .
and often we went out to be a sackgasse and we had to put ourselves in a sackgasse .
anyway , we found that both digital warheads was in reality , and the same goal , but it &apos;s from different directions .
the little sprengkopf takes a kaskade , and überdreht the rotors and slowed it and verlangsamt them and große große , and manipuliert ventile .
so , in the large and all of us , we &apos;re very hopeful that we actually have to have the goal .
it &apos;s natanz , and it &apos;s just natanz .
so we don &apos;t have to worry that other goals could be met .
here &apos;s something really cool stuff that we &apos;ve discovered -- really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really
there &apos;s the gray box , and the top is going to see the zentrifugen .
now , what this thing is , it &apos;s the eingehenden values of sensors -- so , for example -- and it &apos;s legitimen code , who &apos;s still available during the attack , with wrong , with fake , to the wrong .
and in fact , this false origin of stuxnet before before .
so it &apos;s just like in hollywoodfilmen , where the verfolgungsjagd is fed through before the überwachungskamera überwachungskamera .
this is cool , right ?
the idea of this is not just , it &apos;s not just the maschinenbediener in the control system .
in fact , it &apos;s a lot of dangerous and a lot .
the idea is to have a digital sicherheitssystem .
we need digital sicherheitssysteme of the place where a human maschinenbediener can &apos;t respond to the human rights .
so in a power station , if the great dampfturbine is going to fast , you have to open up entlastungsventile within milliseconds .
of course , this cannot be done by a human transit .
so we need digital sicherheitssysteme .
and if the risk is , then really bad things happen .
the power plant can explode .
and neither the maschinenführer , the sicherheitssystem will notice it .
this is scary .
but it gets worse .
and what i &apos;m now saying is very important .
think about it . that &apos;s the attack is generisch .
it has nothing to do with zentrifugen , with urananreicherung .
so he would work well as well -- in a power station or a automobilfabrik .
it &apos;s generisch .
and you don &apos;t have to -- as the attacker -- you don &apos;t have to have the nutzdaten , you don &apos;t have to have a usb- stick on how we saw it on stuxnet .
you could use ordinary wurm- technology to spread .
you just have to get this way of how possible .
and if you do that , you get a cyber- massenvernichtungswaffe .
this is the consequence that we need to ask .
so unfortunately , the biggest number of goals for those attacks are not in the middle east .
they &apos;re lying in the united states , in europe and japan .
so all these green areas , these are the most primitive environments .
we have to put the consequences and we start to prepare for us .
thank you . thank you .
i have a question .
ralph , it was very much of that people assume that the mossad is the hauptorganisation .
is that it also ?
okay , you want to know that really ?
yeah . okay . okay .
my view is the mossad industry , but the driving force is not israel .
so the driving force is the cyber- superpower .
there &apos;s only one , and those are the united states -- luckily , luckily .
because otherwise , our problem would be even bigger .
thank you for us to have a heidenangst eingejagt . thank you .
i spent the last few years in situations that normally work in situations which usually is very difficult to do , and the same time somehow is dangerous .
i went to prison .
i &apos;ve worked in a kohlebergwerk -- dangerous . dangerous .
i filmed in kriegsgebieten -- difficult and dangerous .
and i spent 30 days with the beginning , nothing to eat -- it &apos;s a little bit of a very difficult thing in the middle , very dangerous at the end .
actually , i &apos;ve been exposed to the biggest part of my career in my career , and it all of the things that &apos;s happening for trying to do , social designs , and hopefully , and hopefully , and hopefully , in a way that they do for the audience and accessible .
so when i knew that i would come here to look at the world of branding and sponsoring , i knew i would make something slightly different .
some of you may have heard that i &apos;ve got a couple of weeks ago a couple of weeks ago .
i went to a few facebook-nachrichten , some twitter-nachrichten , and i gave people the opportunity to erstehen the namensrechte of my tedtalk .
really , some happy people , and companies , the unique opportunity -- because i &apos;m sure that chris anderson will never ever again -- the namensrechte of the talk that you &apos;re never going to be able to get a title , a lot of time , and not many clues to the point that i had to be in the subject .
so what you got here , you know , my name here : my tedtalk you have no idea what the subject is , especially if i could be able to fliegen their company for their participation .
but it &apos;s just about it , it &apos;s a very good fortune to do that .
you know how many people look at these tedtalks ?
a lot of lots .
this is just the arbeitstitel .
so despite this warning , i knew that somebody would buy the namensrechte .
if you &apos;ve been asked this , i would have been able to have been able to say this with certainty .
but in the new project i work on , my new film , we examine the world of marketing , the commercials .
as i said , i &apos;ve been doing some of the years in some of the years , but nothing could prepare me , nothing could be vorbereiten , and i couldn &apos;t get to me anything that &apos;s hard to go and go to a room like this .
you know , i had the idea for a film .
what i want to do is a film about product placement , marketing and advertising , which is funded all the film , which is funded by product placement , marketing and advertising .
and the film is going to be &quot; the greatest movie ever sold . &quot;
so what &apos;s happening in &quot; the greatest movie sold , is that everything from the top to the end , completely with tags -- from the titelsponsor you &apos;re going to see in the movie that is the tag of the tag of the marke .
now this tag , the qualcomm stadion , the staples center -- the staples center .
these people will be connected to the film -- forever .
and so the movie is going to investigate this whole idea -- this is what ? in eternity , forever ?
i &apos;m a redundante person .
that was more to the emphasis .
it was in eternity , &quot; in eternity . &quot;
but we &apos;re not only going to just have the tag x than titelsponsor , but we &apos;ll make sure that we are going to sell each other to the film .
so we might sell a shoe and he becomes the greatest shoe that you &apos;ve ever got .
the greatest car that you ever are , from &quot; the greatest movie sold , &quot; the greatest drink that you &apos;ve ever had , a coverage of the greatest ever sold . &quot;
so the idea is to show you that the tags of life is that the tags of life is actually , to get them to finance the film ?
and we actually show the whole process of how it works .
the goal of all the time is transparency .
they &apos;re going to see the whole thing in the movie of the statten .
so this is the whole concept , the whole film , from beginning to end .
and i would enjoy if ceg would help make this happen .
you know , it &apos;s funny because when i first heard it , it &apos;s the ultimate respect for the audience .
i don &apos;t know how to be empfänglich people .
you have to use a perspective -- i don &apos;t want to use the point , because that has a negative konnotation -- but you know how to do that ?
how much money needs to need to realize that ?
1.5 million .
i think it &apos;s hard to meet them , but i think it &apos;s worth spreading , some of the really profound candidate in the process of the process .
who knows when the movie comes out , we might see a horde vollidioten .
what do you think it will be ?
the answer is probably going to be extremely likely .
but it &apos;s a tough thing for the film , or a difficult thing to me ?
jk : both .
... so , not so optimistic .
so , my lord , can you help me ? i need help .
i can help .
okay . okay .
fantastic amazing .
we have to think that &apos;s what brands .
yeah . yeah .
if you look at the people who have to do it -- you have to do it .
there are some locations that we can turn to .
put the camera out .
i thought , &quot; imagine the camera , &quot; would you want to make a hintergrundgespräch .
it turns out that it was actually meant , &quot; we want to do with your film . &quot;
and just so disappeared , all of these companies , one after the other .
no one wanted to do with the film .
i was amazed .
they didn &apos;t want to do anything with the project .
and i was confused , because i thought the whole concept was the idea of advertising , your product as possible as possible as possible as possible as possible as possible .
especially in the world today , on this interface of new and old media and the zerstückelten media -- isn &apos;t the idea that the new exciting is vermittlungsinstrument that the masses is that the mass of that message .
no , that was what i thought .
but you see , the problem was that my idea had a fatalen mistake , and that was the .
actually , no , that wasn &apos;t the mistakes at all .
this would be not a problem .
that would be okay .
but this is what this picture is , is a problem .
you see , if you &apos;re transparency at the google-suche , it &apos;s the -- this is one of the first images that seems to be .
i like to do your species , sergey brin . now .
this was the problem : transparency , frei and tücke , just to detect täuschung and durchschauen ; it &apos;s understandable to informationen the access to information , especially what &apos;s geschäftspraktiken -- the last one , the last one is certainly the biggest problem .
you know , we &apos;re now hearing a whole lot of transparency .
our politicians say , our president , it says , even our ceos .
but when it comes to it , it &apos;s going to be implemented , changes anything .
why ? well , transparency is fear -- like this strange bear , the still still brüllt .
it &apos;s unvorhersagbar -- like this strange landstraße .
and it &apos;s also very risky .
what else is there ?
a whole wonderful sheet of ate eat .
this is very risky .
so when i started talking to companies and tell them that we wanted to tell those stories , they said , &quot; no , we want you to talk .
we want you to tell a story , but we just want to tell you that you &apos;re playing our story . &quot;
and you see , when i was a kid , and my father was a lie -- and he sits with this look at -- he would say , &quot; my son , there &apos;s three versions of three .
there &apos;s your version , there &apos;s my version , and there &apos;s the true version . &quot;
so you can see , with this movie , we wanted to tell the real version .
but there was a company to help us -- and it &apos;s just because i &apos;ve been doing john bond for years -- i noticed that i had to do it alone , i had to deal with the mittelsmann , i had to deal with the mittelsmann and right with my team .
so what you started to understand -- or what i began to understand -- was that when you start speaking with these companies that &apos;s the idea of how your brand is understood , a pressing problem .
i have friends , the big , giant hollywood-filme , and i have friends who do small amounts of things like me .
and my friends , the big , huge hollywood-filme , say that the reason why their movies are so successful that you have .
and then my friends say , the little independent-filme , &quot; well , how should we compete with these big , giant hollywood-filmen compete ? &quot;
and the film is called &quot; the greatest movie ever . &quot;
so what are we going to see in the film ?
whenever i go on the path , and whenever i open up the medizinschrank , you &apos;ll see ban deodorant .
and every time i get somebody , i can say , &quot; are you going to have the fresh enough for this interview ?
are you as much ? you see a little bit .
i want to help you .
so maybe you should be a little bit of this to buy this . &quot;
and then we offer one of those amazing düfte .
either &quot; floral fusion &quot; or a paradise winds , &quot; you &apos;ll have the choices .
we &apos;re going to be both for men as well as women , and i &apos;m stuck , roll-on , or a stick , whatever .
this is the kurzfassung .
now i can answer your questions and give you a ausfühliche .
we are a smaller token .
as you &apos;ve been talking about the smaller films , we are as a brand .
so we don &apos;t have a budget like other tokens .
so these things -- you know , remember , people on the ban -- that &apos;s somehow why we &apos;re interested .
what words would you describe ?
the ban is blank .
this is a great question .
frau technology .
technology is not the way you describe something that &apos;s going to describe it under the achseln .
we talk about bold , fresh .
i think &quot; frisch &quot; is a great word that this category really makes really positive power to the gegensatz odor and humidity . &quot;
it keeps you fresh .
how can we keep them up to the fresh fresh -- better fresh , more fresh , three times .
these things have a positivere effect .
and this is a millionen-konzern .
what about me ? what about the druchschittstypen ?
i have to talk to the man on the street , which are like me , like me .
you should tell me something about my brand .
how would you describe your brand ?
hmmm , my brand ?
i don &apos;t know .
i like to really enjoy nice clothing .
80er revival meets skaterpunk , except on the waschtag .
well , what &apos;s the tag of the brand ?
unique .
i think the genre , the style that i &apos;ve got , &quot; dark glamour . &quot;
i like many black colors , many grautöne and such a stuff .
but normally i have a accessoire , like sonnenbrillen , or a jewelry and such a candy .
if dan dan , he would probably probably probably a classic mercedes mercedes .
man 2 : the brand i am , i would say , lässige fly .
partly options , partly , part of the yogi , partly brooklyn-mädchen -- i don &apos;t know .
man 3 : i &apos;m the schmusetyp .
i sell schmusetiere throughout the entire country , world .
so i think that &apos;s my brand .
this is my brand in my little , verzerrten industry .
man four : my brand is fedex because i were ausliefere .
man five five 5 : brand gescheiteter alkoholsüchtiger schreiberling .
is that ?
i &apos;m a lawyer : i &apos;m a anwaltsmarke .
i &apos;m tom .
now , we can &apos;t all be the tom-marke , but i often see me often about the interface of dark glamour and lässiger fly .
and what &apos;s noticed was that i needed a experts .
i needed somebody who could turn into my head , someone who really could help me understand what &apos;s called the markenpersönlichkeit .
and so i found a company called olson zaltman in pittsburg .
they have companies like nestle , febreze , febreze , hallmark , diese , these markenpersönlichkeit .
if you could do it for the do , they could also help me .
they brought their pictures , right ?
i have this . the first picture is a picture of my family .
tell me just a little bit about how to relate to your mind and feelings about yourself .
these are the people who are weltsicht .
tell me the world from this world .
md : this world ? i think the world &apos;s world is the world where you live around , the friends , the friends , the family , the way that you live your life , the work , the work and so .
all of these things come together and start from a place , and for me , and i start with my family in west virginia .
what &apos;s the next thing about you .
next . this was the most beautiful day of my life .
what context is that the thought of the thought and feelings about them ?
it &apos;s like i want to be .
i like things that are different .
i like things that are queer . i like to do things .
tell me about why &quot; why &quot; -phase -- what does it do you ?
what is the machete ? in which puppenstadium is you &apos;re currently right ?
why is it important , neuzustarten ? what represents the red ?
tell me a little bit about this part .
a little bit more about you that &apos;s not you .
what other metamorphosen have they have gone through ?
... not to be afraid . in what kind of rollercoaster is ?
eeeeee ! no , thank you .
thank you very much for your patience .
yeah . well , well .
yeah , i don &apos;t know what &apos;s going on .
there &apos;s a lot of kooks .
the first thing i saw was that the markenpersönlichekti of the markenpersönlichekti had two separate , but it turns out to be ergänzende pages -- the morgan spurlock-marke is a achtsame / brand .
it &apos;s very good .
and i think there &apos;s a lot of a contradiction .
and i think some companies will only focus on a strength , instead of having on both of them .
many companies tend to -- and this is the human nature -- and that &apos;s the human nature -- things that you &apos;re not sure , you &apos;re not going to be afraid , and they turn them up , and they turn them into something that &apos;s actually heißen into something that &apos;s a geschickter schachzug .
what other brands are doing ?
the first is a classic , apple .
and you can see it here , target , wii , mini , mini of mini and jetblue .
now , there are verspielte tags and achtsame brands , these things coming up and go and go , but a verspielte , achtsame brand is quite a strong thing .
a achtsame , verspielte brand . how is your brand ?
if you would ask them to describe their markenidentität , their markenpersönlichkeit , how would you ?
they &apos;re a up-attribut ? are you something that &apos;s the blood in your body fluids ?
or are you more likely to be a down-attribut ?
are you something that &apos;s a little bit of weekends , reservierter , konservativer ?
up-attribute are things that are the verspielt , fresh , frisch like the fresh , zeitgemäß , abenteuerlich , abenteuerlich , ausgefallen , ausgefallen and lieblich like erol flynn , agile and agile , magisch , magisch , magisch and mystisch like gandalf .
or are you more like a down-attribut ?
they &apos;re achtsam and mondän like 007 ?
they &apos;re called , traditional , pflegend , pflegend , beschützend , compassionate , compassionate ?
are you reliable , stable , familiär , sicher , geborgen , sacred , heilig , bedacht , and the way the dalai lama or yoda ?
in the course of the film , we had more than 500 companies that were sitting and down-firmen and the down-firmen , &quot; no , &quot; because they were not part of the project .
they didn &apos;t want to do anything with this movie because they don &apos;t have control , no control over the finished product .
but then , 17 markenpartner , who were willing to make these control , they were so much to do with somebody and verspielt , and the rest of us , and then we finally get to tell stories that we can &apos;t tell -- stories that would never feed a werber .
they befähigten us to tell the history of neuromarketing , as we tell the history in this film , that you use the lustzentren of the brain to make the lustzentren of the brain , both to make an advert as well .
we went to sao paulo where außenwerbung had been banned .
in the entire city , since five years , there &apos;s no anzeigentafel , no posters , no flyer , nothing .
and we went to school where companies have their way their way to go to the verarmte schools , in all america .
the incredible thing that i &apos;ve got most of the things i &apos;ve got most of the feedback , or where i had the biggest success , which is where i &apos;m going to do things with things .
and this is what these tags have done .
because they umgingen the mittelsmann , they umgingen the agencies , and they said that the agencies might not have their interest in the sense .
i &apos;m going to negotiate with the artist .
i &apos;m going to work with him and make something completely different , something that people think that our world &apos;s future .
and how was it for you ? what it &apos;s successful ?
well , there &apos;s been film festival in the film festival , we can look at this .
now , according to the united states , the republican in january , and since -- and that &apos;s not even the whole thing -- there was 900 million aufrufe of this film .
this is actually only a 24-hour period of two weeks .
this is just online -- no press , no television .
the film was not yet not yet .
there &apos;s not even not even online . no streaming .
it &apos;s not going to go in other countries out .
well , finally , the film has a very big momentum .
and this is not bad for a project where almost every werbeagentur , with the languages that we talked about their clients that have been empfohlen .
something i &apos;m noticing , is that if you have your chance to make the chance , risks , to put those risks in these risks .
i think if you &apos;re sitting there , you get them closer .
i think if you were to trained your employees to avoid risks , you have the whole company to get a place .
i have the sense that we need to encourage people to go into the lab .
we need to encourage people to have no fear to have the opportunity that you might have .
finally , at the end , we should embrace the fear .
we should put the bear in the cage .
so , you &apos;re welcome the fear . you don &apos;t think the risk .
one of the big spoon , so , so we &apos;re going to welcome the risk .
and finally , we should be welcome .
today , more than ever before , let &apos;s get a little bit of a lot of fun .
and the same thing , my transparenz , my face , my face , &quot; welcome to transparency , &quot; which is a transparency for transparency , &quot; you &apos;ve been präsentiert with my good friends of emc , which is $ dollars for the namensrechte .
big data for organizations on the world in great opportunities .
emc presents präsentiert , &quot; you know , &quot; welcome to transparency . &quot;
thank you very much .
now morgan , in the name of transparency , which is now exactly the same thing with $ 7100 ?
this is a great question .
i got a check in my pocket , and it displayed the oberorganisation of the ted-organisation , the sapling-stiftung -- a check in the höhe of dollars , to fund my ted-auftritt in the next year .
my name is amit .
i took another thing in the front of the google and i went to google , and i regte something with museums and art . my chefin , who is still green light .
and it took 18 months .
a lot of spaßiger and stories that i can tell you , with 17 very interesting museums .
but i &apos;m going to focus on the demo .
there &apos;s a lot of stories about why we did this .
i think my personal view is very simple with this slide and their access .
i grew up in india .
i was a great education education -- i didn &apos;t -- but i had to have a lot of museums and that trial didn &apos;t have access to .
when i went traveling and to visit this museums , i started learning a lot .
and as i worked for google , i tried to do this desire -- art of making art -- to lead technology together .
we put a team , a great amount of oil , and we started this .
i &apos;m going to start with the demonstration , and you &apos;ll tell you some interesting things that happened since the beginning .
so you can just get to googleartproject.com. too much .
you can stand in all these museums here .
there &apos;s the uffizi , the moma , the hermitage , the rijks , van gogh .
i even come in one of my favorite , the metropolitan museum of art .
you come up on two because of it -- very simple .
click , and wumms , is you in the museum .
it doesn &apos;t matter where they are -- bombay , mexico , it doesn &apos;t make any difference .
you go around and shine .
you want to get in the museum ?
open the map , and you jump with a click .
they &apos;re in the end of the gangs .
just continued . much fun .
your hands .
thank you , but the best is still coming .
now i &apos;m a lieblingsbilder , , erntearbeiter of pieter breugel in the met .
i see this pluszeichen .
if the museum is given the picture , you click on it .
now this is one of the images .
this is all the metadata .
those of you who really are interested in art , can you get here , but i &apos;ll go away .
this is one of the images that we &apos;ve been festgehalten with the so-called sogenannten .
this is about 10 billion bildpunkte , i believe .
and a lot of people ask me , &quot; what &apos;s going to be for 10 billion ? &quot;
so i &apos;ll show you now , i &apos;m going to show you now .
you can really easily light and rauszoomen .
you see something funny here .
i love this guy ; his word is unaffordable .
but then you really want to really deep deep .
and so i started playing around around , and i noticed that there &apos;s something that &apos;s going on .
and i thought , &quot; wait a minute that sounds interesting . &quot;
i went to the time , and i noticed slowly , that these children actually have something .
i went out a little bit with some familiar with some familiar , and actually found it to a game called squail , where a goose hit the fastnachtsdienstag with a stick with a stick .
ostensibly was very popular .
i don &apos;t know why she did it , but i learned something about it .
to go really close to the way you can go to the middle .
just to give you the phone , i zoome , so you can see what you get .
here we were , and this is the paintings .
the best thing comes out of it -- in a second .
let &apos;s jump to the moma , again , in new york .
another lieblingsbild of me , sternennacht .
so , in the previous example , it was about finding the details , to find the details of the einzelheiten .
but what if you want to see the pinselstriche ?
and what &apos;s only if you want van gogh syndrome ?
you put zoomed in . you can actually go into .
i &apos;m going to zoom in one of my lieblingsteile in this image until i really am in the middle .
this is sternennacht , probably never seen before .
now i &apos;m going to show you my favorite function .
there &apos;s a lot of other things , but i &apos;m missing the time .
this is the really cool part , which is called collections .
each of you , everyone -- just whether or poor , if you have a great house -- doesn &apos;t matter .
you can go and create the own museum of the museum -- from all these images , they can put their own collection .
just simple , they go inside -- and i &apos;ve created this , it &apos;s called the power of the zoom -- you can umherzoomen .
this is the gesandten &apos; gesandten , in the nationalgallerie .
you can send it all with you , you can send your friends , and you know , a conversation start to do that if you &apos;re looking at these masterpieces .
i think , finally , for me , the main thing that all of the wonderful things are not coming from google .
they &apos;re not going to go from the museums .
i should not say that .
they come from the artists .
and this was an experience in humility .
i mean , i hope that we &apos;re going to be able to do this with this digital medium of art , and they &apos;re going to represent them .
and this is the biggest question that i &apos;ve been asked , &quot; did you have this to replicate the experience of a museumsbesuchs ? &quot;
the answer is no .
it should be the experience .
that &apos;s why it &apos;s . thank you .
thank you . thank you .
this is a rendition of your brain . your brain can be divided into two hälften .
this is the left half that &apos;s the logical side , and then the right half that is the intuitive .
if we had a scale to measure the aptitute of any hemisphere , we could make your brain .
for example , this one would be , that someone &apos;s completely obvious .
this is somebody who &apos;s completely intuitive .
now , where would you be your brain on this scale ?
some of us have decided to be settled on one of these extremes , but i think that most people in the audience , your brain looks like this -- with a high school , which is at the same time in both hemispheres .
it &apos;s not as if you &apos;re both of them or so .
you can be logically and intuitive .
and so i &apos;m looking at the one of the individuals , collectively with most other experimental quantenphysikern , which is a good percentage of logic to make the complex ideas .
but at the same time , we need a good percentage of intuition to actually actually get experiments in experiments .
how do we develop this intuition ? well , we love to play with things .
so we go out and play it and look like it , then look at how it responds . and then we start to develop our intuition .
they basically do the same thing .
so one of the intuitions that they &apos;ve developed over the years , is that a thing that &apos;s going to be at the same time in a place .
i mean , it can be strange to think that a thing at the same time in two different locations , but they were not born with this idea .
i remember a kid playing a child at a time .
it was a kleinkind , and not very good at it , and he noticed constantly .
but i bet that it &apos;s the play with the bodenschwelle of a very valuable lesson , which is the big things that you can &apos;t just start and stay on one .
and this is a great konzeptionelles model of the world , so long they don &apos;t have a teilchenphysiker .
it would be a natural model for a teilchenphysiker , because they don &apos;t play with bodenschwellen , but with these little odd particles .
and if you play with your particles , you put all kinds of weird things -- how you fly directly through walls , or that they can be at the same time at two different places .
and so they all wrote all these observations , and they called the theory of quantum mechanics .
this was the one of the physics of a few years ago ; you needed quantum little particles to describe little particles .
but you didn &apos;t need them to describe the great everyday objects around us .
this has not a intuition , and that might just be because i don &apos;t have a lot of things with particles .
well , i play sometimes with them , but not very often .
and i &apos;ve never seen them .
i mean nobody ever seen a particle .
but my own side doesn &apos;t have it .
because if all of the things are made out of particles and all these particles of the rules of quantum mechanics , then you should not know anything that &apos;s the rules of quantum mechanics ?
i don &apos;t see why that should be this .
so i would have a better sense of the whole thing when we could demonstrate , that alltagsgegenstände also have the rules of quantum mechanics .
so i made me a few years ago , i did this .
i created one .
this is the first object that you can see that was in the quantenmechanischen .
so what we &apos;re looking at here is a tiny computer .
and you can see this green dot there in the middle .
this is the piece of metal i &apos;m going to talk about .
this is a picture of the object .
and i &apos;ll zoom out there . we look at the center here .
and here &apos;s a really big close-up of this little piece of this little piece of metal .
so what we &apos;re looking at is a little piece of metal it is like a springboard and it stands over the edge .
so i did this thing on similar way that you do a computer .
i went to a clean room with new siliziumscheiben , and rackerte rackerte for 100 hours to 100 hours .
for the last little bit , i had to build my own machine -- to make this a swimming pool , and get the thing .
this thing has the ability to be in the quantenmechanischen superposition , but it takes a little help to do it .
look , let me give you a analogy .
you know how uncomfortable it is in a crowded elevator ?
i mean , if i &apos;m alone in the elevator , i &apos;ll do all kinds of weird things , but then i go and go and do it on all these things because i don &apos;t want to talk to you , or frankly , they &apos;re verschrecke .
so quantum mechanics says that unbewegliche objects are just as much .
the mitfahrer for unbewegliche objects are not only humans , but the light that seems to be on it and the wind that will lead to you and the heat of the space .
and so we knew that if we wanted to see that piece of metal acts as it was quantenmechanisch , we had to get rid of all the mitreisenden out .
and we did .
we &apos;ve put the light on a vacuum , put it into a vacuum and saugten the whole air , and it kühlten it up to the now , the whole metal , was the piece of metal , as always as always .
so we measured his movement .
we found that it really is really strange .
instead of that there &apos;s just a steady of it because it &apos;s just calm down there , the way it was like this -- like a ausdehnender and together ziehender ziehender .
we had a little push , we could not have to vibrate at the same time and not to vibrate -- something that &apos;s only in the quantum mechanics .
so what i &apos;m telling you is what &apos;s really going to be a fantastic .
what does it mean for a object to the same time and not yet ?
let &apos;s think about the atoms .
so the first case : all the trillionen of atoms are there silently out there silently and the same time moving the same atoms and down .
only to präzisen stimmen you .
the rest of the time is .
the means that every atom in the same time , at two different locations , which is that the whole piece of the piece is that the whole piece of metal is in two different locations .
i think that &apos;s really cool .
really , really .
this was worth all of these new space in the clean space telescope , because , check that the massstabsunterschied between a single atom and this piece of metal is about as much as the difference between the piece and you .
so if a single atom can be at the same time in two different locations , this piece of metal can be in two different places , why don &apos;t you also do it ?
i mean , that &apos;s just what my own side says .
so , imagine you would be at the same time in multiple places , how would that feel ?
how would you deal with your consciousness that you &apos;re body in the room ?
there &apos;s another aspect of history .
when we aufwärmten it , the light bulb and the box reinschauten , we saw that the piece of metal are always in a piece of metal .
and so i had to develop this new intuition that it looks like all the objects in the elevator in reality , which are just a little objects that are in a little room that are in a small room .
you hear a lot of talk about how quantum mechanics says that everything is connected to everything .
now that &apos;s not really right ; it &apos;s not really right .
there &apos;s more more interesting than it is still .
it &apos;s so that these connections , their connections , with all the things around them , literally define who they are , and that &apos;s the tiefsinnige and the seltsame of the quantum mechanics .
thank you .
in 2007 , i decided we should think of economic development .
it should be our goal that when families are thinking about where they live and work on , you know , to be able to live between at least one hand , which is to grow up all of the different cities that are all in competition .
now we are at the moment we &apos;re far away from this goal .
there are billions of people in developing countries that don &apos;t even have a only city that you would welcome .
but the amazing thing about cities is that they are so much more worth than it costs to build it .
so we could actually be very simple with duzenden , maybe even hundreds of new cities .
now this sounds may sound , maybe , you might have never thought about new cities .
but they just keep the building of wohnungen versus the north .
imagine that half of the people who want to live in homes , and i &apos;ve already done it , but the other half are not .
you might try to expand the capacity of the capacity to the already existing homes .
but you know what you would like to go out to this homes and whose environment are to avoid the law to avoid the ausbau and ausbau .
so it turns out it &apos;s a very difficult to do that .
but you could go to a whole new place , a completely new building building , and that the laws would have a building that we would not have to help .
so i proposed that governments create new space that provide enough space to offer enough space for a city and have given them a name .
later , i figured out that , about the same time , javier and octavio , and octavio about the challenge of a reform .
they knew that every year , they were talking about the country to go into the united states , and they wanted to know what they could do to make sure that those people can stay in their country and right in the same thing .
and this is what &apos;s going on in the site , &quot; what happens if we just want to go into a message of the country , and if we go to a message of the kanadischen , and if people go to the united states , you can go to the united states , and you can go to the united states , you can do it , and
in 2009 , it was in the heftigen of 2009 , it was a heftigen verfassungskrise .
the next planmäßigen elections , won lobo in a turnaround , whose program both and schlichtung versprach .
he forderte octavio , his stabschef .
in the meantime , i prepared to go to a talk at tedglobal .
by improvement , try and through the study of consumers , i &apos;ve tried to reduce this complicated concept of the charter city to reduce the basic elements of the initial city .
the first point is the importance of laws , laws that are the ability that you don &apos;t have to be able to get in the existing citizen .
we &apos;re looking for new technologies , but for progress , it needs technologies and laws and laws , and it &apos;s usually laws of rules that we have .
in autumn , a friend of 2010 , a friend of guatemala in the link den the link .
again , the again , he showed him .
the two agencies were getting me .
and said , &quot; let &apos;s give us the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; the &quot; of our country . &quot;
so we met in december in december of a hotels in miami .
i &apos;ve been trying to make the precious cities to get much more than you &apos;re going to be .
and i used this chart to show how valuable rohland is in a place like new york . think that a area is worth a square meter of dollars in some cases of dollars .
but it was a pretty abstract discussion on a place when it was a pause , and he said , &quot; paul , we might have to look at the tedtalk . &quot;
so the original research is actually creating a place that &apos;s a place where a anfang city is a place where the law has to be able to go and find the opportunity to decide either , either under those rules or not .
so i was asked by the president of the präsidenten of the präsidenten that meant that we have to do that it &apos;s important to make our own country .
i was asked to get to tegucigalpa and get at the fourth and fifth of january of january of january .
so i &apos;ve given a another with facts talk , which is a graph like this includes this includes the same thing that tries to make that if you want to be much value in a city , it needs a very big city .
this is a picture of the city , and the sketch , the new airport that was built in the denver .
now , alone has a area of 100 quadratkilometern .
so i &apos;ve tried to convince the honduraner of you , if you want to build a new city , you have to start with a area of 1,000 1,000 .
these are more than 250 thousand acres .
now , are all applaudiert .
the faces of the audience were very serious and carefully .
the head of the congress came on the stage and said , &quot; professor romer , i thank you for your talk , but maybe we might look at the tedtalk .
i have him up here on my laptop . &quot;
so i went down , and you &apos;ve got the tedtalk .
and i &apos;ve come to the punch of the heart that a new city of new city is a new new opportunity .
there was a chance to live in a city that would be in honduras , instead of hundreds of kilometers in north .
and a new city includes new opportunities for leaders .
the executives of the government in honduras would be made from partnerländern , they could benefit from their partnerländern , which they would have to support the aufstellen of the laws of the law and support that everybody can trust that charter really .
and the discovery of präsident lobo was that the idea of the durchsetzung i thought was a way to build the foreign investors for the foreign investors that could be done for all the parties for all the parties that have been in the world for many years of suffering and mistrust .
we &apos;re in a area of dangers .
this picture is from this place .
it sums up a lot of conventional square miles .
and shortly after the 19th january , they &apos;ve been able to congress congress to have a change of the constitution to have a verfassungsgemäße , which is spezielle for special zulässig .
in a country that has a kind of crisis crisis behind behind , congress was in congress to a voice to a voice .
all parties , all the fraktionen of the society , supported this .
to be part of the constitution , it has to be approved for congress .
february february , it was a second time to 114 a voice .
so immediately after this election , between the 21st and the 24 february , he was a delegation about about 30 hunduranern locations that were most interested in the business of the städtebaus .
the one place is south korea .
this is a picture of a large hadron collider that built into south bronx built into südkorea as the stadtzentrum bostons .
all you can see on this slide , within four years , after four years , after four years , it has to have the power .
the other place that was very interested in the urbanism , singapore .
it has two cities in china , and the third is in preparation .
so if you look at it in a handy , it &apos;s the way we &apos;re now .
they already have a baugrundstück ; and they &apos;re looking at this area for the second city .
it &apos;s been working on a legal system that allows managern allows to participate , and it will work on a external system .
a country has already been gerichtshof with the supreme court as court for the entgültige appeal of the dortigen system .
also städtedesigner and -bauer are very interested .
they even get funding in a funding .
one thing you know , has already been already , there &apos;s a lot of mieter .
there are many neuromodulators that would love to america in a place with a freihandelszone , and there &apos;s a lot of people who would like to live in there .
all over the world there &apos;s 700 million people who are afraid that they like to live in a permanent place .
one million people leave a year jährlich lateinamerika , and go to the united states .
many of you are people who are forced to be forced to be , their families , to work hard sometimes , they &apos;re also found mothers who have to earn enough money to make food and clothing .
unfortunately , it &apos;s sometimes kids who try to find their parents back in some cases , since a decade ago .
so what &apos;s it for a idea that you think about this whole new city ?
or even duzende of those cities , or hundreds of the world around the world ?
so what &apos;s it for a idea that every family has a choice between several cities that are in new ways to new inhabitants ?
this is a idea that &apos;s worth spreading .
my friends from honduras asked me to say , thank ted .
you know how many choices you do to make a typical day ?
you know how many choices you meet in a typical week ?
i &apos;ve recently made a survey about 2,000 americans , and the average number of decisions , the angabegemäß of the angabegemäß , the angabegemäß , a typical americans , a typical americans , is a typical place in a day .
it was also a study of ceos in the week , which is the ceo of the ceo .
and these scientists have just the different topics that are busy because of those ceo , and how much time they spent decisions with the issues that are not free to the issues .
and they found that a average ceo was doing in the week in the week .
each of those topics consisted of many , many smaller choices .
50 percent of your decisions were within nine minutes or less .
for about 12 percent of their decisions , they have an hour or more of their time .
think about your own decisions .
you know how many choices you do in the nine minutes of coming across the neun of the one in the world ?
how well , think , are you to deal with the decisions ?
today i want to talk about one of the biggest entscheidungsprobleme of our modern time , the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem .
i want to talk about the problem and over some possible solutions .
now , if i talk about this problem , i &apos;ll ask you some questions , and i want to know your answers .
if i ask you a question , raise your hand , because i &apos;m blind , just if you want to burn some calories .
so , i urge you , please , i ask you , if i ask you a question , and your answer is , my first question is , are you willing to hear something about the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem ?
thank you .
when i was at stanford university university , i went to this very very very , very very extremely motion , at least at least at the time .
it was a store , the draeger .
this business , it was almost like a vergnügungspark .
they had 250 different kinds of mustard and essig and essig and vegetables and vegetables and more than two dozen different kinds of water to water -- and that was a time when we actually have a leitungswasser .
i loved it to this store ; but at a time , i &apos;ve asked me , well , how does it tell you that you never have anything ?
here &apos;s the olive gear .
they had over 75 different displays , including the ones that were embedded in the boxes that came from thousands of years .
so i decided to visit a filialleiter , and i asked the ladder , &quot; working that model that you really offer the people of these opportunities ? &quot;
and he pointed out to the busladungen of tourists that came every day every day and gewöhnlich their cameras .
we decided to do an experiment , and we chose marmelade for our experiment .
here &apos;s your marmeladen gang .
they had 348 different kinds of marmelade .
we have a little verkostungsecke directly on the fly on the fly .
we have six different tastes marmelade , or 24 different flavors of different flavors , and we &apos;ve got two things on , first , i would like to go to the case of people who would stay more people and get out of the marmelade ?
it &apos;s more people , if it were 24 , about 60 percent when it was six , about 40 percent .
and then we looked at the case of the people who were more marmelade a glass of glass .
now we saw the opposite effect .
from the people who were there were 24 than it were 24 , bought three percent actually put a glass of glass .
from the people who were standing there when it was six , now , now we saw that 30 percent of you have bought a glass of a glass .
now , if you calculate it , the people have more than a glass of glass , who you had six to choice when they were 24 .
now , if you don &apos;t buy a glass of marmelade , probably good for our waist -- but it turns out that the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem also affected us very rough decisions .
we don &apos;t decide to decide if it &apos;s going to go against our own best interests .
so , in the end of the day , financial save .
i &apos;m going to describe a study that i &apos;ve been carrying with gur huberman , emir kamenica , where we durchführte the decisions for the rente of a million americans in the entire united states of the united states .
and what we were looking at was whether the number of fondsangebote that were possible to be a rentensparplan possible , the chance of the plan , the chance of getting more for tomorrow .
and we found that there was a relationship .
so in these plans , we had about 657 plans that had something between two to two to the other one .
and what we found was that the more developed surgery were being used that was actually the participation .
if you look at the extreme position , the plans that are two , they had a teilnahmerate in the late -- still haven &apos;t like that .
in the plans that almost all the things that are fast , the teilnahmerate now , the teilnahmerate now is now teilnahmerate on the sechzigsten .
now , what &apos;s turns out even if they were to participate if you stood more options , then even the negatives has the negative consequences .
so the people who opted to participate in the other ways that the more choices are available to the disposal , the more they get it out and choosing .
the more options you have to add , the more you put their money into pure money .
none of these extreme decisions , belongs to decisions that someone would recommend , if you &apos;re the future of the future of well-being .
now , in the last 10 years , we &apos;ve seen three major major negative consequences that are offering the offer of more choices , and more choices .
they take the decision to -- push , even if it comes to your own best interest .
they make a decision decisions -- potential financial and creating common decisions .
they decide to be more for things that you &apos;re using yourself , even if you make it a objektive .
the main reason we might think it might be able to look at this huge amount of mayonaise , mustard , and marmelade , but we can &apos;t draw the compare and abgrenzungen and then we can actually make something out of the amazing offer .
so what i want to suggest today is four simple techniques -- techniques that we have tested on different types of forschungsorten -- they can just use them into their business .
first of all , you know .
you &apos;ve heard it before , but it never was never true as today , that less is more .
people are always concerned when i say , &quot; well . &quot;
they &apos;re always worried that they lose regalfläche .
but in fact , it &apos;s more and more , that if you &apos;re ready to be willing to be a bit , and the unwichtigen gleichartigen are going to go , and then there &apos;s a increase of the sales , it will be the cost of the verkaufszahlen , and there &apos;s a improvement of the entscheidungswahrnehmung .
as a proctor and gamble the various practice of 26 and shoulders species of 26 miles in 15 , they had a increase in the more quarters of the more than 10 percent .
when the golden cat corporation corporation , they were erlebten the gewinne to be the revenues to be 87 by the other percent of the verkaufszahlen -- a result of the sales and the reduction of the world , the increase in the world , and the reduction of the cost .
you know , the average supermakrt today , they offers 45,000 products .
a typical classic walmart offers today today &apos;s 100,000 products .
but the neuntgrößte supermarket , the neuntgrößte supermarket in the world is aldi , and they offer only 1,400 products -- a kind of tomato sauce in the same way .
now in the world of the sparens , i think one of the best examples that are coming up with the market , which is the best way to get the best choice , was something that david laibson has very strong mitgestaltet , it &apos;s a program that &apos;s going to be offered harvard .
every single harvard and a half percent of a lot of employees now takes a lebenszeitfond .
the ones that really want to meet a choice , 20 , 20 , they &apos;re going to be 300 or more .
you know , how people often say , &quot; i don &apos;t know how to do it .
it &apos;s all important opportunities . &quot;
and the first thing i ask the question is , &quot; tell me how the opportunities are distinct from each other .
and if your employees can &apos;t auseinanderhalten them , it can &apos;t be able to do their clients . &quot;
now before we &apos;ve been talking about lunch , i had a conversation with gary .
and gary and gary said that he would be willing to be all people in this audience to the most beautiful place of the most beautiful street in the world .
here &apos;s a description of the road .
and i want to read you .
and now i &apos;m going to give you a couple of seconds to read them and ask you to clapping them if they &apos;re ready to assume the point of view .
okay . everybody &apos;s willing to assume the offer of the gary .
all of that are all ?
well , let me show you something more .
they knew it was a trick in ?
well , who is ready for this journey .
i think i &apos;ve got more hands .
well .
the fact that you look at is looking at the first time , when the first time , more information than the second time , but i would like to give it a second time to the second time .
because the images would have it for you to be .
what makes me think of the second technology that helps you deal with the problem of the entscheidungsüberlastung , it &apos;s the konkretisierung .
it &apos;s about understanding the difference between ways , understanding what the consequences are really , which are associated with the individual choices , and that &apos;s a lot of information that &apos;s been made and that those consequences have been felt .
why giving people a year 15 percent more than 30 percent more , if you use a ec-karte or a credit , when the cash ?
because it &apos;s not going to be a lot of money .
and it turns out that if you &apos;re able to make it feels , it &apos;s a very good tool , so you get people to save more .
so we &apos;ve done a study that i made with shlomo benartzi and alessandro previtero , we &apos;ve made a study with ing -- employees , who &apos;ve been working on for the ing -- and these people were all in a gathering in which they &apos;ve been wasting their participation for their own rentensparplan .
and as this gathering , we &apos;ve got this gathering just as points as they used to be , just a little bit of added .
the little thing we &apos;ve got to gefügt , was that we were asked people to think of all the positive things that would happen in their lifetime , if you would save money .
so we did this simple thing , there was a increase between 20 percent and there were a increase in the number of people who were willing to save , or a five-meter and a five-meter and a five-meter and a five-meter and a five-meter and a five-meter and a five-meter percent of the amount of time they were willing to pay for the sparkonto .
the third technique : kategorisierung .
we can have better than more than more choices .
here &apos;s for example , a study that we did in a zeitschriftengang .
it turns out it &apos;s in the wegmans supermärkten , and the bottom in the northeast , the number of species have been variiert up to the zeitschriften of the magazines .
but you know what ?
when i show you 600 papers and show you 400 papers , and i &apos;ll show you 400 more papers , and then you believe that i have more choices , and then you believe that i would have more choices , when i gave them the 400 given if i had given them the 600 .
because the categories tell me how i can hold them apart .
here are two different types of schmuckauslagen .
one is called jazz &quot; jazz &quot; and the other is called &quot; swing . &quot;
if you think that the left display is swing , and the display right is burned , then you clap in your hands .
okay , there &apos;s a couple of .
if you think that the on the left is jazz and the ones on the right is , please , please .
okay , a few more .
well , it turns out they &apos;re right .
the on the left is jazz and the right on the right is swing , but you know what ?
this is a hochgradig unnützes kategorisierungsschema .
the categories must say something something that &apos;s a little bit of the selection .
and this problem often you see , if you look at the long bullet of all these things .
who are you going to do with this ?
my fourth technology : &quot; the premise of complexity .
it turns out that we can deal with more information than we think we have to do .
we need to increase complexity slowly .
i &apos;ll show you an example of what i mean .
let &apos;s take a very , very complicated decision , the purchase of a car .
this is a german autohersteller autohersteller that offers you the opportunity to get your car itself .
you have to make 62 different choices to make your car .
now , these decisions are now going to be the number of choices that they offer a decision .
autofarben , außenfarbe of the car -- i &apos;ve 56 options .
motors , gear -- four options .
what i do now is , i &apos;m the order of the order of the decisions .
half of the customers is going to go from the many ways , 56 autofarben , 56 autofarben , four blades .
the other half of the customers are about low opportunities , four blades , to the 56 autofarben , many options .
what &apos;s going on ?
how are you interested in .
if you use the standardauswahl at the decision , it means that they &apos;re overwhelmed , that &apos;s the heisste , i &apos;m sorry .
what you find is that people who go from the low auswahlmöglichkteiten and over the standardauswahl .
we lose them .
you go from the little choice to the many , you stay in .
it &apos;s the same information . it &apos;s the same number of possibilities .
the only thing i did is that the order of the order is changing in this information .
when i start with the simple , i learn how i &apos;m auswähle .
even though the gear , i don &apos;t choose anything about my preferences at the top , i still have to get it in front of me .
it also takes me in the aufregung of the big product that i &apos;m zusammenstelle , and so i &apos;m ready to motivate me to be interested in .
let me wrap up .
i told you about four techniques , the issue of entscheidungsüberlastung &apos;s disease -- but they &apos;ll do it for real , -- -- we can do it real ; -- we can do better with more categories , less options , less options .
every one of these techniques that i &apos;m thinking about to help you is to manage the opportunities for you -- well for you , you can use them for yourself , well for the people they need to provide service .
because i think the key to the best choice is that you &apos;re choosing choices .
and the more we pick up , the better we will be able to practice the art of the choice .
thank you .
hi . i &apos;m kevin allocca , trends-manager at youtube . i &apos;m looking at the same thing i &apos;m youtube-videos .
this is true .
now we want to talk about how video video viral are becoming and then afterward , why that &apos;s what &apos;s important .
we all want to be stars -- berühmtheiten , singers , comedians -- when i was young , i was so hard to be .
but webvideos have enabled us that we all have , all of our creative activities can become famous in a part of our culture .
every single one of you could be the internet to the internet to be famous .
but youtube will be more than 48 hours per minute a minute .
again , it will only have a tiny percentage of a percentage of a percentage of a prozentsatz and it becomes a whole bunch of times and so on .
how does this work ?
three things : tastemaker , teilnahmecommunities and the unexpected .
well , then we want .
oh my god . oh my god . oh my god .
oh my god !
woah !
ohhhhh , wowwww !
last year , sendete vasquez , this video that he had been in the yosemite nationalpark in yosemite park .
in 2010 , it was a million million times .
this chart shows how it was when the video was popular for the last summer last summer .
actually , i didn &apos;t want to do a viral video .
he just wanted to share one rainbow , just a rainbow , sharing .
because you &apos;re going to do that as if you &apos;re yosemite yosemite mountain .
he had a lot of naturvideos .
and this video was actually received in january of january .
what &apos;s happening here ?
there was jimmy kimmel .
jimmy kimmel sendete the tweet that was made the video that was the video .
because tastemaker kimmel , where jimmy kimmel are where we present new and interesting things and show you a big audience .
it &apos;s friday , friday , friday , gotta get , everybody &apos; to to on , weekend forward , weekend forward , weekend forward , weekend forward , weekend , friday , friday , friday , down , and you wouldn &apos;t have to be able to get those entertainment without talking about this video , i hope .
rebecca blacks blacks , &quot; is one of the top of the top video of the year .
it was almost 200 million times a year .
this is what the chart looked like .
just like the double rainbow , it seems to be out of nowhere .
what &apos;s happened on this day ?
well , it was friday , that &apos;s true .
if you want to know it , these other spitzen are also freitage .
but what about this day , this particular day ?
now , tosh.0 gabelte it on , many blogs started writing .
michael j. nelson &apos;s nelson cole from the mystery science theater was a first one that was made a joke .
so important is that a individual or a group of tastemakers had a point of tastemakers , with a big audience , and with the process of the process .
then the community of people who shared this big insiderwitz shared , and start talking about it and to do it .
now there &apos;s 10,000 parodien of &quot; friday &quot; in youtube .
already in the first seven days , there was a spoof of every single day .
unlike the einseitigen conversation in the 20th century , the participation of the community is to be part of this phenomenon -- either by getting it to spread it or something new .
&quot; nyan cat , &quot; animation and music in endlosschleife .
that &apos;s it , very simple .
this year , it was nearly 50 million times .
and if you do that for crazy , you know , there &apos;s a dreistundenversion that &apos;s been able to get four million times .
even cats look at this video .
look at cats look at cats , looking at this video .
so important , the creativity that is in the internetkultur of the techies and geeks .
there were remixes .
someone made a altmodische version of it .
and then it became international .
a whole remix-gemeinde fired made out of the ground , which it made it from a very small joke that we all have to participate .
today , we don &apos;t find just pleasure in something that we &apos;re doing with .
who would have gone up ?
who would have been &quot; the &quot; double &quot; or maybe black or &quot; cat . &quot;
what drehbücher did you can write to write in that sowas ?
in a world where every minute two days , two days , only , only focal , and unexpected hervorstechen , like the video of the video .
i &apos;m not to admit i was very interested in a friend of mine , i would say this great video , i would have to look at this great video , which is in new york for bicycles to fahrräder .
i got a ticket because i don &apos;t on the radweg , but often there is no disability in the radweg drive .
there was a whole surprising and humorous , and humorous was a casey niestats , casey witzige and his argument .
this approach is true of all the new ones we do creative .
and that &apos;s all of us to ask us a big question .
what does that mean ?
ohhhh .
what does that mean ?
tastemaker , creative teilnehmergemeinden , completely unexpected , the characteristics of a new kind of media and culture , which has access to each access and the audience .
as i said , one of the big star wars -- justin bieber -- did his start with youtube .
nobody needs to give your ideas green .
and today we all feel as owners of our star .
and these are not the characteristics of the old media and they also meet , they also meet on the media today , but they will determine the conversation of the future .
thank you .
how i can talk about the course of the connectedness over three generations , and how they were sitting in the world of a vierjährigen boot , and a verbundenheit boot in the chinese of this country , and a verbundenheit boot that &apos;s been stuck in the life of this little girl , and no longer that verschwand in the life of this little girl and never verschwand --
the history is not going on .
it &apos;s a puzzle that &apos;s going to be done .
i want to tell you about some of the puzzlestückchen .
imagine the first piece of : a man who &apos;s smiling .
it &apos;s a poet , a writer , a man whose whole life was made by the simple hope of oneness and freedom of being used .
keep it at the einmarsch of the kommunisten in saigon , as he has to admit that his life was a single waste .
the words , so long as his friends , spotteten now .
he moved back to silence .
he died , broken through the story .
it &apos;s my grandfather .
i &apos;ve never met him personally .
but our lives are so much more than our memories .
my grandmother has never forget me .
i had to worry that it was not free , and it was my job to learn that the story was trying to learn that we were going to get it .
the next thing shows shows how a boat could leise on the early 1960 .
my mother may may be 18 as their father died -- already in a arrangierten marriage , already with two little girls .
for you to do that , you know , the answer of your life is : the escape of your family and a new life .
it was completely excluded that it could fail .
after a vierjährigen and filmreifen saga glitt glitt a boat , on the lake , as a fischerboot .
all adults were aware of the risks .
the biggest fear had a lot of fear , rape and death .
as most adults on the boat , my mother had a little giftflasche .
it &apos;s a gefangennahme meal that i had my sister and i , and then you get my grandmother .
my first memories of this boat -- the stetige tuckern of the engine , which was clapping with each wave on the front , the vast and the emptiness .
i don &apos;t remember the pirates that came to the pirates , but it was about the todesmut of men on our boat , or at the ausfall of the engine that six hours to not start .
but i remember the lights of the ölplattform , and the young man who was the zusammenbrach , and the died of the journey was too much for him , and the taste of the first apfels , the geschmack of the men on the platform .
no apple has ever tasted again .
after three months , we landed in melbourne .
and the next puzzlestück is about four women in three generations that are being built together .
we were digging out of footscray , one of the working-class vorort , whose population of the population is made of immigrantenschichten .
unlike the alteingesessenen mittelklassevororten , whose existence of me was completely unknown , there was no anspruchsdenken .
the smells of ladentüren came from the rest of the world .
and the fetzen gebrochenen , the fetzen englischs were killed between people who had one thing in common .
my mother worked on farms , then on a fließband in a autofabrik , six days , double layers .
it managed to find the time to find english and it-qualifikationen .
we were poor .
every dollars was assassinated and the math was to make the englisch and mathematics , no matter what we had to do for doing this . mostly the new things that came out of the margins .
two pair of strümpfe for school , every one to put the holes in the other .
a schuluniform to the knöcheln , because they had to go to six years .
and there was the rare chöre , but it was painful by the schlitzauge , and here and there &apos;s wandmalereien , &quot; the &quot; -- &quot; the &quot; world , goes home . &quot;
after home ? where ?
something versteifte into me .
there was a meeting for reconciliation and a quiet voice , &quot; i &apos;ll go out of the way . &quot;
my mother , my sister and i slept in the same bed .
my mother was every night , but we told each other one of our day , and heard the movements of our grandmother in the house .
my mother suffered on alpträumen from the boat .
and it was my job , every night , every night , until their alpträume came to me .
it opened a computergeschäft , then then a kosmetikerausbildung and a store one .
and the women got to their stories about men who don &apos;t get rid of the change , angry and sorgenerfüllte , and sorgenerfüllte children , between two worlds .
loan and funders have been sponsoren .
centers became built .
i lived in parallelwelten .
in one , i was the classic asiatische , the unerbittliche demands of himself .
in the other , i was in the other life , the tragic scars of violence , the drogenmissbrauchs and the insulation .
but so many got over the years .
and because of this aid , i was in my last year as a young australierin of the year of the year .
and i was going from a puzzlestück to the next , and the margins couldn &apos;t get together .
tan le , the anonyme bewohnerin of footscray , and the social activist that were invited to participate in places for the lectures of which they &apos;ve never heard of , and in habitats , whose existence had never imagined .
i was not familiar with the etikette .
i didn &apos;t know how to use the besteck .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about wine .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about anything .
i wanted to go back to the routine and the convenience of a unknown vororts -- a grandmother , a mother and two daughters , which is like 20 years ago , which is just like 20 years ago , by each other , to each other , to get the stories of your day and einschliefen , we still still have three of the same bed .
i said my mother , i would not do that .
she reminded me that i was so old as she was at the time , when we had the boat .
no , no one had ever been .
&quot; do it just &quot; simple &quot; she said , &quot; and not , what you &apos;re not . &quot;
so i spoke about jugendarbeitslosigkeit and education , and the importance of the marginalisierten and entrechteten .
and the more i talked about , the more i should tell .
i met people in all of the lebenslagen , so many of you , what they loved , they were living on the limits of the possible .
and even though i had my degree , i realized that i couldn &apos;t get me with a career in a career .
there had to be another one another .
and i realized that it &apos;s okay to be a maverick , a neuankömmling , a neuankömmling , new guinea -- and not only one thing , but something that you have to be grateful , maybe a gift of the boots .
because dazuzugehören can be so easily to be able to have the horizonte , so easily , that you can make the assumptions of the environment .
now i &apos;ve gone out of my bequemlichkeitsbereich to know that , yes , yes , the world , but not as you get it .
opportunities that hasn &apos;t been allowed to have been ausdrücklich .
there was a energy , a unerbittlichen optimism , a strange mixtur of the humility and the wagnisses .
so i followed my gut .
i collected a little team of people to go to the schublade , &quot; i don &apos;t know , &quot; a unwiderstehliche challenge . &quot;
a year we had no cent .
so at the end of one , i &apos;ve been a giant topf soup that we shared .
we worked until the night .
most of our ideas were mad , but there were a few brilliant , and we did the breakthrough .
i met the decision to pull the decision to the united states , to the united states .
after only one journey there .
my gut bauchgefühl again .
three months later , i was moved and the adventure .
before i abschließe the talk , i want to tell you about my grandmother .
she grew up at a time where the social norm and the local action was the most important person .
life had not changed since centuries .
dad died of their father .
her mother moved on them .
with 17 , she was a second woman of a woman whose mother had her .
without your husband , she &apos;s held a sensation sorgte by putting it in trial and anklägerin in her own case , and a more larger fishing than she won .
&quot; don &apos;t worry . &quot;
i &apos;m going to duschte in a hotel room in sydney than she died . 1,000 miles away from melbourne .
i looked through the duschtrennwand , and i watched it on the other side .
i knew she was coming to say goodbye .
my mother phoned me a few minutes later .
a few days later , we went into a buddhist temple in footscray and sat around their own .
we told her stories and versicherten that we were still in their .
in midnight , the monk came to the monk , and said , he had to close the full line .
my mother asked us to make their hand .
she asked the monk , &quot; why is your hand so warm and the rest of you is cold ? &quot;
&quot; because she &apos;s been holding it in this morning , &quot; he said .
&quot; you don &apos;t have them . &quot;
if it &apos;s a band , then it &apos;s going through the women .
and you see who we were , and how life has shaped , we can now see that the men who might have come in our lives , we were in the quere .
the defeat would have been too simple .
now i have liked my own kids , and i think about the boat .
who would ever want to make one ?
yeah , i &apos;m afraid of privilegien , locally ago , front of berechtigungsanspruch .
can i give you a bug in your life , the brave jeder of every wave of the engine , the unbeirrte , the stetige tuckern of the engine , the most weiten , the most likely to be performed ?
i don &apos;t know .
but if i could give this , and it would certainly durchbringen it , i would do it .
also , is tans mother in the fourth or fifth .
i &apos;m here to share my photography with you .
is it possible ?
because that &apos;s a picture you can &apos;t pick up with his camera .
but i was going to have my interest in photography when i received my first digital , in the age of 15 years .
i put it with my former predilection , but it was a little different , because the camera was the process of the planung .
and if you take a picture with a camera , once the process , if you press on the trigger .
so for me , it appeared to be about the right place to be right at the right place to be at right .
i believed everybody could .
so i wanted to create something else , something that &apos;s going to happen when the trigger is .
the pictures like this : a construction , a lot of befahrenen road .
but it has a unexpected twist .
and behaltet still trotzdem a realistic level .
or pictures like these -- dark and farbenfroh at the same time , but everyone with the common goal , a realistic level .
when i say reality , i mean i foto-realität .
because , of course , is not something you can really capture , but i want to look like it , as if you could have that , on a photograph .
and pictures , where you have to think a little moment to figure out the trick .
so it &apos;s more about this idea of a idea when really a moment .
but what &apos;s the trick that it is that realistic ?
it &apos;s about the details , or the colors ?
it &apos;s about the light ?
what creates the illusion ?
sometimes it &apos;s the perspective of illusion .
but the end of the end is how we interpret the world , and how they can make it happen in a two-dimensional surface .
it &apos;s not about what &apos;s realistic , but what we &apos;re going to do for realistic .
so i think the basics are very simple .
i look as a puzzle of reality where you take different pieces and make it to create a alternative reality .
and let me show you a simple example .
we have three songs of three of these three studies of the objects that we can identify in a three-dimensional world .
but in a certain kind of interconnected , you can combine something that &apos;s still more elegant than that it could exist .
but at the same time , we know that that &apos;s not possible .
so we are used our brains because our brain doesn &apos;t just make sense that it doesn &apos;t really make sense .
and i see the same process of photographs .
it &apos;s really about to combine different realities .
so the things that look like a picture look like , i think it &apos;s the things we &apos;re not thinking about the things that we &apos;re in our everyday lives .
but if we combine photographs , it really matters to think about it , because otherwise you just don &apos;t see it wrong .
so i would say that there are three simple rules to obey to achieving a realistisches outcome .
as you can see , they &apos;re not three special images .
but it &apos;s combined to combine something that &apos;s creating here .
so the first rule is that there should be the same kind of pictures of the same .
second , second , kombinierte photographs have been beleuchtungsart .
and these two images have these two things -- from the same altitude , and the same beleuchtungsart .
third , it &apos;s about making it impossible to be able to make where the individual images start and end by using them seamlessly .
does it matter to say , how did the photo actually put together .
so by you , contrast , contrast , contrast , contrast to the individual images , fotografische and helligkeit , wie and disorders , we verwischen the limits between the different images and allow them to look like a single photograph , although a picture of a ebenen can be done .
here &apos;s another example .
you might think that this is just a landscape , and the bottom of the one is being manipulated .
but this is actually completely composed , from all sorts of different locations .
i personally personally think it &apos;s easier to make a place than a place , because you don &apos;t have to have compromise with the ideas in his head .
but it requires a lot of planning .
and when i had this idea in winter , i knew i needed several months to find them to find the different locations for the appearance of the puzzle .
for example , the fish was taken on a anglerausflug .
the waterfront is from a different place .
the unterwasser-teil comes from a quarry .
and yeah , i even have the house on the island of red umgefärbt to make it look silly .
to get a realistisches outcome , it &apos;s just about to me out of the planning .
i always start with a sketch , a idea .
and then it &apos;s about the combination of the different images .
and here &apos;s a piece of very good job .
and if you do good pictures , it can be pretty beautiful , and it &apos;s pretty realistic .
so it &apos;s all tools , and the only thing that we &apos;re looking at is our imagination .
thank you .
i &apos;d like to talk to you about why so many electronic electronic elektronische .
and i think the most important thing is that we stopped having stopped with our patients .
and one of the things that we introduced on the radboud-universität was , was a haupt-zuhörer .
you &apos;re not going to be very scientific , you know , a cup of coffee or tea and tea , and asks patients , families , relatives , &quot; how are you ?
how can we help you ? &quot;
and we think we want this to be one of the problems that all of the things is why everyone is going to fail the most electronic gesundheits-projekte , because we stopped listening .
this is my wlan-waage . a very simple thing .
she has a button , / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / /
and every morning i wake up .
and yes , i have a job , as you might recognize .
i &apos;ve got my job at 95 pounds .
it &apos;s very simple : every time i jump on the scale , you put my data on google .
and there you also have from my allgemeinarzt abgerufen , so he can see where my gewichtsproblem is because of my gewichtsproblem , and not only in the moment , i &apos;m doing kardiologische or so , but also with a glimpse of the past .
there &apos;s something else .
maybe you know , you know , i &apos;ve known the known , i &apos;ve got 4,000 follower on twitter .
so every morning i wake up on my wlan-waage and people talk to me before i sit in the car , &quot; go to lunch , just a little salad today . &quot;
but this is the netteste thing that can happen because this is the gruppenzwang , gruppenzwang , to help patients , because it could be used by obesity , or it could be the rauchen patienten .
but it may be used to get people out of their chairs , and they get together , collectively , in common , to play any game to control their health better .
next week , this is coming up on the market .
it will give this little blutdruck-messgerät that you &apos;re in a iphone or so anschließt .
and it &apos;s going to allow people to send home to their blood pressure , and it &apos;s like to share it with other people to share something more than 100 dollars .
at this point , patients come to the game , you can &apos;t just take control of the control , but can also be kapitän on their own ship , but also the challenges of challenges that are in the challenges that we &apos;re seeing , and the kostenexplosion of the health , and so on , the kostenexplosion of the health , and so on .
think of ways that easily are easily using easily , and start with that one , patients in the team .
and that &apos;s how you can do through these methods , but also through evidence .
and one of the things that we &apos;ve done , i would like to share with you a quick clip .
we have all of the navigationssysteme in our cars .
maybe even in our cell phones .
we know exactly where all of the people are in all around the world around .
we know one of one , where all of the stations are .
and sure , we can find fastfood-ketten .
but where would the next aed to help this patient ?
we have herumgefragt , and nobody knew .
nobody knew where the next lebensrettende lebensrettende was in that moment .
so what did we did ? we did crowdsourcing in the netherlands .
we have a website , and a menschenmasse asked , &quot; if you see a aed , please share it with where he &apos;s on , &quot; because sometimes he &apos;s closed during the geschäftszeiten , of course .
and over 10,000 aeds have been shown in the netherlands .
the next step was to find apps for that .
and we have a ipad-app designed .
we have developed an app for layar , augmented reality to find these aeds .
and if you &apos;re in a city like maastricht and somebody else , you can use your iphone , and within the next weeks , you can also find the next aed to find the next aed .
and now , today , we &apos;d like to just live as a aed4u , like the product is called the product , but also as a aed4us team .
and we want to bring this up in a world .
and we &apos;re all asking our colleagues on all over the world , from other universities , to help us behave like knotenpunkte to try to crowdsource these sites around the world .
and if you &apos;re in holiday and someone &apos;s zusammenbricht , it &apos;s your own well-being or someone else , you can find a aed .
the other thing we want to ask is that companies are helping us all over the world to help us the bestätigung of this .
this might be kurierdienste , or technicians for example , just to make sure that the gemeldete aed still remember the gemeldete .
please help us and try to make health health care only in the hand .
thank you .
today i &apos;m going to convey from unexpected discoveries .
i work in the solartechnologie-branche .
and my little startup startup that we &apos;re going to make us to the environment , by using it ...
... it &apos;s got to be able to get the act of vision .
here &apos;s a quick video of what we do .
oh . one moment .
it may be , maybe it &apos;s a sign .
now -- we can just jump out -- i &apos;ll just give you the video of ...
no .
this is not ...
okay . okay .
solartechnologie &apos;s solartechnologie ...
oh , my time is already over ?
okay . thank you .
so a few years ago , i started taking a program to get the stars in technology and design to work out to work and work in a while , which is pretty much more and everything that you &apos;re actually doing , we have to work them in government .
the program is called code for america , and it &apos;s a little bit like the friedenscorps for geeks .
we choose a year of fellows , and we &apos;re working with stadtverwaltungen .
instead of sending them into the third world , we send them in rathäuser .
and they developed great apps , working with urban collaborators .
but what you really do is to show what &apos;s possible today .
so they meet al .
al is a hydrant in the city .
this looks like he looks after a date , but what he really looks like , but what he really is looking for , is someone who &apos;s eingeschneit , because he knows , he &apos;s not very good at the brandbekämpfung when he &apos;s a meter of feet .
how did he get to search for help ?
we had a team of fellows in boston in the heart of the code of america .
they were there in february , and it has a lot of geschneit in february .
and they realized that the city never had this fire frei .
but a particular fellow , a man named erik michaels-ober , noticed something else , and that was that the inhabitants are frei the bürgersteige free frei , directly front of those sharing .
so he did what everyone would do , he wrote a app .
it &apos;s a nice little app where you can put a fire .
you stimmst too much to him , if it &apos;s schneit .
if you do that , you can give you a name , and he called the first al gore .
if you don &apos;t do that , you can take it away .
so there &apos;s a nice little bit of little game .
this is a humble little app .
it &apos;s probably the smallest apps of the 21 apps that the fellows was written in the last year .
but it does something that does not do any other regierungstechnologie .
they &apos;re spreading out of their own .
there &apos;s this guy in the i.t. division of the city of the city , who has seen that app , not for snow , but to put the citizens of poverty .
it &apos;s very important that these tsunami-sirenen work , but people steal the batteries .
so he got the citizens to check it .
and then , seattle , seattle , the app to clean the citizens to clean the verstopften gullys .
and chicago has just introduced them to the buergersteige people who schneit the buergersteige .
we now know nine cities that plan to use this app .
and it has been made up , organic , organic , of course .
if you know something about regierungstechnologie , you know , you don &apos;t normally work that way .
the beschaffung of software takes a few years .
we had a team that was working on a project in boston , for three people , for three people .
it was a way to find out the parents who are the right public school for their children .
it was told that if it was going to go over the normal canals , it took over two years , and it would have been able to do two million dollars .
and this is nothing yet .
there &apos;s a project in the california harbor that has two billion dollars a year , and it doesn &apos;t work .
and there are projects like this on every level of government .
so a app that &apos;s written in a few days , and then then , from selbt , is a kind of shot to the right of the government .
it shows how government could work better -- not like a privates companies , how many people think that they should think that they should .
and not like a technik-unternehmen , but rather like the internet itself .
and that means free access to access , which means open and productive .
and that &apos;s important .
but more importantly , the way that you &apos;re looking for a new generation that the problem of the government is -- not as the problem of a verknöcherten institution , but as a problem of collective action .
and this is a very good news , because it turns out that we &apos;re very good at the collective action .
now there &apos;s a big community of people who make tools that we need to do things in common together .
it &apos;s not just &quot; code for america , &quot; there are hundreds of people across all over the country , the aufstehen and regierungs-apps , every day in their own communities .
they didn &apos;t have the government .
they &apos;re terribly frustrated with her , but they don &apos;t complain about it .
and these people know what we &apos;ve lost from the eyes .
and this is when you all have feelings about politics and all the other things that we &apos;ve really upset is , in the core of tim , in the words of tim o , &quot; in the words of tim o , &quot; what we do is not going to do that . &quot;
now , a lot of people have given the government .
and if you &apos;re one of the people , please , i ask you that you &apos;re going to talk about because things change .
politics doesn &apos;t change ; the government is in change .
and because the government finally has to be made of us -- erinner you , &quot; we have the people ? &quot; -- how we think about how this change happens .
i didn &apos;t know much about government , when i started this program .
and how many people , i thought it &apos;s the fact that the government is about to choose people in a office .
now after two years , i came to the conclusion that it &apos;s all the end that it &apos;s mostly about kommunen .
this is the call &quot; call &quot; promises for service and information .
you &apos;ll get out of the raus when you put into your city .
if you have the chance to work in your attention , in your städtisches call , you know , our fellow scott &apos;s fellow , they &apos;re going to see that the people who call the government , because of the government , the government , including a beutelratte in your house .
so scott gets this anfruf .
he &apos;s typing , &quot; beutelratte , &quot; in the official database .
and he didn &apos;t really have a idea . he starts with the tierfänger .
and finally , he says , &quot; look , you can just get all the doors in your house and very laute music , and see if the livestock is abhaut ? &quot;
and that worked . applause for scott .
but that wasn &apos;t the end of the beutelratten .
boston has not just a physical call .
it has an app , a web- and handy-app , called &quot; citizens connect . &quot;
we didn &apos;t written this app .
this is the work of work very smart people in the office of the new urban mechanics . &quot; in boston .
one day -- this is a actual report -- came to this : &quot; beutelratte in my mülltonne . can &apos;t tell you that it &apos;s dead .
how do i get them away ? &quot;
but what happens with citizens connect is the other way .
scott unterhielt is coming from human .
but on &quot; citizens connect , &quot; everything is public , so everybody can see it .
and in this case , it saw a neighbor .
and the next one we got , &quot; i went there , i found out there , the mülltonne behind the house .
beutelratte ? yes . alive ? yap .
turned out the mülltonne on the page . went home .
good night , sweet beutelratte . &quot;
pretty simple .
this is great . here &apos;s the digital physical physical .
and it &apos;s also a good example of how the government is in the crowdsourcing .
but it &apos;s also a great example of the government as a platform .
and i don &apos;t mean any of the engineering definition of platform .
i &apos;m talking about a platform for people to help themselves and help others .
a citizen helped another citizens , but the government was playing a central role .
they put those two people .
and you would have them with government benefits if these needs have been needed , but a neighbor is a far better way and cheaper to create services .
if a neighbor helps us , we strengthen our communities .
let &apos;s take the tierfänger , it costs a lot of money .
one of the most important things is that we have to think that the government is not the same as politics .
and most people understand that , but they believe that one of the input of the input of the other .
that our contribution to the system is the vote .
how often we chose a political leader -- and sometimes we have a lot of energy to choose a new political leaders -- and then we figured out that the government , our values and our needs , our values and our needs , and then hasn &apos;t changed a lot of it ?
this is because the government is like a farther and politics are the top of the 15cm .
and what &apos;s underneath , is what we call the bureaucracy .
and we use this word with such a contempt .
but it &apos;s this contempt that we have , and for the we have to pay for something , something that &apos;s going to be working on us , something else , and then we entmachten ourselves .
people seem to think of politics , politics is sexy .
if we want to do that institution for us , we have to make a bureaucracy .
because that &apos;s where the actual regierungsarbeit is happening .
we have to put on the machinery of the government .
so the occupythesec-bewegung has done it .
have you seen those guys ?
it &apos;s a group of citizen who wrote a very serious report , which is a answer to the sec-memo of the gesetzesvorlage .
this is not politically active , that &apos;s a bürokratisch active .
now , for those of us who have given the government is , it &apos;s time to think about that , that we want to leave our kids .
you have to imagine the enormous challenges you have to imagine .
we really believe that we have to do what we need to do without the institution that can act in the name of all of us ?
a government is absolutely vital , but it has to be more efficient .
the good news is that technology is possible to make the function of the government in a way that actually can make something that actually reduces the society .
and there &apos;s a generation that has been raised the internet , and the knows that it &apos;s not so hard to do things , to do things that are just really really designed to build really systems .
now the average age of our fellows is 28 , so i &apos;m , unfortunately , almost a generation of most of you .
this is a generation that grew up with it , your voice of granted .
they don &apos;t fight these battle that we all fight , who talk about who talk ; they all have to talk .
you can make your mind personally , on every drug , and you do it .
so if you &apos;re faced with the problem of government , they don &apos;t care about their voices .
you use your hands .
you use your hands to write applications that improves the work of government .
and this apps let us use our hands to improve our communities .
this might be a fire freizuschaufeln , unkraut , unkraut , a trash with a beutelratte .
and sure , we would have these hydranten of all the time , and many people do this .
but these apps are the apps , as small digital memories , we &apos;re not just consumers , and we &apos;re not just consumers of government , the taxes , and leistungen .
we are more than that , we are citizens .
and we &apos;re not going to improve the government until we improve the citizenship .
so the question i &apos;ve all here is , if it &apos;s about the big , important things that we have to do , all of the things that we have to do , we all have to be a lot of voices , or will we be a lot of hands ?
thank you . thank you .
normally , what &apos;s the role of people who are doing people like this is how wonderful technologies are the new technologies , which i &apos;m going to tell you , and i thought i really want to tell you what i really think is really , and also trying to understand what &apos;s really going on with these incredible sprüngen , which is so quickly that we can get
i &apos;m going to start with you a only one , boring slide .
... if you can just show you the slide here .
this is a slide that i selected from my folder .
it &apos;s not about the details of the slide , but rather the power form .
this slide shows a analysis of a analysis of us about the performance of risc processors on the performance of a local .
the interesting thing here is that this slide , like this , like this , we often have often , in our field , a kind of semi-logarithmischen curve .
in other words : every step here is a potenz in the leistungsskala .
and this is a novelty that we have to use this guy on semi-logarithmischen curves in the field of technology .
something very strange happens here .
this is basically what i &apos;m going to talk about here .
so if you ask the light back to the light .
another thing , because i &apos;m going to draw something on the paper here .
now , why do we draw the graphen in the technology of the technology ?
the reason it &apos;s when i draw it on a normal curve , where i say that , the timeline here are the zeitachse , and this is a reflection of a kind of technologie , which is , which i want to do with a graphs , then the graph is albern .
and then you see that .
and that doesn &apos;t tell us a lot .
now if i want to record another technology , say , well , that would be a transporttechnologie scale , that would be very unvernünftig in shape in shape .
but if this is something like this , then this is the most sophisticated conditions .
so if the transporttechnologie would go fast as fast as the mikroprozessor-technologie would be , we could put into a cab in a taxi , and in 30 seconds we would be in tokyo .
but that &apos;s not going to be so fast .
there was never before in history , these kinds of rekursivem growth , through the order of the order of the order of the few years .
the question i want to ask you is if you look at these exponential curves , you don &apos;t see them forever .
it &apos;s not possible that everything is forever and forever , as quickly as the process .
there are two choices : there are two choices .
either it becomes a classic s-kurve like here , until something new , or something new , or it will happen here .
it &apos;s it in about it .
well , i &apos;m an optimist , so i think i &apos;ll just think of this kind of thing .
it &apos;s really , then , that &apos;s what we &apos;re in here at the moment in a transition .
we &apos;re here on this line , in a übergang , from the world &apos;s world in a new kind of world .
so the question i want to ask is , and i also have a lot of myself in the face of this new world ?
what &apos;s this new state that &apos;s slowly ?
because the transition seems to be very confusing if you &apos;re in the middle of the middle .
when i was a kid , there was the future somewhere in 2000 , and people talked about it , what probably happened in the year 2000 .
now we have a conference where people talk about the future and you find that the future is still in 2000 .
and then we don &apos;t go to the next .
so in other words , the future is every year , i &apos;ve been in the world every year since i &apos;ve been in this world .
i think the reason is that we realize that there is something in the moment .
the transition happens . we can all feel .
and we know that there &apos;s no sense to try to try to try to try to try and look at 50 years into the future because everything is so different is that a simple hochrechnung of what we do now is not make any sense .
i want to talk about what this might be , that transition in which we are in .
to do this , i first talk about some other things that really have nothing to do with technology or computers .
because i think it &apos;s really to understand this , we need to go back and look at the thing that &apos;s going to look at a longer zeitskala .
and i want to look at this on the zeitskala of life at the earth .
i think the big makes sense of meaning if you put it in some milliarden-schritte .
so we go back , and that &apos;s a 2,5 billion years ago , the earth was a big , steriler steinklumpen with lots of chemicals .
now if you look at the way that these chemicals were organized , then you have a pretty good picture of how they anstellten the anstellten .
i think there are also theories that we &apos;ve got to start to understand how everything started with rna , but i &apos;ll tell you a simplified story of what &apos;s going on that time to get small öltröpfchen öltröpfchen , which are different kinds of rezepten of chemicals on chemicals .
some of these öltröpfchen contain a special combination of chemicals that allowed them to integrate other chemicals from the outside , and then we grow .
everybody who were all like , started to be young .
these little öltröpfchen were in the sense of the primitivste .
but these weren &apos;t öltröpfchen aren &apos;t about alive in today &apos;s senses , because every single one was just a small , zufälliges of chemicals .
and every time it divided , they have to spread out the chemicals of ungleichen .
so each one was a little bit different .
in fact , the tröpfchen , which is one for growth , faster than others and integrated more chemicals from the outside and the teilten .
so this is the whole thing that kept on , longer and it &apos;s vermehrten in grösserem .
so this is just a very simple chemical form of life , but more interesting , it gets to learned a trick about abstraction .
on any kind of way we don &apos;t fully understand , these tröpfchen have the ability to learn the ability to create information .
they &apos;ve learned the recipe of the cell as a information , and in a certain chemical shape , which we call dna .
in other words , they have found in this geistlosen , evolutionary way , which allowed them to allow them to make niederzuschreiben what they were able to do that that information and copied .
the amazing thing is that this kind of information is speichern over time over the time of 2.5 billion years in which they &apos;ve made , right .
in fact , recipe for us , which is our genes that exactly the same code , the exact same code and the same notation .
and it &apos;s every time that the exact same letters is the exact same letters and the same code .
we are as though we , only for the vergnügungszweck , the thing that can write in this code .
and i &apos;ve got 100 mikrogramm of a white pulvers , which i &apos;m trying to keep in airports .
in fact , in fact , in fact , what i &apos;ve done is , i took this code -- the code consists of a normal letters -- and i &apos;ve written my visitenkarte on a piece of dna , and it &apos;s 10 ^ 22 times .
so if someone wants to be a hundred million copies of my visitenkarte , i &apos;ve got enough enough for everybody to everyone in this room and even for everybody on the world , and it &apos;s right here .
if i was a egoist , then i would have written them on a virus and then freigegeben into the room .
so what &apos;s the next step ?
the niederschreiben of dna was a really interesting step .
and the veranlagten of these cells -- that made them happy for another billion years .
but then another , very interesting step where things were completely different , and that &apos;s why they started communicating these cells and information that communities have made of cells .
i don &apos;t know if you &apos;ve already known that , but bacteria can actually replace their dna .
it &apos;s also the reason why for example , is to grow the consistency .
some bacteria have figured out how they can distinguish penicillin from penicillin and have this information together with other bacteria in dna , and now we have any amount of bacteria that are resistant to penicillin because the bacteria communicate .
this communications allowed us to have the reasons of communities that were in some sense in the same boat ; they were synergetisch .
so they &apos;ve either survive together , or they went together , and that meant that if a community was successful , all the individuals of the community , and the evolution is denied of evolution .
so the übergangsstelle is where these communities are so close to the fact that they determined the recipe for the whole community to write the dna for the dna .
and the next interesting period took about another billion years .
we have mehrzellige communities , communities of community verschiedlichen , which together as individual organism .
in fact , we are also a mehrzellige community .
we have a lot of cells that are not worth caring on itself .
your skin are useless without heart failure , muscle cells , brain cells and so on .
so these communities started sich , so that the plane was not going to be the evolution , not the single cell , but the whole zellengemeinschaft that we call the organism .
the next step is now within this communities .
the zellengemeinschaften started making information .
and they developed special structures that are not doing anything else as information as information within the organism .
and these are the neural structures .
so the neurons are the informationsverarbeitungsapparat that have built these zellengemeinschaften .
they started to have specialists in the community , special structures which are responsible for learning , understanding and the result of information .
and this was the brain and the nervous system of the communities .
this gave them a evolutionary advantage .
because at this point , a individual -- now , in the time of the period of the lifetime of a single organism , instead of having on this evolutionary period .
so one organism could learn , to eat a certain fruit , because they liked it , and it made him sick , the last time he ate it .
now this could happen within the individual organism , whereas these information were used to be learned about the individuals , because of the individuals , because of the individuals that because of those years , because of those informationsverarbeitungsstrukturen were not available .
so the nervous system has the evolutionsprozess of this particular informationsstrukturen , because evolution could now be able to do within a common place .
it was able to go in a zeitlichen zeitlichen .
what happened , is that the individual organisms have to find a way to communicate each other .
for example , the raffinierteste of the raffinierteste , the raffinierteste of the version of this vaccine is the human language .
it &apos;s a pretty amazing invention when you think about it .
i have a very complicated , unordentliche and wonderful idea in my head .
i &apos;m sitting here , and basically , grunzende sounds of mine , in the hope of me , a similar visual idea of the hoffnung of the mind that have a certain resemblance of my original idea .
so we take something very complicated , it &apos;s a sequence of sound , a sequence of sound , and make something very complicated in the minds of others .
so this allows us to work as a unified organism .
and what we did in , we have , the humanity , we have started .
we filled the same levels that have been made of mehrzellerorganismen -- the abstraction of our methods that we &apos;ve collected data , we have to have a process .
the invention of language , was a little step in this direction .
telefonie , computers , videobänder , videobänder , cd-roms and so on , all of our neural mechanisms that we built in our community to build this information .
and it connects us all together to something that &apos;s much larger , and also capable of being able to develop faster than we were .
so today , evolution can happen in the span of microseconds .
you &apos;ve seen a tys little evolutionsbeispiel , where he &apos;s a little evolution in the convolution program , &quot; program , &quot; program , right before your eyes .
so we &apos;ve got the zeitskalen again again .
the first steps of history that i &apos;ve told you , dauerten a billion years per piece .
the next steps , like the nervous system and the brain , dauerten hundreds of millions of millions .
then the nächstens steps , like language and so on , less than a million years ago .
and these next steps , like electronics , seem to seem few decades .
the process is ernährt , and it &apos;s going to be , i think , is the word for -- if something is a änderungsgeschwindigkeit .
the more it changes , the faster changes it .
and i think that &apos;s what we &apos;re seeing here in this explosionsartigen curve .
we see the process that &apos;s native themselves .
i live from computers , and i know i use the mechanism that i use to build the computer , not using the amount of imagery that i could do with the amount of progress in the computing .
my current effort is to create objects with such a high complexity that it &apos;s impossible to make it in the traditional meaning .
i don &apos;t know what any individual transistor does in the verbindungsmaschine .
it has billions of things .
what i do instead , and what &apos;s also about thinking of thinking , we think of a abstraktionsebene , and the machine makes us something that &apos;s a machine that makes our capabilities far more distant , better and faster than we could ever do .
and it makes it partly with ways that we don &apos;t even know right now .
a way of what &apos;s interesting is what i &apos;ve been used to have been used in recently lately , is evolution itself .
and we put a evolutionsprozess in the machine that in the mikrosekunden-bereich .
to give an example , in the most extreme cases , we can create a program that evolved from random systems .
we say , &quot; computers , generiere , please ask a hundred million of millions of birds .
now , please , all of these random zufällig are actually instruktionen , all programs out of programs , and then the ones who are the ones that are the closest to the next one . &quot;
so in other words , i define what i want .
let &apos;s say , i want to get numbers of randomness , this would be a simple example that i &apos;ve already used for .
so , what &apos;s shocking , which is the most exciting thing to do the most .
of course , the chance of happened was very small , very small , that you &apos;re going to make a chance of accident to make sure that you &apos;re going to be a chance of randomness , so don &apos;t think that the really will actually make this .
but one of those likes are very fortunate to do two numbers of two numbers in the right order .
now i say , &quot; computers , now take those 10 percent of the sequences that are coming up .
they &apos;re going to put these down , lösche the rest .
now , reproduziere all the übriggebliebenen that are the numbers of the best .
and it &apos;s a method of the design process , analog to reproduction . &quot;
take two programs and they produce children through the exchange of their subroutinen , and the children who are the characteristics of the subroutinen of the two programs .
so i &apos;ve got a new generation of programs that have made by combinations of programs that are something closer to the 1980s than others .
say , &quot; please , please repeat this process . &quot;
bewerte them .
maybe some mutations are a few mutations .
and try to do this stuff with another generation .
all of these generations need a few milliseconds of water are just a few milliseconds .
and so i can run a evolution over millions of years in the computer , or in some cases , some of the hours .
finally , i get programs that can be perfect .
the fact is , these programs are so much more efficient than every program i could ever have written by hand .
if i look at these programs , i can &apos;t tell you how they work .
i &apos;ve tried to understand it .
it &apos;s chaotic and odd programs .
but they do all the job .
i &apos;m sure and i &apos;m sure you &apos;re going to do the job because it &apos;s from a series of hunderttausenden programs that have been done .
because your life depended on it , if you really did the job .
i sat in a 747 together with marvin minsky minsky , and he ale a card card , and he says , &quot; oh look . look at that . look at that .
there &apos;s this plane consists of hunderttausenden kleinteilen , which are working together to make their flight safer . &apos; &quot;
we know that a entwicklungsprozess isn &apos;t optimal if it &apos;s too complicated .
so we start to rely on computers for a process which is very different from the classical brain .
it allows us to deal with a much higher complexity than it would allow the normal methods to make the normal form of the normal form .
and yet , we don &apos;t understand the opportunities that we don &apos;t yet .
gewissermassen überflügelt überflügelt us the technology .
we use these programs to make the computers make a lot faster , so that we can capable of can do this processes still .
so it creates a rückkopplung .
it gets faster and faster and i think that &apos;s why it seems to be confusing .
because all of these new technologies are called themselves .
we &apos;re living .
we &apos;re at a point where the analog is to mehrzeller-organismen as a einzeller-organismen evolved .
so we are the amöben , and we can &apos;t really make the hölle , which is what we &apos;re actually on here .
we are in the middle of this .
but i really think that after us .
i think it &apos;s very hochmütig to say that we are the endprodukt of evolution .
and i think we &apos;re part of the creation of the creation of whatever &apos;s next .
now , the lunch is before and i think i &apos;m going to hear that before i &apos;m going to go back here .
my story starts right here in rajasthan , about two years ago .
i was under the sternenhimmel of the wüste of the wüste zusammen ali .
we talked about that nothing has changed since the time of the ancient indian epos . &quot;
if we were going to travel to the indian time , we would have kicked into a car and schwirrten over the sky .
now we do this with aircraft .
at the time , when the great indian indian arjuna , he took a bow , fired , fired in the soil and water .
now we do with bohrern and machines .
we came to the conclusion that magic and magic is replaced by machines .
it really did me sad .
i got a fear of technology .
i &apos;m afraid to me that i could lose the ability to lose the ability to enjoy the sonnenuntergang without the sonnenuntergang and without any tweet of my friends .
i found that technology would be possible and not kill .
when i was a little girl , my grandfather gave me his little silberne taschenuhr .
this piece of 50 years old , the magischste thing was to me .
it was a goldener access to a world full of pirates and verunglückter ships and images in my imagination .
i came up with it as though we all send our send our send to uhren clocks and cameras from them .
they kept us from being inspired .
and so i went into the world of technology to see how i could use it to make a magic instead .
with 16 , i started to illustrate books .
when i saw the ipad , i saw it as a device to be the reader that reader reader around the world .
it can know how we think it .
it can know where we are .
it &apos;s got images and text together and animation , sounds and touch .
the storytelling is always more of the senses .
but what do we do ?
i just go to khoya , a interactive ipad app .
here says , &quot; shake your fingers on every light . &quot;
and so -- here &apos;s this box ... &quot; &quot; i write my name .
and i &apos;m going to give you a figure in the book .
and again , again , a letter to me -- and the ipad white , i know where i live -- which is really right to me .
the kid in my mind is really excited about this .
i &apos;ve talked a lot about magic .
i don &apos;t mean , and dragons , but the magic of childhood , those ideas that we all had as children .
fireflies happen in a glass , i always thought .
so you have to blow out the ipad and the fireflies .
and the beleuchten of the whole path through the rest of the book .
another idea that i was fascinated as a kid , that a whole galaxy can be in a single group .
and so here &apos;s every book here , and every world , a little murmel that i &apos;m here to show you the magic device in the device .
and this opens up a map .
fantasybücher had always been a maps , but these maps were static .
this map grows and then and lights and serves for guidance in the rest of the book .
it also shows you in other places of the book .
i &apos;m going to go here .
also , it &apos;s important to me , to make something that is indisch , but also very zeitgemäß .
this is the apsaras .
we &apos;ve all heard of feen and nymphen , but how many people know their indian colleague , who are the apsaras ?
the poor apsaras were thousands of years in indras chambers in a old days of the book .
and we bring them back , in a zeitgenössischen history for children .
a story that has to operate with new issues , like the umweltkrise .
for the theme , a big issue of the last 10 years is that children sitting in their phone rooms , without the computer .
but now , with mobile technology , we can take our children into the natural world with their technology .
in a interaction of the book , you &apos;re sent to a search , you have to go out and get out there and with the camera of the integrated natural objects .
as a kid , i had collections of stöckern , rocks , kieseln and muscheln .
somehow the children are not doing more .
this is kindheitsritual . you have to go out and get out to go out to a chapter of a flower and tag .
in another chapter , you have to go a piece of baumrinde and tag .
so you actually creates a digital collection of photographs that you can ask online .
a kid in london shows the picture of a fuchses and says , &quot; oh , i &apos;ve seen a photograph . &quot;
a kid in india says , &quot; today i have seen a monkeys . &quot;
this is a kind of social network around a digital collection of photographs that you actually have taken .
there &apos;s a variety of opportunities to combine the world and technology together .
in the next book , we &apos;re planning a interaction with the video of the ipads and through augmented reality , which is a animation that &apos;s on a plant from a plant .
at a point , the screen is going to leaves the screen .
you have to do the sound of the winds , and you have to read and read the rest of the book .
we all move around a world where the forces of technology are closer and in the magic and technology .
we use the energy of the sun .
we bring our children and closer to the natural world and to the magic , fun , and the love of our childhood , through the simple medium of a story .
thank you .
this is really a remarkable honor for me .
i spend most of my time with people in untersuchungshaft , prisons or todeszellen .
i spend most of my time with the social development in the sozialbausiedlungen and places where there are much more comfortable .
here &apos;s at ted to see and hear how little stimulierend , it has very much force .
the brief time here was clear to me , ted has a identity .
you can say things here , the world have influence .
and sometimes , when something comes over ted , it &apos;s a meaning and force that otherwise would otherwise otherwise .
i say that because i think identity is very important .
we &apos;ve seen some amazing presentations .
i think we &apos;ve learned that the words of a teacher have meaning , but that &apos;s the words of a dedicated sentence in a linear .
as a doctor , you can do good . as a fürsorglicher doctor , but can you do more .
and that &apos;s why i want to talk about power the power of identity .
i didn &apos;t have the way in my work as a lawyer .
i learned this from my grandmother .
i was big in a family , a traditional afroamerikanischen household , who was dominated by a matriarchin dominated , and this matriarchin was my grandmother .
she was a taffe , strong woman , she had .
she had the last word in every familienstreit .
it was also the origin of many differences in our family .
she was the daughter of a sklavenfamilie .
her parents were born in the 1840ern in virginia than slaves .
she was born in 1880 , and the experience of slavery would really marry the experience of slavery .
my grandmother was strong , but she was also liebevoll .
when i met them as a little boy , she came to me and umarmte me .
she &apos;s holding me so so that i could barely breathe . then they let me go .
one or two hours later , when i stepped up , she came up to me and said , &quot; bryan , you know , you know , you know ? &quot;
and if i said , &quot; no , umarmte you back me again . if i said , &quot; yes , you would call me .
and she was doing something that was always going to be in your nearby nearby .
the only thing that was that she had 10 children .
my mother was the youngest of their 10 children .
sometimes , when i wanted to spend time with her , it was difficult to get their attention .
my cousins around around all around me .
i remember i have to have eight or nine , that i woke up one morning and we went to living room . all my cousins around the day .
my grandmother was sitting at the end of the beach and staring at me .
first , i thought that this would be a game .
i looked at it and lächelte , but she looked very serious .
this went to 20 minutes . then she sits on , and then she came to me . she took me at hand , and she said , &quot; come , bryan , you and i have to talk . &quot;
i remember it was a lot yesterday .
i &apos;ll never forget .
she took me out to go out and said , &quot; bryan , i &apos;ll tell you something , but you have to promise that you don &apos;t get it . &quot;
i said , &quot; i promised , &quot; oma . &quot;
she said , &quot; ehrenwort ? &quot; &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
she sat down and looked at me . she said , &quot; i want you to know that i &apos;ve seen you . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you &apos;re something special . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you can do anything you want to do . &quot;
i will never forget that .
she said , &quot; you &apos;ve got to promise three things , bryan . &quot;
i said , &quot; okay , oma . &quot;
she said , &quot; first of all , i said , &quot; first of all , you &apos;ll always love your mom . &quot;
she said , &quot; your mom is my baby , and you have to have to have promise you &apos;re always going to be able to take care of you . &quot;
i got my mother , so i said , &quot; yes , i &apos;m going to do that i &apos;ll do that . &quot;
and she said , &quot; when next versprich , i &apos;m going to be able to do the right thing . &quot; also , if it &apos;s hard to do that right ? &quot;
i thought , &quot; yes , &quot; yes , i said , &quot; oh , i promise . &quot;
finally she said , &quot; the last thing you have to have been told , is that you never drink alcohol . &quot;
now i was nine years old , and i said , &quot; yes , i &apos;m sure . i promise it . &quot;
i grew up on the country , in old south , and i have a brother who is a year and a year of a year .
when i was about 14 or 15 , one day , my brother home and brought this sixpack beer with a sister and me and me and i went to the woods .
we just alberten there as well as else as well .
then he took a drink , and i took a bot of my sister , and she took them , and then they gave me one .
i said , &quot; no , no , no . it &apos;s all right . i don &apos;t want to do a beer . &quot;
my brother said , &quot; well , let &apos;s do this . today we do that , but you &apos;re also doing anything we do .
i had what your sister had a beer , and you go to a beer .
i said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to . power you only . &quot;
my brother staring at me .
he said , &quot; what &apos;s going on with you ? well , what &apos;s going on . &quot;
then he looked at me and said , &quot; oh no , you don &apos;t do anything for you to do with a grandmother ? &quot;
i said , &quot; what are you talking about ? &quot;
he said , &quot; grandma tells everybody who are special . &quot;
i was devastated .
i &apos;m going to give you something .
i should probably not do that .
this is going to be öffentlich in this .
i &apos;m 52 years old , and i gestehe that i never had a drop of alcohol .
i don &apos;t say that because i think it &apos;s tugendhaft . i say that because identity is power .
if we create the right kind of identity , we can tell the people around us , they don &apos;t believe in the world .
we can get them to do things that they thought they couldn &apos;t .
of course , my grandmother would tell all of their grandchildren , they &apos;re special .
my grandfather was during the prohibition in prison .
my uncle died of alkoholinduzierten diseases .
and they believed that this is the subjects that we have to have to care .
i &apos;ve tried to say something about our justizsystem .
this country is unlike 40 years ago .
government were 300,000 people in haftanstalten and prison .
today it &apos;s 2.3 million .
the united states today is the highest world population today .
seven million people are on bewährung , or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
my view is that we have altered our world .
in social physics and black forces of the population and hopelessness , because of this changes .
one of three male black between 18 and 30 is in prison , in prison , in bewährung , or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
in urban communities , from los angeles , from los angeles , about 60 , baltimore , 50 to 60 percent of all the black men , in prison , in prison , in prison , or mit with bedingter strafaussetzung .
our systems not only been shaped by asking questions that have been doing with rassenzugehörigkeit , it will also be through poverty .
we have a justizsystem justizsystem that you &apos;re much better than you &apos;re rich and guilty of them as poor and innocent .
wealth , not verschulden , impacts the result .
but still , we seem to be satisfied .
a politics of fear and anger has convinced us that these problems aren &apos;t our problems .
we lost the touch .
i think that &apos;s interesting .
there &apos;s some hochinteressante developments .
my home collaborator john pushed them permanently permanently the wahlrecht when they &apos;re strafrechtlich .
here and today in alabama today , 34 percent of the male black population is lost .
we prognostizieren that in ten years , the brush of the aberkennung aberkennung is so high as high as the verabschiedung of the wahlrechtsgesetzes .
the silence is ohrenbetäubend .
i &apos;m vertrete children .
many of my girls are very young .
the united states of america are the only country in the world , the dreizehnjährige children in jail .
in this country there &apos;s for children for children without bedingte strafaussetzung .
we &apos;ve got a lot of technology .
the only country in the world .
i put people in todeszellen .
the question of death is a interesting question .
we think it &apos;s because you &apos;ve been taught us to be the question of the question : has a human being , for a human being to die of a begangenes ?
this is a very sensitive question .
you can also think of it , but you can also think of how we see our identity .
the other one is not : has somebody for a crime worthy of death , but we can &apos;t do it ?
i think that &apos;s fascinating .
the death penalty in america is defined by the irrtum .
in nine people we &apos;ve executed , comes out of the unschuldig we have been certified , the entlastet and the death of death .
a remarkable fehlerquote . one of the nine choices .
i think that &apos;s fascinating .
we would never fly somebody with a plane when nine planes , the celebration , one of them .
but somehow we do it , we &apos;re going to abzunabeln it from this problem .
it &apos;s not our problem .
it &apos;s not our burden .
it &apos;s not our fight .
i &apos;m talking about this questions .
i talk about race and the question of whether we &apos;re right .
and it &apos;s exciting because i &apos;m my students afroamerikanische history . i talk about slavery .
i talk about terrorism , the time of the end of the rekonstruktion , until the beginning of the two war .
we don &apos;t really know very much about this .
but for the rivers in this country , it was a time of terror .
in many areas , people have to have been afraid of lynchmobs , people have been afraid of lynchmobs .
or bombs .
it was the fear of terror that was shaped .
and these older people come to me and say , &quot; mr. stevenson , they &apos;re talking about , they &apos;re talking about , they say that they should stop , we have to have the first time in the history of our nation , after 9 / 11 . &quot;
they say , &quot; no -- say , people are being grew up with that . &quot;
and after terrorism , the rassentrennung and decades of rassistisch motivierten the motivierten and apartheid .
and yet , there are a dynamic dynamic , we don &apos;t like to talk about our problems .
we don &apos;t like to talk about our story .
and so we don &apos;t really understand what the meaning of our actions have in the historic context .
we &apos;re constantly getting around .
we always create new tension and conflict .
it &apos;s hard to talk about race , and i think that &apos;s because we &apos;re not willing to be willing to get us to get us to the process of truth and reconciliation .
in south africa , people understood that the rassentrennung wouldn &apos;t have to overcome the willingness to overcome without truth and reconciliation .
even after the genocide in rwanda , there was these willingness to have these willingness , but not in this country .
i have some talks in germany , about death .
it was fascinating , because one of the scientists stood up to my talk , and i said , &quot; you know , it &apos;s profoundly troubling , they &apos;re so deeply talking to hear . &quot;
he said , &quot; in germany , there &apos;s no death penalty .
and of course , you can never give it more . &quot;
it was totally silent . then a woman said , &quot; with our story , it &apos;s impossible to kill us for the systematic killing of people .
it would be gewissenlos of us , and specific people hinzurichten .
i thought about it .
as it was going to live in a world where the german state of people were hinrichten , especially if you were a unverhältnismäßig of jews .
it would be a unerträglich .
it would be gewissenlos .
and yet , in this country , in the states , in the states , we &apos;re going to be -- here &apos;s the risk of the old südens , the risk of the old , elf higher , if the angeklagte black is black , and the victims of the world , if the angeklagte black is white , in the same states , in their soil and the
and yet there &apos;s this mental illness .
i think our identity is threatened .
if we don &apos;t deal with these difficult topics , then the positive and wonderful things are also affected .
we love innovation .
we love technology and creativity .
we love entertainment .
but eventually , this realities will be überschattet of the suffering , abuse , herabsetzung , ausgrenzung .
i think it seems to be able to merge both .
because we ultimately talk about that we need more hope , more commitment , more commitment to make a complex world .
for me , the time is aufzubringen , thinking and talk about the poor , the benachteiligten that who never be at ted .
but think of a way that &apos;s in our own lives .
we all have to have the last thing we have to do in the world we can &apos;t see .
we do this . so we are also as rational as we are , so we were very advanced .
innovation , creativity , and development are not just coming out of our minds .
they come from ideas that are driven by the persuasion in our hearts .
it &apos;s this kopf-herz-verbindung , which i think you &apos;re dependent on , not only to be open for all the bright and begeisternden things , but also the dark and problematischen .
vaclav havel , who was great tschechische politicians , once said , once again .
when we fought in eastern europe , we wanted to be able to do anything , and what we needed was a spiritual , a spiritual , the willingness to be , the willingness to be in hoffnungslosen places , and to be in the first place .
this mental orientation is the core of the core of what i believe is that the ted-gemeinschaften need to engage .
there &apos;s no difference to be technology and design that allows us to be very , very human , as long as we don &apos;t have eyes and ears for poverty , and injustice .
i want to warn you . this kind of identity challenges very much more of us than if we don &apos;t take us .
it &apos;s going to touch them .
as a young lawyer , i was hatt the big privilege to meet pink parks , pink parks , pink parks .
and then , women came back to montgomery , where they had two of their elders , johnnie women who had organized the montgomery-busboykott -- an incredible afroamerikanerin , die carr -- a tremendous afroamerikanerin -- a tremendous afroamerikanerin -- a white , whose husband , clifford durr , dr. king vertrat .
so these women are met themselves and just simply sit .
occasionally , and then , a woman named me and said , &quot; bryan , frau , woman , frau , frau parks in the city . we want to talk .
want to dazukommen and listen ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; yeah , i like , &quot; very , very like . &quot;
she said , &quot; and what are you going to do when you &apos;re here ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m going to listen . &quot;
and i went over and i just heard it .
it was always inspiring , so beflügelnd .
and one day i was sitting there and listened to these women , and after a few hours , women turned to me , &quot; now , bryan , tell me what the › initiative is right .
what do you try to do ? &quot;
i started with my usual talk .
i said , &quot; we &apos;re trying to go to injustice .
wr , people want to help people were convicted of innocent .
we want to be able to fight and fight discrimination in the strafvollzugssystem .
we want to abschaffen lebenslängliche haftstrafen without the children for children .
we want something to the death penalty company .
we want the number of the transportation .
we want to abolish masseninhaftierungen . &quot;
i thought my usual talk , and then she looked at me and said , &quot; mhmm . mhmm . &quot;
she said , &quot; it &apos;s going to be very , very tired . &quot;
then the lady of a woman carr to me , put a finger on my face and said , &quot; and so you have to be very , very tapfer . &quot;
and so i think that the ted-gemeinschaft should be tapferer .
we need to have to put ways of these challenges : this is the problemen that i &apos;m .
because ultimately , our humanity depends on our humanity .
i learned a very simple things .
i learned a few simple things .
we all are more than the worst thing we ever done .
i think that &apos;s true for every people on the planet .
if somebody lies lying , it &apos;s not just a liar .
if somebody assumes something that doesn &apos;t hear it , it &apos;s not just a gun .
who kills somebody is not just a murderer .
and because this is , there &apos;s a fundamental human dignity that have to respect the law .
i also believe that in many parts of this country , and certainly certainly in many parts of the earth , the opposite of poverty is not wealth .
i don &apos;t think that .
i think that in many places , the opposite of poverty is .
and finally , i think , although it &apos;s so dramatically , so beautiful and inspiring , and so anregend , we don &apos;t have the end of our technology , not to the things that we &apos;re doing not , not to our intellect and understood .
finally , a society is not about how they do their rich and powerful and powerful treated , but it &apos;s a privilegierten of the poor people , the verurteilten , the inhaftierten .
because in this context , we start to understand the amazing things that we &apos;re doing .
sometimes i have the equilibrium . a story to end .
sometimes i sometimes do seem to be too .
i &apos;m going to move forward .
sometimes these ideas of our thinking , very important way .
i &apos;m vertrete these kids who were convicted of hard to make a hard .
i go to the untersuchungsgefängnis and i put a client , the 13 or 14 years old , and the erwachsener of the dish .
then i ask myself : how could this happen ?
how can a judge of someone in a something that he isn &apos;t ?
the judge looks at it as adult , but i see a child .
i stayed for a long time , i thought , my goodness , when a judge can transform us into something else , then he has to have zauberkräfte .
right , bryan , the judge has zauberkräfte .
you should also make you want .
and because it was too late , and i couldn &apos;t really think right , i started working on one .
i had a 14jährigen , poor black boys than a police .
and i started working with this . the headline was like , &quot; no , &quot; no , &quot; no , my poor , 14jährigen black paper , white , white , , weißen « .
in my mind , i explained that the world of the world &apos;s population growth and police .
there was a crazy line that there is nothing more about that country is nothing more rechtens that there &apos;s only a lot of people .
the next morning i woke up and didn &apos;t know if i had this insane thought , or it was written .
and i didn &apos;t just write it on my horror , but i was sent to the court .
a few months went off and i had all forgotten about it .
but finally , i decided to myself , my god , i have to have to go into the court and this crazy .
i stepped in the car and was really overwhelmed -- fundraising .
so i went to the court .
and i thought that &apos;s going to be so hard to do so painful .
finally , i went out of my car and went up to the staircase .
when i was hochging. in the gericht , black man , the janitors in the dish .
when he saw me , he came to me and said , &quot; who are you ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m a lawyer . &quot; &quot; &quot; he said , &quot; you &apos;re lawyer ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
he came to me and umarmte me .
then he fell in the ear .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m so proud of them . &quot;
and i have to say , there was a force .
it &apos;s a little deep to me , identity , the ability to be every single one , something to be a community , to a perspective of hope .
well , i was walking the gerichtssaal .
as soon as the judge was looking at me , the judge was looking at me .
he said , &quot; mr. stevenson , have you put this crazy thought ? &quot;
i said , &quot; yes . &quot; and then we started to discuss .
more people came in , just because they were angry , they were angry , they were angry .
i had written that crazy thing .
polizeibeamte came in and stellvertretende staatsanwälte and büroangestellte .
in the handumdrehen , the gerichtssaal of people who were angry , who were angry , we were talking about skin languages , about poverty .
from my augenwinkel , i saw the janitors and go down .
he kept walking through the window and couldn &apos;t hear the whole tohuwabohu .
he went on and down .
finally , this older black guy came with a very besorgten gesichtsausruck , and put it right up to me , almost on the verteidigungsbank .
ten minutes later , the judge was a pause .
while the pause came to a polizeibeamter in the room that was hoping that the janitors was in the gerichtssaal .
this deputy ran to the older black .
he said , &quot; jimmy , what do you do in the gerichtssaal ? &quot;
the older black man was on . he looked at me , and he said , &quot; i &apos;m a hergekommen to say that young man , lose this goal to tell you that don &apos;t take the goal out of the eyes . don &apos;t give you .
i came to ted , because i think many of you have understood that the moral structural is weit the universe , but that it &apos;s the justice of justice .
that we are not evolved as humans , as long as we don &apos;t care about human rights and grundwerte .
that our survival is wired to every single one .
that we have our visions of technology and creation and creation and creativity , to connect with humanity , pity and justice .
and i &apos;d like to have to have those of you who see that just simply , just say , you don &apos;t lose the goal of the eyes . don &apos;t give you .
you &apos;ve seen this audience , this community &apos;s a single wish and heard of them and do something .
what can we do ?
bryan stevenson : well , there are all kinds of ways .
if you live in a thousand life , there &apos;s a volksentscheid , where it &apos;s about , in this spring , it &apos;s about a effort of geldstrom , something that &apos;s going to be in the politics of the punishment .
here , in california , you &apos;ll be able to do a billion dollars for the death penalty ausgeben. , a billion dollars a dollars .
and yet , 46 percent of all the hadn &apos;t had to be with a verhaftung .
and 56 percent of all the vergewaltigungsfälle are not in court .
there &apos;s the chance to do something .
this referendum is going to suggest that money and invest in more sicherheitskräfte and security .
i think everywhere we are .
as the last three decades , the average number of america is in america .
this fact is often going to put into a relationship with elevated elevated .
what would you tell somebody who believes that ?
well , actually , the number of doesn &apos;t have the number of non-zero-sum games .
most of the funding in this country didn &apos;t really found in the class of the gewaltverbrechen .
it was the fehlgeleitete kreuzzug against drugs .
so the dramatic numbers come out of the time .
we &apos;ve got hinreißen of the rhetoric .
now we have drei-verstöße « , people who are bringing people for forever gitter for a fahrraddiebstahl , for the theft of the theft of the theft of the theft of the theft of the theft of the diebstahl .
i think we need to do more to help people , the victims of a straftat , not less .
and i think that our conventional wisdom are not helping us .
i think that &apos;s what we need to change .
bryan , you have a saite to do it .
they &apos;re a inspirational personality .
thank you for ted . thank you .
white death is a erhöhtes utility .
2 : famine in somalia . let &apos;s 3 3 : the police of the police .
4 : bösartige kartelle . five 5 : dangerous kreuzfahrtschiffe .
six : social security broke : sprecher 7 : 65 .
8 : tsunamiwarnung . sprecher 9 : cyber-attacken 9 .
different speakers : drogenkrieg . massenvernichtungswaffen . tornado .
recession . it &apos;s a stillstand . doomsday . syria .
crisis . death .
oh my god .
so these are just a few of the clips that i &apos;ve collected over the last six months -- it would have been able to be the last six days , or the last six years .
the fact is that media prefer us to show us negative topics because our minds are able to fill those issues .
and there &apos;s a very good reason for that .
every second every second every day , our senses are going to have much more information than our brain can ever .
and because we &apos;re not more important than our survival , is the first haltestelle of all the information for all the information that are part of our temporallappens , the amygdala .
so the amygdala is our frühwarnsystem , our frühwarnsystem , our gefahrendetektor .
it exploded and durchkämmt the whole information on the search for the search of danger in our surroundings .
so if we see the news , we prefer to keep it to negative news .
and the old adage , &quot; if it &apos;s blutet , the demand is very true .
now , with all of our digital devices , the seven days of the week , 24 hours a day , 24 hours a day , it &apos;s not a miracle that we are pessimistic .
it &apos;s not a miracle that everybody thinks that the world is always going to be worse .
but maybe it &apos;s not the case .
maybe it &apos;s the reality .
maybe the vast progress that we have is in the last century , we &apos;ve taken a series of forces that we have been able to create a lot of forces in the next three decades , it will be able to create a world of abundance .
now i don &apos;t say we have no big problems -- climate change , water , water and energieprobleme -- that we &apos;ve already done .
and as humans , we are much better at solving very long term , but they eventually wanted to get out of it .
let &apos;s look at what we &apos;ve been achieved in the last century , so we can actually anticipate the evolution .
over the last hundred years , the average life expectancy has doubled more than doubled , which is the world &apos;s population durchschnittseinkommen of the world &apos;s population .
child mortality has a tenth of a tenth .
and then , that &apos;s the ernährungs- , elektrizitäts- , elektrizitäts- and food that have been a pair of time .
steve pinker showed us that we are now in a very peaceful amount of time in the lifetime of life .
and laut charles kenny , the alphabetisierungsquote of the last 130 years of 25 percent of 25 percent of 25 percent of 80 percent .
we live in a really extraordinary time .
and many people forget this .
and we &apos;re going to increase our expectations on our expectations .
in fact , we have a poverty .
remember , a great proportion of americans who live under poverty , water , water , water , toilets , television , television , television , mobiltelefonen , klimaanlagen and cars .
the richest capitalists of the last century , the imperatoren of the earth , never have never been able to have to have to be able to have dreamed of those luxusgüter .
the foundation of that are based on that , and these growing are expotentiell .
my good friend kurzweil has shown us that every tool that &apos;s going to be the information , on the curve of moore &apos;s law , the preis-performance-quotient of all 12 to 24 months .
so that &apos;s why the cellphone of the cellphone in your pocket about a million times a million times , and it &apos;s a supercomputer faster than a supercomputer of the &apos; 70s .
now look at this curve .
this is moore &apos;s law of the last hundred years .
notice two things on this curve .
first of all , how smooth you can do -- in good times , war , war or peace , depression and hochkonjunktur .
this is the result of the faster computers , the faster computers .
it slowed down for none of our big problems .
also , despite their logarithmic verlaufs on the left-hand side , it &apos;s going to blow up .
the rate itself is accelerating .
and on this curve , on the back of moore &apos;s law , we find a series of technologies that are available to all of the things .
&quot; cloud-computing , something that my friends in autodesk &quot; infinite-computing &quot; infinite-computing &quot; infinite-computing , &quot; sensors , the personal production of the planet , synthetic biology , synthetic biology , synthetic biology , and synthetische , impfungen and food , digital medicine and artificial intelligence .
how many of you have seen victory of ibms supercomputer in the risk of the risk ? &quot;
this was the grandios .
i &apos;ve got the newspapers , and after the best headlines i could find .
i love this : &quot; watson bezwingt menschlichen human capital . &quot;
&quot; jeopardy &quot; is not a simple game .
it &apos;s about understanding the nuances of language .
imagine that this artificial intelligence is available to each of a mobiltelefones .
four years ago , ray kurzweil and i &apos;m here at ted university of university called singularity university .
we bring our students all these technologies , with shining emphasis on , in terms of this , they can be used to solve the big challenges of humanity .
and every year we ask the students , companies , products and services that are creating a decade of people who can do the lives of billions of people .
think about it , that a group of students can have been affecting the lives of billions of people .
30 years ago , this was a ridiculous .
today , we can have dozens of companies that have done this .
if i think of it , i don &apos;t think of the abundance , i don &apos;t mean a lifetime of luxury on every planet ; it &apos;s about to create a life of opportunities .
it &apos;s about creating knappen goods .
but the scarcity is kontextbezogen , and technology is a resources of power power .
here &apos;s an example .
this is the story of napoleon iii. in the middle of the century .
it &apos;s the guy on the left .
he &apos;s got the king of siam to dinner .
napoleons soldiers got silber-besteck , napoleon himself got gold-besteck .
the king of siam , however , aluminium-besteck .
now , as i was there was the most valuable metal on the planet , more than gold and platin .
this is the reason why the dome was made from aluminum .
although the aluminum 8,3 percent of the erdmasse , it doesn &apos;t come from the sheer metal .
it gets connected to oxygen and silikate .
but then the technology developed the elektrolyse and made aluminiumherstellung aluminiumherstellung , so that we use it with our wegwerf-mentalität .
then , let &apos;s take this analogy into the future .
we think of energieknappheit .
ladies and gentlemen , we live on a planet in a planet with 5.000-mal energy than we consume .
16 terawatt energy prasseln alle every elementary minutes on earth .
it &apos;s not about scarcity , the problem is not .
and there &apos;s good news .
in this year , you &apos;ve managed to reduce the cost for you to reduce the cost in india in india -- 8.8 rupees in comparison of 17 rupees .
the cost of solar energy , in the last year alone , 50 percent .
last month , this was published with a study showing that the end of the united states in the world &apos;s decade , the united states of the united states is a kwh of kwh , compared to 15 cents in the national average .
and if we have a energieüberschuss , then we will have water in the abundance .
we talk about wasser-kriege .
remember , as carl sagan was 1990 , when it was the saturn , when it was the saturn was back to earth ?
he took a famous photograph . how did it meant ?
&quot; a pale blue . &quot;
because we live on a wasserplaneten life .
we live on a planet who is 70 percent of water .
yes , it &apos;s 97,5 percent saline , and we &apos;re fighting by 0,5 , and we &apos;re fighting for 0.5 percent of water on the planet , but there &apos;s also hope .
and there are new technologies , not in 10 or 20 years , but now .
it &apos;s new nanotechnologien on the way , nano-materialien .
and i &apos;m talking about a conversation with dean kaman , one of the innovators of the building -- he would give you something to you -- his technolgie , which is the erlaubnis , and many of you have heard of you , and many of you have heard of you , and it &apos;s the size of a kühlschranks in the studentenheim .
it can generate thousands of gallons of clean drinking water , a single day of all kinds of sources -- the mysterious water -- and all of that for less than two cents a gallon .
the pilot has been eingewilligt , a big tire of test-projekt with a hundred units in developing world .
and when everything comes well , and i &apos;m very optimistic , then coca-cola is the technology to apply this technology to the whole planet .
this is technologieunterstützte innovation that are today .
and we have seen this in mobile .
you mean my goodness , we &apos;re going to be able to get the 70 percent of mobile phone of mobile phone in the world to the end of 2013 .
remember , a massai-krieger with a cell phone in the middle of kenya , a better mobil-kommunikation than president of 25 years ago .
and if you look at your smartphone on google , you have more access to knowledge and information as president clinton , 15 years ago .
they live in a world that &apos;s information and communications in the abundance of the abundance of how nobody ever could ever have .
and it &apos;s better , the things that you have and i have spent several thousand dollars , and i have several thousand dollars -- a gps and the foto , libraries and music , and music , technology to the medical imaging center -- now , literally entmaterialisiert and cheaper in your cell phone .
and the best thing is , is potentially , what &apos;s going on in the realm of health .
last month i had the pleasure , with the qualcomm-stiftung that so-called &quot; $ 10 million qualcomm x tricorder x x . &quot;
we &apos;re calling teams on earth all over the world , all these technologies are able to connect together with a cellphone , because it &apos;s linked to the machine , you can reinhusten your ki or his blutwerte .
and to win , it has to be a better diagnosis than a team of physicians .
imagine this device . in a developing country where there are no doctors , but 25 percent of the world &apos;s population and 1.3 percent of the health of the health care .
if this device is a rna- or dna-virus , who doesn &apos;t know , it &apos;s the focus and prevents a pandemic before it was a pandemic .
but now , the biggest force that &apos;s going to lead us to the world of the excess .
i call them &quot; the coming &quot; of a billion . &quot;
the white lines are in the population .
we &apos;ve just crossed the 7-milliarden-marke .
and by the way , the biggest absicherung , the biggest absicherung against a solar system is a better education and diet in the world .
in 2010 , we had this kind of billion people in the same way .
by 2020 , we &apos;re going to internetnutzer the voraussichtlich from two billion milliarden .
three billion new heads that we never heard before , will be the global communications .
what does those people need ?
what are you going to consume ? what are you going to desire ?
and instead of the wirtschaftlichem gridlock , i see one of the biggest economic growth of the story .
these people represent several trillion dollars that are going to be going to be constrained in global economy .
and they &apos;re going to be ripped by the use of the tricoders healthy , and they will be trained by the khan-akademie , and by the way you have the opportunity to have 3d and 3d-drucker computing , and so much more powerful than that ever before .
so what can three billion growing , healthy , educated , productive members of us ?
how would it be a sentence , never before gehörter .
how would it be , wherever you are , you &apos;re always to give a voice to make it up and create change , change the first time , for the first time ?
what are these three billion people ?
how would it be beiträgen that we can &apos;t even see ?
one of the things i learned from x is that small teams that are driven by passion and focus , extraordinary things can create extraordinary things , things that create the big companies and governments only in the past .
i want to close with a story that really excites me .
there &apos;s a program that might have some of you .
it &apos;s a game that &apos;s called the first one .
it was developed at the university of washington in seattle .
and it &apos;s a game where people can take a sequence of amino acids , to explore how the protein will evolve .
the after the behavior of his behavior , we can predict the structure and function .
and this is very important in the medizinforschung .
so far , this was a problem for supercomputer .
and this game was played by universitätsprofessoren .
and it &apos;s hundreds of thousands of people who played the game online .
and it showed that today the human pattern better better than the protein is the best possible .
and as those individuals , and they were looking at who was a mit-professor , even a caltech-student , it was a jemand , a woman , a woman who was a woman who was a assistentin woman in a reha-klinik , and night was the best protein-ordnerin of the world .
ladies and gentlemen , what gives me enormous confidence in our future is the fact that we have more power than individuals to ask us the big challenges of our planet .
we have access to use on tools with exponential technology .
we have the passion of a diy-innovatoren .
we have the capital capital of the techno-philanthropen .
and we have three billion new heads that we can work online to meet the new challenges , and to do that .
we expect a few extraordinary decades .
thank you .
i think we have to have something against a verändernswertes piece of medical culture .
and i think it &apos;s a medical student and i &apos;m here .
and maybe i &apos;ve been long enough to be a long time when i allow it to allow me a piece of my own personal falschen aufzugeben to allow this .
but before i come to the middle of my talk , let &apos;s start with a little baseball .
hey , why not ?
we are the saisonende close and move on the world .
all of us love baseball , right ?
baseball is full with amazing statistics .
and there are hundreds of them .
&quot; moneyball soon and turns around statistics and to use this great baseball team .
i &apos;m going to get myself on a statistics of statistics of the hope that i hope most of you have heard .
it &apos;s the durchschnittsleistung of the schlägers .
we talk about a 300 , when a bat schlägt .
that means that the player is safe three of 10 .
this is called the ball ins , he &apos;s not going to go , and who &apos;s going to go to the first base , it didn &apos;t have to take the world to the first base , it didn &apos;t have time to go in .
three out of the 10th 10 out of the 10th .
you know how to put a 300ter in major league in major .
well , really well , maybe a all-star .
you know how to call a 400ter ?
this is a person who &apos;s safe four times a little bit of four .
legendär -- like ted williams -- the last major league league player in a regulären season for 400 times .
let &apos;s go back to my world in medicine , in which i feel like i feel good or less comfortable with you about this .
suppose you have a blinddarmentzündung , and they become a operateur , and they &apos;re going to have a operateur , whose durchschnittsleistung 400 400 400 in terms of blinddarmentzündungen .
somehow it doesn &apos;t work , right ?
suppose they live in a particular remote neighborhood and they have a beloved people with verstopften herzkranzgefäßen and her hausarzt überweist that durchschnittsleistung that durchschnittsleistung at 200 .
but , but you know what ?
it &apos;s a lot better than it is in the middle of the field .
and it &apos;s a 257 .
somehow it doesn &apos;t work .
but i &apos;m going to ask you a question .
what do you think about the durchschnittsleistung for a kardiologen or a nurse or a orthopäden , a geburtshelfer , a rettungsassistenten should be a rettungsassistenten .
family , very good .
the truth is that nobody in medicine knows what a good surgeon or doctor or rettungsassistent .
what we do is we &apos;re going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be perfect with the world .
never ever make a mistake , nobody does , but it &apos;s a mistake , as you should be thinking about .
and this is the message i put in medical school .
i was a zwanghaft student student .
in high school , a mitschüler said that brian goldmann would be learning for a bluttest .
and this was also .
and i learned in my little dachstube in the sisters of the sisters at the schwestern , general , unweit of here .
i learned everything .
in my anatomievorlesung , i learned the origins and ausläufer every time , every branch of any artery to each other , which is the aorta of the aorta , obskure and ordinary differentialdiagnosen .
i knew even the differentialdiagnose to klassifizieren renale azidose .
and the whole time i collected more and more .
and i was good , i was closed with cum laude .
and i left the medizinstudium with the idea that i knew everything i ever memorized and everything that way possible , as possible as possible as possible , as possible , i could not make the mistakes of mistakes .
and it was a time for a time until i met a woman .
i &apos;m sitting on a lehrkrankenhaus in toronto as a woman was brought into the notfallabteilung of the hospital .
at that point , i was the kardiologischen layer in the kardiologischen service .
and it was my commission when the notfallpersonal kardiologischen council sought to study the notfallpatienten .
and i think of my oberarzt .
i examined a woman , and she was in atemnot .
and when i was a doctor , she made keuchende sounds .
and when i was working with the stethoskope abhörte , i could hear a knackendes sound on both sides , which told me that she had a kongestiver heart rate .
this is a state in the heart of the heart , instead of using the whole blood flow , and it &apos;s a part of the blood flow and filling that gradually , so that &apos;s the kurzatmigkeit .
and that was not a hard to be stellenden diagnosis .
i put them and made me to the treatment .
i gave her . i gave her medicine to take the pressures of the heart .
i gave her medicine that we call diuretics water , water , so they were ausschied the liquid .
and over a period of a time , a period of two hours , they started to feel better .
i felt really good .
and i made my first mistake ; i sent them home .
actually , i did two errors .
i sent them home with my oberarzt .
i didn &apos;t have the one in the front and i did what i would have to have been a phone call in my oberarzt would be to make it a chance to make a chance to make a own picture .
and he knew he &apos;d be able to get additional information into the beizusteuern .
maybe i did it with good reason .
maybe i didn &apos;t want to be the most pressing doctor .
maybe i want to be successful and to take the responsibility to take that i was so so much , i was so like that , and so i would have to go to my patients without the position of my patients .
my second mistake was worse .
so i sent them home , i missachtete a quiet voice in me , trying to tell me , &quot; goldman , no good idea . don &apos;t do that . &quot;
in fact , i was really struck in this very selbstsicherheit , i was so privileged to me that i was doing the nurse that was doing a woman , &quot; believe it , if you go home ? &quot;
and the nurse thought about it and said in faktischer , &quot; sure , i think it &apos;s going to be good . &quot;
i remember it was yesterday .
so i unterzeichnete the entlassungspapiere and a ambulance and rettungsassistenten and brought them home .
and i went back to work .
the rest of the day , i had this nagende sense in my stomach .
but i continued to work .
and at the end of the day i wrapped my stuff , put the hospital , and went to the parking lot to go home to the car , when i did , i didn &apos;t do .
i went through the notfallabteilung to my way home .
and there was another nurse , not the sister who had a woman &apos;s sister , but another three words , and those three words are afraid that i know most of the most notfallärzte i know .
other doctors fear fear these but the notfallmedizin is very special because we only see the patients just watch so .
the three words : remember ?
&quot; remember you remember the patient that you were going to ? &quot;
asked the nurse .
so she &apos;s back , &quot; she said , &quot; she said , &quot; she said , &quot; she said , &quot; she said in that particular particular .
so she was back .
she was back , and they die .
about an hour after she got home after i had sent her home , she would give them home , and they called a family , they would call a 911 , and they brought back to the notfallstation with a blood pressure of 50 , that &apos;s a dangerous schockzustand .
they hardly atmete and blue was angelaufen .
the notfallpersonal gave us all the strands .
they gave her blutdruckerhöher .
they closed them on the beatmungsmaschine .
i was shocked , and to the inner zerrüttet .
and i used this rollercoaster because they came after the stabilisation on the intensive care system , and i hoped that she would recover .
and after two , three days , it was clear that she never would never come back .
she had not behandelbaren a behandelbaren erlitten .
their family moved to their family .
and over the course of the next eight , nine days , they ergaben the geschehenen .
on the day day they go -- ms. drucker , a woman , a woman and grandmother .
you say you don &apos;t think the names of the versterben .
and this was the first time i learned this .
the next weeks , i &apos;ve been looking at , and i learned the ungesunde empires in our medical culture -- i felt like , not alone , not the kind of healthy shame that you &apos;re talking about , because you can &apos;t talk to the peers .
you all know the healthy shame , even though you &apos;re a geheimnis of the best friend , and you get caught and then you get caught and then a schrecklich friend , but my own kind of discussion is a terrible thing , but you have a bad discussion , if you have a bad thing , and you &apos;re schwört that you never make a mistake .
if you put together wiedergutmachung and the mistakes never again .
this is the kind of lehrreicher shame .
the kind of the art i &apos;m talking about is the , that makes you a innersten .
it &apos;s one that tells you that doesn &apos;t happen to you that what you did is , but it &apos;s bad .
and that was what i felt .
and it wasn &apos;t on my oberarztes , he was very gentle .
he talked about family , and i &apos;m sure he was the wogen glättete and safe and sure that i didn &apos;t get sued .
but i asked myself to ask this question .
why did i ask the oberarzt , why i &apos;m going to ask them home ?
and then in my worst moments , how could i make such a stupid mistake ?
why am i going to go into medicine ?
slowly , but surely it &apos;s safe .
i started feeling better .
and then a day , there was a hole in the clouds and the sun , and i said i can probably get myself better .
and i was with me that if i have my efforts to perfection and never again a mistake that the voice could be verstummen .
and she did .
and i continued to go on .
and then it happened again .
two years later , i had service in the notfallstation hospital hospital of toronto and i begutachtete a 25 year-old guy with gereiztem rachen .
it was a lot of los and i was in a hurry .
he showed up here .
i looked at the rachen , and it was a little bit pink .
and i gave him a prescription for penicillin and sent him .
and then he was out of the door , he showed him on his rachen .
two days later , i came to my next notfalldienst and my chefärztin asked me to put on a conversation in your office .
and she said the three words : remember you ?
&quot; remember you remember the patient with the gereizten ? &quot;
it turns out he &apos;s a streptokokken-infektion .
he had a potentially lebensgefährliche lebensgefährliche illness called epiglottitis .
you can the one , but it &apos;s not a infection of the rachens , but the top atemwege and causes the verschluss of the atemwege .
and luckily , he didn &apos;t die .
he received intravenöse antibotica and recovered a few days later .
and i went back by the same tortur of shame and self-doubt , felt me , and went to work and again and again and again .
in a notfallschicht , i have two time a blinddarmentzündung .
there &apos;s a lot of time thinking about that , if you think that you &apos;re in a hospital that was just 14 , 14 patients had 14 patient .
in both cases , i didn &apos;t have them home and there were no mängel in their treatment .
when i thought he was nierensteine .
i ordnete the x-ray x-ray of the kidneys . when the ohne was befund , my colleague , stellte , put my colleague , verhärtung , and i was stuck in the bottom of the patient , and called the operateure .
the other had been diarrhea .
i ordnete ordnete to him and asked my colleagues to perform my colleague .
and he did , and when he was writing a verhärtung in the right in the right , he called the operateure .
in both cases , and it went out well .
both of the fälle nagten , fraßen me .
and i would be happy to say that my worst mistake , in the first five years , i &apos;ll just show you , many of my colleague , but i think photography is nonsense .
some of my klöpse were covered in the last five years .
alone , beschämt and without support .
here &apos;s the problem : if i don &apos;t go with my mistakes and talk about you , if i tell the silent voice that i can &apos;t find , how can i share it with my colleague ?
how can i teach you my mistakes so that they don &apos;t make the same ?
if i had a room -- like now , i &apos;m just now , i don &apos;t have any idea what you think about me .
when did you have the last time you talked about fehlschlag about fehlschlag ?
oh , yeah , you go to a cocktail party and there you might have heard about other doctor , but you don &apos;t have somebody to talk about your own mistakes .
if i had a room with colleagues and to get their immediate support , and they want to tell you what i would have told you , i would not really be really aggressive before it would really be really aggressive , anyone would be einflechten , you would be vergessen the topic , and the rest of the rest .
and in fact , if i knew my colleagues knew that a orthopäde in my hospital , the wrong leg , then you would believe me , i would have problems in the eye .
this is the system in which we live .
it &apos;s a totally verleugnung knowledge of errors .
it &apos;s a system where there are two basic positions -- those who do the mistakes , and those who do not make mistakes , and those who require the schlafmangel and the limitation that have to have the bad results , and with good results .
it &apos;s almost a ideologische reaction as antibodies , the antibodies that will change .
and there &apos;s the idea that if we can make the people who are making mistakes , that we can make a system that we can do .
but there are two problems in there .
in my about 20 years of the medical school and journalism , i have a personal study of medical failures and wrong treatments , to make me know of a ersten , i &apos;ve been given to my first article to my show , &quot; white coat , black , &quot; i wrote to learn .
and what i learned is that errors are absolutely unumgänglich .
we &apos;re working in a system that &apos;s going to happen in a system where a 10 medikationen is either a false or wrong dosiert , and it &apos;s always zahlreicher and zahlreicher and verwüstung .
in this state die , about 24,000 canadians fehlern .
in the united states , the institute of medicine for medicine is the number of numbers .
both of these are strong untertreibungen , because we don &apos;t look at the problem as well as we should .
and is the crux .
in a krankenhaussystem medical system , the medical knowledge is all about two to three years , we can &apos;t keep up .
schlafmangel is ubiquitous .
we can &apos;t get rid of it .
we have a cognitive error , so that we can take a perfect krankheitsverlauf for patients with chest .
then i take the same patient with brustschmerz , making him ihn and geschwätzig and give it a slightly alkoholisierten breath and suddenly the story with contempt .
i don &apos;t take the same thing .
i &apos;m not a robot ; i don &apos;t do things .
and my patients are not cars ; they don &apos;t tell me their symptoms in the same way .
all of the summarized is inevitable .
so if you take the system as i was taught , and all the fehlerbehafteten fehlerbehafteten gesundheitsexperten , then there &apos;s no longer left .
and you know the leier of people who don &apos;t want to talk about their worst cases ?
in my show , &quot; white coat , &quot; i &apos;m &quot; my &quot; schlimmster &quot; i would say , &quot; my worst mistake , &quot; this is my worst mistake , &quot; this is a &quot; schlimmster mistake , &quot; blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , and then i &apos;ll show you with the microphone
and then they expand their pupils , they &apos;re sitting in front of your head , then you look down and swallow , and start to tell their stories .
they want their stories . they want their stories .
they want to say , &quot; look , look , don &apos;t make the same mistakes that i &apos;m fabrizierte . &quot;
what you need is a environment that you can make it .
what you need is a new medical culture .
and it starts with a doctor .
the new doctor is a human being , white to its humanity , accepted , is not proud to make mistakes , but it sets all of it to learn from it , so that it can be passed .
they share their experiences with others .
they supported the other mistakes .
and it shows others that &apos;s not to be on the same mistake , not to bloßzustellen , but in a support , and it &apos;s all the way that all of that is benefit .
and she &apos;s working in a medical culture that people have the system that people fill the system with life and if that &apos;s how it &apos;s , people are also going to do mistakes at time .
so that the system evolved to build the same as the people who do , and it &apos;s also the same way of creating the public health , which is the best possible for the health care , which is actually creating things that are actually ansprechen the health and it &apos;s actually reward , and that specifically for people who are going to be the mistakes and for the
my name is brian goldman .
i &apos;m the new doctor .
i &apos;m a man . i &apos;m making mistakes .
i &apos;m bedaure das. , but i &apos;m trying to learn from learning to learn it .
i don &apos;t know what you &apos;re holding me , but i can live .
let me just close with three of my own words : i remember .
i &apos;m going to talk about a tiny , little idea .
it &apos;s about veränderbare normwerte .
and because you can explain this idea in a minute , i &apos;ll tell you three stories about the time .
the first story is about charles darwin , one of my heroes .
you know , he &apos;s probably 1835 that he was 1835 here .
you might think that he finken finken , but that &apos;s not true .
actually , he was sammelte .
he described a lot about it as a very common idea .
it was a zackenbarsch .
until the &apos; 80s , he was gefischt in grand style .
now he says it on the red list of the list .
this story has a lot of times from the galapagos or from other places , it &apos;s not very special .
yet we &apos;re still going on the galapagos .
we still think they were .
the broschüren describe it still , they still have a untouched .
what &apos;s happening here ?
the second story is supposed to be another concept , the veränderbare taillenweite , verdeutlichen .
because i experienced it when i was running a lagune in west-afrika .
i went there because i grew up in europe and i wanted to work later in africa .
i thought i could integrate .
and i got a bad sonnenbrand , and i was convinced that i really wasn &apos;t at all .
it was my first sonnenbrand .
as you can see , the lagoon of palmen , and a few mangroven mangroven .
there were buntbarsche buntbarsche by 20 , schwarzkinnmaulbrüter , a unterart of the buntbarsche .
the fischgründe of these buntbarsche were very ertragreich , and the fishermen were living at all , and they were very high school in ghana .
when i got 27 years later , the fish was on half of its size .
they &apos;re at the same time they &apos;re at five centimeters .
they were been proposed to be erdrückt .
there were still fish .
people were still happy .
and the fish also had the fortunate that &apos;s fortunate .
so it has nothing changed , and yet it has changed everything .
my third little story tells me from my mittäterschaft in the introduction of the schleppnetzfischerei in southeast asia .
in the 1970s , more to the beginning of the 60s -- förderte europe is a lot of entwicklungsprojekte .
hand , the 100 of the 000 fish started , the industrial fishing , this is a pretty ugly ship called mutiara 4. .
i went on and we were doing in the entire southern southern southern hemisphere and especially in the javasee .
we have no words for what we were there .
i know that it was the reason of the ocean .
ninety percent of our fangs were sponges , other animals who are connected to the bottom .
the biggest part of the fish that are small dots on the rubble , the trümmerhaufen , were korallenriff-fische .
basically , the reason of the ocean came to the sea level and then zurückgeworfen .
these images are extraordinary , because the transition is very fast .
within a year , you have a survey through , and then you start with the average fishing .
the reason is changing . in this case -- a hard reason or soft corals is matschiger .
this is a dead turtle .
they didn &apos;t eat them , you &apos;d threw them away because they were dead .
once we started a alive .
she wasn &apos;t ertrunken .
then they wanted to kill them , because you could eat them well .
in fact , this mountain will have angesammelt of trümmern , if you &apos;re in areas where they &apos;ve never been left .
but it &apos;s not going to be documented .
we change the world , but we don &apos;t remember it .
we &apos;re going to adapt our normwerte level of new level and not to remind us what was there .
if you zoom out , this is what happens .
on the y-axis are a few good things : biodiversity , the number of orca , the green of the country , the wasservorrat .
it changes the time . it changes it , because for people , the people are all of course .
every generation looking at the images you can pick up , you can pick up your life as a standard and will have everything that it needs .
the difference is then , as loss .
but they &apos;re taking the previous losses .
it can be a order of changes .
and at the end , they just want to get the erbärmlichen remains .
this is exactly what &apos;s our goal .
we want to get things that are disappeared , or things that are not so much that they were .
you might think that the problem is the problem of people who lived in räuberischen societies , animals and only after a few generations , which was discovered for a few generations .
because obviously , an animal that it &apos;s going to have been very often , until it rarely never happened before it was ausstirbt .
so you don &apos;t have a frequent framework .
you &apos;re always going to be used in rare animals .
and that &apos;s why it &apos;s not being a big loss of loss .
and with time , we &apos;re focused on the big animals and the seas are the big fish .
they &apos;re going to be surprised because we &apos;re going to catch them .
with the time , little fish remains , and we think that &apos;s the normwert .
the question is , why people accept the accept .
well , because you don &apos;t know that it was different .
of course , a lot of people , scientists , scientists , confirm that it really was really different .
you &apos;ll confirm it because the evidence you can quantify in a earlier form , are not as much as you would like to fall into the evidence .
there &apos;s the one that the anecdote is that the report of a kapitäns is not used in this area of a kapitäns , not used , or not gewertet , because he &apos;s not &quot; scientific . &quot;
so we have the situation that people don &apos;t know the past , although we live in gebildeten societies because they don &apos;t trust the vents of the past .
this shows the enormously big , that can play a marine games .
because the only way we are doing the past .
we put the past again that people can &apos;t understand because the normwerte have changed and very low .
and so that &apos;s the people who can see a marine reserve and the insight that it lets you have to have your normwerte .
what about the people who don &apos;t have to be possible because they have no access to -- the people in the middle east ?
here , i think , i think , the art and the film might fill the gap and maybe the kind of gap .
this is the simulation of chesapeake bay .
a long time ago there was there -- 500 years ago .
and the farbtöne and -schattierungen , maybe you might be able to call &quot; avatar . &quot;
if you think of &quot; avatar , &quot; if you think of it , the people were being touched by this -- except by the pocahontas-geschichte , why were they touched by the bilderwelt ?
because it &apos;s a little wachruft that &apos;s lost in some sense .
so my empfehlung , the only ones i &apos;m going to give you to , and it &apos;s going to be on cameron , so he turns out to be a avatar .
thank you .
in the &apos; 80s , in the kommunistischen ostdeutschland , you had to be able to fill up with a typewriter that you have to register the government .
they had to be a piece of sheet of beispieltext out of this typewriter .
the reason for this : the government could roll where a text .
they found a article with falschem gedankengut , and they could track the urheber of this thought .
and we couldn &apos;t understand the west , like someone could do something , and how much the speech will cost .
in our own countries , we would never do something .
but if you buy a new farblaserdrucker of the leading laserdruckerfabrikanten , and a page , it has a page , this page is a little yellow flecke , in a side , in a pattern , which is the side to them on it and their printer .
this is what happens today .
and it seems like nobody &apos;s aufzuregen .
and this was an example of what our own governments are the technology to bring the technology against us , the citizens .
and this is one of the three hauptquellen of the existing online-problemen of the existing online-problemen .
so let &apos;s look at what really on the world : we can actually split the attacks in categories .
we have three hauptgruppen .
there are online-kriminelle .
for example , this is mr. dimitry golubow golubow from kiew in ukraine .
and the motive of online-kriminellen are very easy to understand .
these people deserve money .
they use online-angriffe to earn a lot of money , a giant lot of money .
there are several known fälle cases of online-millionären , multimillionären who have made their money through attacks .
this is wladimir tsastsin from tartu in estonia .
this is alfred gonzalez .
stephen watts .
björn sundin .
these are matthew anderson , tariq al-daour , tariq al-daour and so on .
these people have come to wealth , but they &apos;ve been illegal to klauen money from our bankkonten , as we do our online-banking , or also keylogger , which are the tastatur of our online-banking , or also keylogger that are collected on the input using the keyboard , while we &apos;re shopping with a infected computer .
the u.s. intelligence agency in two months ago , two months ago , sam , and on this account , 14,9 million dollars as it was frozen .
mr. is a mountain itself is on display , the aufenthaltsort is unknown .
and i claim that it &apos;s more likely to be more likely to be victims of a online-verbrechens than one of the things that &apos;s in the real world .
and it &apos;s very obvious that this is going to be worse .
in the future , most of the crime are going to play online .
the second angreifergruppe that we can observe today , are not by money .
they &apos;re not motivated by something -- it &apos;s made , or through your audience .
groups like anonymous , as a lot of anonymous are aufgestiegen and the hauptspieler on the top of the online-angriffe .
so these are the three main characteristics : criminals that it &apos;s doing money because of the anonymous , the resistance that are doing resistance , but the last group are nations , governments that lead the attacks .
there &apos;s a look at how the diginotar .
it shows you what happens when governments are going to attack their own citizens .
diginotar is a vollmachtszertifikat from the netherlands -- or , or it was .
in the last fall , it had to be insolvenz , because it was hacked .
someone was eingebrochen , and had the system to hack .
and last week in a meeting , in a meeting , i asked a leitenden of this leitenden of this group , the question that he was possible for possible that because of the diginotar-hacks people were died .
and his answer was &quot; yes . &quot;
now , how does people die in a magic such one ?
diginotar is a zertifizierungsstelle .
they sell them .
what do you do with zertifikaten ?
now , you need a certificate , if you have a website with https , with ssl-verschlüsselten , for example , for example .
now we &apos;re all using , or a lot of us , or a lot of the konkurrenten , where the dienste are particularly common in totalitären states like the iran , where they know that they can trust more than local anbietern , and they &apos;re more confidence , and they &apos;re about ssl-verbindungen , so that the local government can &apos;t be able to perform that the local
can you see if you sit in a foreign position in one of the foreign .
zertifizierungsbehörde hacking hacking and gefälschte zertifikate .
and that &apos;s exactly what happened in the trap of diginotar .
how does it behave with the arab spring and the things that are in egypt ?
now , in egypt , the investigating the aufständischen of the world &apos;s gdp in the world &apos;s population of egyptian geheimpolizei . and it &apos;s found a lot of records .
in those records , a folder was called &quot; finfisher . &quot;
and in this folder , a firma notizen in germany , who had been selling a couple of programs with whom they were -- in very large-scale frame -- any communication of egyptian citizens could .
they had this program for 280.000 dollars to the egyptian government .
the firmenhauptquartier is exactly here .
so provide western governments to totalitäre governments to hilfsmitteln government to hilfsmitteln the against their own citizens .
but western governments help itself .
for example , in germany , just a few weeks ago , a few weeks ago , the sogenannte was gefunden by german regierungsvertretern to bespitzeln their own citizens .
if you &apos;re going to be in a kriminalfall verdächtigt , then you will be ziemlicher your phone phone .
but today we are far beyond .
they tap their internet connection .
they use resources like the staatstrojaner to bespielen their computer with a trojaner that allows them to überwachen their entire communications , their online-diskussionen abzuhören , their passwörter .
so if we think about these things , the obvious answer is , the obvious answer of people : &quot; ok , that sounds bad , but it doesn &apos;t happen because i &apos;m a braver citizen .
i don &apos;t have to worry about that !
i have nothing to hide . &quot;
and this argument makes no sense .
privacy has been to be a privacy .
privacy is not the debate .
it &apos;s not a decision between privacy and security .
it &apos;s a choice between freedom and control .
and as we now , in 2011 , our governments might be trust , but every right we &apos;re going to do is forever .
and trust , we trust , we trust any future government , a government that we might have in 50 years ?
these are the questions we have to do with the next 50 years .
it may seem odd to show you , but i &apos;m a big fan of betonblocksteinen .
the first betonblocksteine were made 1868 and entstammten of a simple idea : module out of cement with a really special measurements that fit .
betonbausteine were very quickly , very quickly , the most meistgenutzte baueinheit in the world .
they put us into the situation that we were larger than we were , buildings , bridges , a rock after the other .
basically , the betonbaustein was going to become the building of our time .
nearly a hundred years later , in 1947 , the lego came out of this .
it was called the automatically verbindende rock . &quot;
and within a few years , legos in every household .
it &apos;s estimated that over 400 billion bricks , or 75 steine for every person on the planet .
you don &apos;t have to be an engineer to make beautiful houses , beautiful bridges or beautiful building .
lego made it possible for all possible .
lego has basically the betonbaustein , the building block the world , and it &apos;s made a building for our imagination .
in the meantime , in the same year , the next year , the next revolution , the next revolution .
the transistor was a small plastikeinheit , which is a little plastikeinheit that tells us a world of the statischen , aufeinandergestapelten building blocks of the world in the world was going to be interactive .
like the betonblock , allows us to build a lot of larger cycles , a rock after the other .
but there &apos;s a hauptunterschied : the transistor was just for experts .
i personally accept that , i don &apos;t think that the building of our time is reserved and so i decided to change that .
so eight years ago , i was at the media lab and i started exploring this idea how to make the power of engineers in the hands of the hands of the hands and designers .
a few years ago , i started to develop littlebits .
let me show you how you work .
littlebits are electronic modules that have a specific function .
they &apos;re vorgefertigt , light , tone , ton , motor and sensor .
and the best thing is that they connect with magnets together .
so you can &apos;t get rid of them wrong .
the stone stones are farbcodiert .
green is an issue , blue is electricity , pink is input and orange .
so all you have to do is a blue and a green with a green interconnected , and you can make very quickly kreislaufe quickly .
you add a blue lights on a green , and you can make light .
you can put a switch in between the camp and so they have a little dimmer .
take the switch off around a pulsmodul , which is , put up , and you &apos;ve got a little blinker .
take this buzzer for a extra effect , and they have a lärmmaschine .
i &apos;m going to stop this .
beyond the simple play , is actually pretty powerful .
instead of giving you programming , verdrahten or löten , allow you to program with simple , intuitive gestures .
so to make the sand or slow motion , just turn it on this button and it makes the momentum or slower .
the idea behind littlebits is that there &apos;s a growing library .
we want to bring every single interaction on this world in a gebrauchsfertigen rock .
lights , sounds , töne , solarelemente , motors -- everything should be available .
we &apos;ve got littlebits of children and play with it .
and it was an incredible experience .
the most beautiful thing is , how you start to understand the electronics that you &apos;re in the everyday world and not learn them in school .
like a nachtlicht , or why the doors of the aufzugs , or how a ipod responds to touch .
we also brought littlebits .
so we had an example of any designers in electronic things that started to play with littlebits as material .
this is what we see with filz , paper and water , like geordie ...
so a few weeks ago , we had littlebits littlebits and gave them some designers that had no technical experience -- just left , wood and paper -- and they said , &quot; power . &quot;
here &apos;s an example of a project that they did , they did a bewegungsgesteuerte .
but wait you , this is actually my favorite page .
it &apos;s a hummer of play-doh , the fear of the dark .
for these nicht-ingenieure , littlebits became a more important , electronics , electronics , just a more important material .
and we want to do this material for all the available .
so littlebits open source .
you can go on the website , all the designvorlagen and you make yourself .
we want to encourage the world of creators , the inventors , the inventor , the mitwirkenden , because this world we live in , the interactive world , is heard of us .
so , pull them off and start invent them .
thank you .
