you know , one of the big vernügen of the travel and one of the freuden at the ethnographischen research , together with the people who remember the old days , and the past still feel the way in the wind , touch them on the rain geglätteten stones , taste them in the bitteren blättern .
and just the way that jaguar-schamanen are still full of the way of the milky way , or the importance of the ancient of the world are still full of meaning , or that the central revelation of anthropology to rufen , that &apos;s the idea that the world that we live in , not in an absolute sense , but only as a model of reality , as a
and of course , we all share the same anpassungsnotwendigkeiten .
we &apos;re all born . we bring children to the world .
we &apos;re going through initiationsrituale .
we have to deal with the unaufhaltsamen separation by death and so we shouldn &apos;t surprise that we all sing , dance and art .
but interesting is the unique tonfall of the liedes , the rhythm of dance in every culture .
and it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s the penan in the forests of borneo , or the krieger in haiti , or the warrior in the kaisut-wüste of nordkenia , or a karawanserei in the middle of the sahara , or a karawanserei in the middle of the sahara , and this is random by the colleague i traveled to a month ago in the desert , or even
all these people teach us that there are other other existenzmöglichkeiten , other ways , other ways of orientation on earth .
and this is an idea that , if you think about it , can be able to meet with hope .
together , the unzähligen cultures of the world are creating a net of spirituellem and kulturellem life that umhüllt earth and for the earth &apos;s probably as important as the biological lebensnetz you know as a biosphere .
you can imagine this cultural lebensnetz as a ethnosphäre , and ethnosphäre can be the gesamtsumme of all thoughts and dreams , myths , inspirationen and intuitionen that were being defined by the human imagination for the beginning of consciousness .
the ethnosphäre is the great legacy of humanity .
it &apos;s the symbol of what we are and what we are capable of doing as an amazing species .
and just like the biosphere was abgetragen , this was happening with the ethnosphäre -- just at least more speed .
no biologist would be to argue that 50 percent or more of all species are just going to extinction , because it &apos;s just not true . and yet , this -- the apokalyptischste szenarium in the field of biodiversity -- almost hardly what we known as optimistischstes szenarium on the region of cultural diversity .
and the key thing about this is the extinction of languages .
when any of you were born in this room , the earth were talked about 6,000 languages .
now , a language is not just the sum of the vokabulars or a series of grammatikregeln .
a language is expression of the human mind .
it &apos;s a means that has a soul of a certain culture to find access to the physical world .
every language is like a altbestehender forest of the mind , a turning point , a thought , an ecosystem of spiritual possibilities .
and these 6,000 languages are going to be here today , while we &apos;re in monterey , right half of the time , they &apos;re not geflüstert in the ears of children .
they &apos;re not taught to be a kleinkindern . that means , if nothing is done , they are already already dead .
what could be a einsamer than to be from silence , one of the last person &apos;s last to be , who speak your language , no possibility to share wisdom of the ancestor , or the hope of hope ?
and yet , this horrible fate actually happens to someone on earth , about every two weeks , because every two weeks , an older person dies , and taking the last silben of an old language .
and i know some of you say , &quot; isn &apos;t it better ? &quot; wouldn &apos;t the world be a better place if we all would speak a language ? &quot; and i say , &quot; well , let &apos;s be a language . let &apos;s be kantonesisch .
let &apos;s be kogi . &quot;
and then you suddenly realize how it would be , if you could not speak your own language .
so i &apos;d like to take you today , a journey , to take a journey through the ethnosphäre , a short journey through the ethnosphäre to try to understand what &apos;s been lost .
now there are some of us who remember , that i think , when i say , &quot; different possibilities of his being , &quot; really different possibilities of his mind .
take this child of the barasana in the northwest of the amazon , the people of the anakonda , believe that they were mythologisch the milchfluss from the east in the belly of holy snakes .
this is a people that doesn &apos;t be cognitively between color blue and green because the himmelszelt of the forest that people depend upon is gleichgestellt .
they have a eigenartige language and a heiratsvorschrift called the linguistic exogamie , and you have to marry someone who &apos;s going to speak a different language .
all of this is wurzelt in the mythologischen past . the eigenartige of these big houses , which are spoken in the mischehen of six or seven languages , but it &apos;s not that you never hear someone who &apos;s learning a language .
you just hear and start speaking .
or , one of the most fascinating tribes i &apos;ve ever lived with , the waorani in the northeast of ecuador , a amazing people , the first time in the year of 1958 peaceful .
in 1957 , five missionare were trying to meet contact and made a schwerwiegenden mistake .
they took glänzende photos of themselves , which we would judge as a friendly gesture , and they forgot that these people had never seen anything more zweidimensionales in their lives .
they took these photographs from the forest floor , tried to see the face or the character , and they couldn &apos;t find anything and schlussfolgerten that this is the business of the devil and killing the five missionare with the speer .
but the waorani doesn &apos;t just kill the speer .
they &apos;re durchbohrten each other .
54 percent of the deaths happened by durchbohrungen .
we &apos;re tracking eight generations back and found two cases of a natural death and when we ausfragten people with a nachdruck bit about it , they gave them that one of the people had become so old that he died because of his age , and we kill him with the speer .
but at the same time , they had a clear kenntnis of the forest that was amazing .
their predators could smell the urine of a animal from a animal &apos;s urin , and determine what animal species of this was .
in the early days , i got a really amazing assignment when my professor at harvard asked whether i was interested in taking haiti and to infiltrieren the secret societies that were the foundation of duvalier and tonton macoutes and the poison that was used for that to make zombies .
so to give a sense of this , i had to think of this remarkable faith in the vodoun knowledge and voodoo is not a kult of the black magic .
it &apos;s the opposite , it &apos;s a complex kind of a kind of thing that is happening .
it &apos;s interesting .
if i would ask you , the big world &apos;s world , what would you say ?
christianity , islam , buddhismus , judaismus , whatever .
a continent is always left out , because the guess is that there &apos;s no religious belief in sub-saharan africa , and of course there was one and voodoo , and there &apos;s just the überbleibsel of this very tiefgehenden religious thought that &apos;s in the tragic of the sklavereizeit &apos;s tragischen .
but what makes interesting interesting is that this is what this is living between the living and the dead .
the living gave the minds .
the minds can be heraufbeschwört by under the big water , answers to the rhythm of dance to verdrängen the soul of living , so that the akolyth is going to be a short glänzenden moment for god .
deshab , they like to say , &quot; your white is going to church and talk about god .
we dance in the temple , and become god . &quot;
and because you &apos;re obsessed , you &apos;re going to take off of the mind . how can you damage harm ?
you can see these amazing demonstrations : voodoo-akolythen in a trancezustand , the glühende coal without any verbrennung , an amazing amount of the ability of mind to influence the body so that this is aushält when it gets to a state of extreme arousal .
now , from all the people i met were the kogi kogi de de marta in nordkolumbien , who was the most extreme .
and offspring of the ancient tyrannischen civilization that bevölkerten the karibische of the kolumbien of the kolumbien , and in the end of the eroberung , this people massiv into a isoliertes vulkanisches massiv that aufsteigt above the karibischen küstenebene .
in a blutbefleckten continent , these people were the only ones that have never been erobert by the spaniern .
until the day of the day , they become a ritual priesterschaft , and the training of the priesterschaft is very extraordinary .
the young akolythen are separated from their families , and in a schattenhaften world of finsternis , steinhütten at the fuße of the glacier for 18 years , zwei zwei , by the time , for nine months of the pregnancy , to try to mimic the nine months of the pregnant that they spent in their leiblichen mother , so they &apos;re metamorphorisch in the lap of the big
and during this time , they &apos;re being introduced culturally in the values of their society , values that sustain the claim that their prayers and their prayers , the cosmic cosmic -- or we could say the ecological -- balance .
at the end of this amazing , you &apos;re going to take a sonnenaufgang day , and at the age of 18 , you &apos;re going to see a sonnenaufgang , and in this kristallklaren moment of the amazing beautiful landscape , suddenly everything you learned in the abstract , bestätigt pracht , and the priest will come back and say , &quot; hey , i &apos;m really , you
it &apos;s so wonderful . you need to protect it . &quot;
they call the older brothers and saying that we &apos;re the younger brothers , the destruction of the world are responsible .
now this level of intuition is really important .
whenever we think about eingeborene and landscape , we either beschwören the rousseau and the old gerücht of the noblen wilden , which is a rassistischer thought , or other , and say , these people are connected to nature as we are .
so , eingeborene are neither sentimental , nor they &apos;re geschwächt by the nostalgie .
it doesn &apos;t have a lot of space to put in the malariaverseuchten sümpfen of asmat or the cold winden of tibet , but still , through time and ritual , they have shaped a geheimnisvollen nimbus of the earth that &apos;s not based on the idea , but at a very far subtileren intuition , the idea that the earth can only exist on itself because it &apos;s being
now , what does that mean ?
it means that a small child in the anden , who is growing up the mountain is a apu-geist , who determine their fate , will be a whole person , and a different relationship with this resource or this place , as a small child from montana , who grew up in the belief that a mountain is a bunch of rocks that can be abgetragen .
whether it &apos;s a aufenthaltsort of a mind or a bunch of erz , is irrelevant .
the interesting is the metaphor that &apos;s defined the relationship between the individual and nature .
i grew up in the forests of britisch columbia and believed that these forests are there to be gerodet .
and that made me a different person than my friends under the kwakiutl who believe that these forests of aufenthaltsort and gebogenen are geister , and the kannibalischen are geister to live in the nordende of the world , to make sense of their hamatsa-initiation .
now , if you start to look at the idea that these cultures can create different realities , you can understand some of your extraordinary discoveries . like this plant here .
it &apos;s a picture i just took last april in the northwest northwest .
this is ayahuasca , which many of you have heard , the most powerful psychoaktive präparat präparat .
what ayahuasca does that is not just the most powerful potential of this präparats , but it &apos;s made really out of two different sources , and it &apos;s actually a hölzerne liane that &apos;s a series of betakarbolinen , harmin , harmolin , light halluzinogen , birgt . this kletterpflanze is just about as if a blue trüber smoke is going to be on their consciousness , but it
this plant contains some very strong tryptamine that are very similar to the serotonin , dimethyltryptamin-5 and methoxydimethyltryptamin .
if you &apos;ve seen the yanomami of the yanomami , like you schnupfen this stuff , this substance that you &apos;re producing from different species .
this powder is about as much as being made out of a gewehrlauf , gesäumt of barocken paintings and the landing on a sea of electricity .
it &apos;s not erzeugt any verzerrung , but the resolution of reality .
i even have a professor , richard evan shultes , who was a man who had helped the psychedelische pilze of the magical mushrooms in mexico , in the 30iger years of diskutiert , and i said that you couldn &apos;t put these tryptamine as a halluzinogen , because in the moment you feel the effects , you &apos;re not there to experience a halluzination .
but the thing about tryptaminen is that they can &apos;t be taken oral , because they &apos;re naturally vorkommendes by a human darm , of course , vorkommendes enzym on behalf of monoamin-oxidase , denaturiert .
they can only be taken in relation to some other chemicals that are mao by the mao .
now the amazing thing is that the betakarboline that contain in the liane are mao-inhibitoren of exactly the kind of thing that is necessary to potenzieren the tryptamine . so ask yourself .
how can these people from a flora species of 80.000 plants have not to find these two morphologisch plants , which is , if , to combine , in this way , a kind of biochemischer version , so that the whole thing is bigger than the sum of its parts ?
we use these great euphemismus , trying and error , which is not meaningless .
but you ask the indian people saying , &quot; the plant speaks to us . &quot;
so what does that mean ?
this tribe , the cofan , have 17 variations of ayahuasca that they all recognize in the forest that are in the forest that appear for our eyes as a kind of way .
and then you ask them how to take their taxonomie and say , &quot; i thought you &apos;re going to understand something about plants .
i mean , don &apos;t you know anything ? &quot; and i said , &quot; no . &quot;
so it turns out that you take each of the 17 variations in the vollmond and you sing them in a different kind of different .
now , this doesn &apos;t get you a ph.d. at harvard , but it &apos;s much more interesting than stamina .
now the problem is that even those of us who have sympathy for the difficult position of native americans have to look at them as a orginiell and farbenfroh , but somehow narrow down to the past while the real world , the fortschreitet , the world .
so , in fact , you &apos;re not going to be remembered about the 20th century , 300 years of the wars or technical innovation , but rather than an era that we were in and the massive destruction of the biological and cultural diversity on earth either aktiv or passive passive . so the problem is not the change .
all cultures have been involved in the dance with new lebenmöglichkeiten .
and the problem is not technology .
the sioux-indianer listening didn &apos;t hear less about the sioux , as they bow and pfeil tasks when americans were going to be americans as they were horse and pferdewagen tasks .
not change and technology , bedrohen the integrity of the ethnosphäre , it &apos;s power . the ugly face of death .
and wherever you are in the world , you &apos;re going to be dynamisch , that &apos;s not the untergang of the anpassung , which is the ungeheuerliche of anpassung frei , from sarawak , a people who are verschmutzt in the heimatland of the penan , and now , a people who are verschmutzt in the forest of the forest , and now that &apos;s the fluss of the
or if we go into the mountains of tibet where i &apos;m going to go to the berge , you will see the ugly face of political dominance .
you know , the genocide , the phyische extinction of people will be convicted , but the ethnozid , the destruction of the people &apos;s lives , not only verurteilt , but in general , as part of a entwicklungsstrategie .
and you can &apos;t understand the suffering of the suffering if you don &apos;t have it at the unterster level .
i &apos;ve been traveling with a young colleague of chengdu überland überland , and i first saw the face of the statistics of the statistics that you hear . 6,000 holy monumente , which were transformed into schutt and asche , 1.2 million people who were murdered during the cultural revolution .
the father of this young manns was identified as a anhänger of the panchen lama .
it meant that he was killed in the chinese invasion .
his uncle floh with her heiligkeit in the diaspora who brought people to nepal .
his mother was locked up as a punishment for the crime of being wealthy .
he was geschmuggelt in the prison age , in the age of two years , to hide under their rockzipfel , because she couldn &apos;t live .
the sister who did this brave tat was brought into a erziehungslager .
one day she came up with an armband maos and for these übertretung , she had to go into a schweres camp for seven years .
the suffering is unerträglich , but the erlösende spirit of humans is something .
and at the end , we &apos;re really going to stand up with a choice . we want to do a monochromatischen world of monotonie , or in a polychromatischen world of diversity ?
margaret mead , the great anthropologin before she died that while we move towards a faden , gestaltlosen , generischen world , we would not only see the entire range of human imagination to a more eingeengte mindset , but that we &apos;d come out of a dream and forgotten that there was ever other possibilities .
and it &apos;s very clear to think that our species has existed for over the last time .
the neolithische revolution that brought us agriculture , and that moment the kult of the saatkorns unterwarf , the poetry of the schamanen of the schamanen ersetzte and hierarchy , specialization and überschuss -- found only 10,000 years ago .
the modern industrial world as we know it is hardly 300 years old .
now , this is a very common story , not telling me that we all have answers to the challenges that we face in the next millennia .
if we ask these unzähligen weltkulturen after the importance of human being , they &apos;re going to respond to 10,000 different voices .
and in this song we will be able to make the possibility of what we are , people with full consciousness that are aware of the importance of that all humans and gardens have to be able to flourish a space that needs to be zugesichert , and there are great moments of optimism .
here &apos;s a picture i took on the northern end of the baffin-inseln , when i went to the narwhal-jagd , and this man , olaya , told me a wonderful story of his großvaters .
the canadian government is not always very good with the inuit and during the 50iger years of herrschaft our regime of law , they were forced to move in settlements .
the grandfather of this old man refused to be .
the family who had fear around his life took him all the guns and all the tools .
now you have to know that the inuit are not afraid of the cold , they used to their advantage .
the gleitschienen of your schlitten was originally made of fish that were used in karibu-haut .
the grandfather of man &apos;s man &apos;s man , not before the arctic night or the black storm .
he schlüpfte out , he left his pants off of seehundsfell and defäkierte his hand , and when the microbes started to get , he formed them in the form of a messers .
he sprühte speichel on the side of the fäkalien-messers and when it was completely frozen , he was a dog with it .
he enthäutete the dog and a geschirr , took the skeleton of the dog and improvisierte a schlitten , spannte a other dog and entschwand about the eisschollen of the fäkalien-messer .
you can &apos;t do anything like this .
and this is in many ways a symbol of the resistance of the inuit and all the native native of the world .
the canadian government in april 1999 gave full control over a field , which is bigger than california and texas .
it &apos;s our new country of our country , and it &apos;s called nunavut .
it &apos;s an independent area . you &apos;re all controlling the mineralvorkommen .
an amazing example , like a nation , a state that can search for people to go and reach .
and finally , i think it &apos;s pretty obvious , at least for those of us who traveled to these distant goals of earth , to realize that they &apos;re not at all .
they are the heimatländer of somebody .
they represent part of the human imagination that zurückreichen in past times , and for all of us , the dreams of these children , like the dreams of our children , is part of the state of hope .
what we &apos;re doing at national geographic is that we believe that politicians never do something .
we believe that polemik -- we think that polemik is not compelling , but we believe that storytelling can change the world , and therefore we &apos;re probably the best institution in storytelling in the world . our website is 35 million hits every month .
the other 156 nations are sending our fernsehkanal .
our magazines are read by millions .
and we take a series of trips to the ethnosphäre , where we take our audience from the gesehenen and hopefully , will take one by the other &apos;s zentrale revelation , that this world has made it , to exist in different ways that we can find a lebensmöglichkeit in a truly multikulturellen world , where the wisdom of all people can contribute to our shared well-being .
thank you .
what i first will show you , as fast as possible , is a new technology that we have microsoft than a part of a übernahme , just to give it a part of a year , and it &apos;s seadragon , and it &apos;s an environment where you can either be local or entfernt with enormous amounts of visual data .
we see many , many of the gigabytes of digital photos that you can nahtlos and continuously fortwährend , schwenken , can new ways .
and it doesn &apos;t matter how many information we look at how big these collections are or how big the images are .
most of you are digital photos of a camera , but this one is a scan of the kongressbibliothek , and it &apos;s in a range of 300 megapixeln .
it doesn &apos;t matter because the only thing that the performance of a system like this can be einschränken is the number of pixeln on their screen at every moment . it has also a very flexible architecture .
this is a whole book , an example of nichtbild-daten .
this is bleak house from the dickens , every column is a chapter .
to prove it &apos;s really about a text and not about a picture , we can do something like this , to really show that this one is a real representation of the texts and no image .
maybe this is an artificial way to read a e-buch .
i wouldn &apos;t recommend it .
this is a realistischerer case . this is a copy of the guardian .
every big picture is the beginning of a abschnitts .
and that &apos;s really giving you the pleasure and the good experience of a real papierausgabe of a magazine or a newspaper , which is a kind of a medium of a kind of different scales .
we also have a little bit of the corner of this particular copy of the guardian .
we designed a falsche display with very high resolution , which is much higher than a normal display , and we added additional content .
if you want to see the functions of this car , you can see them here .
or other models , or even technical .
and this really takes these ideas to stop these limitations for the existing space on the screen .
we hope that this is not a pop-ups and other nonsense of it -- that should not be necessary .
of course , the mapping is one of the really obvious applications for a technology like this .
and i don &apos;t want to spend a lot of time here , except for saying that we &apos;re going to contribute to this area .
but this is all the streets in the u.s.
übereinandergelagert &apos;s top of nasa &apos;s erdräumlichen image .
let &apos;s get something else out .
this is actually live on the internet . you can nachprüfen it .
this is a project called photosynth , which really connects two different technologies together .
one is seadragon , and the other is a very good research on computervision who snavely by noah , a universitätsstudenten universitätsstudenten , under the advice of steve seitz , who &apos;s the uw of the uw .
and rick szeliski &apos;s done by microsoft research , a very good collaboration .
so this is live on the internet . it &apos;s driven by seadragon .
you can see that , if we create these kinds of views , where we can pass through images and make this experience of the mehrfachen .
but the spatial anordnung of the images is actually in the fact of meaning .
the computervision-algorithmen have taken these pictures together so that they were made the real space , in which these images , which were all made in the kanadischen lakes , in the canadian rockies , they &apos;re equivalent to the elements of stabilisierten slides or panoramischer bildverarbeitung , and these things are all the way in relation to each other .
i don &apos;t know if i have some other environments to show you .
there are ones who are much more räumlicher .
i would like to show you a geradewegs of the originalen datensätze of noah , and this is from an early prototype of the photosynth that we &apos;ve been working on in the summer of the summer , to show you that it really is the pointe of this technology , the photosynth-technologie , and this is not necessarily obvious when you look at the environments that we have on
we had to make ourselves because of the lawyers , and we had to worry .
this is a rekonstruktion of the cathedral , notre lady who &apos;s just a notre dame of flickr , and they &apos;re just notre dame in flickr , and they &apos;re going to get images of men in t-shirts and on the universitätsgelände and on the universitätsgelände , and each of these orange kegel represents a picture that was discovered as a model of gehörend .
so these are all flickr-bilder , and they all are in the way that they &apos;re in the way that they are in relation to each other .
and we can navigate in this very simple way .
you know , i never believed that i &apos;m going to work at microsoft .
i &apos;m very thankful for the empfang there .
and i guess you can see that these are many different kinds of cameras : everything is from the handy-kamera to professional slrs , a fairly large number of them that were all zusammengeflickt in this environment .
and if you can , i &apos;m going to find some of the weird strange .
many of you are verdeckt by faces , etc .
there &apos;s a bunch of photographs here , right here -- here &apos;s it .
this is actually a poster of notre lady that was recorded right .
we can move from the poster to a physical view of this environment .
the point is that we can do things with social environment , and it &apos;s now collected data from all -- from all the collective memory of what is visual the earth -- and everything is connected to each other .
all these pictures are interconnected , and it creates something that is bigger than the sum of the parts .
they &apos;re getting a model that comes out of the whole planet .
look at this as the fortsetzung of the work of stephen lawlers on virtual earth .
and this is something that &apos;s growing by complexity , with the people that use it , and it &apos;s always getting bigger for the user .
their own photos are going to have a metadaten beschildert that took a different person .
if someone &apos;s doing it and mitteilt all these sacred , and you can tell the picture of the notre dame-kathedrale all of the time all of the data , and i can use it as a place to go into this room , to use these metaverse , to use some of the fotos modaler of other people and make a kind of übergreifender social experience of the other
and of course , the vast rich are the immense rich of every interesting part of the earth that &apos;s not only by überflüge or satellite satellite and so on , but through collective memory .
thank you .
and i understand that right ? their software is allowing that to a certain point of time , within the next years , all the images that are used to be linked to someone in the world in principle ?
yeah . it &apos;s doing nothing else .
if you want them to make hyperlinks between the images .
and she does this because of the content in the images .
and this is really exciting when you think about the abundance of the semantischen information that many of these images have .
how if you do a websuche for images , where you enter sentences and the text of the website contains a lot of information about what is that .
but what if the picture you linked to all of your images ?
and then the volume of the semantischen querverbindung and the amount of the abundance that makes it out , really enormous . it &apos;s a classic netzwerkeffekt .
blaise , that &apos;s really incredible . thank you .
thank you very much .
i &apos;m going to tell you some things from my book , as i hope , in the same way that i hope you &apos;ve heard about , and i &apos;m going to try to make some connections if you haven &apos;t noticed .
i want to start with what i call &quot; offizielles dogma . &quot;
the official dogma of what ?
the official glaubenssatz of all western developed societies .
the official dogma works is that if our goal is the maximieren of the common of our citizens , this is particularly durch by the maximierung of the individual .
the reason for this is that freedom is good , valuable , meaningful , a unverzichtbare premise for the human .
if people have freedom , each of us is about the things that we do , and we &apos;re not in charge of our good , and nobody has to decide for us .
the way to maximize freedom is to maximize choice .
the more choices people have , the more freedom they have , and the more freedom they have , the more they have .
this is , i think , in our water supply , so deep in our water supply , that it would not be in the sense of it .
and it &apos;s also in our lives too .
i &apos;m going to give you some examples of what makes us modern progress .
this is my supermarket . no big .
i just want to say a little bit about salatdressing .
there are 175 dressings in my supermarket , if you can &apos;t mitzählen the 10 different extra olivenöle and 12 balsamico-essig that you could buy to make a big number of salat dessings in the unlikely case that none of the 175 in the store for it .
so that &apos;s like the supermarket .
and then they go to the verbraucher-elektronik business for a stereoanlage zusammenzustellen -- speaker , cd-player , a kassetten-player , radio , verstärker , and in this one electronics , there &apos;s so many stereo facilities .
we can put together millions of different kinds of different kinds of facilities out of the components that are offered in this one business .
you have to admit that this is a big selection .
in other areas -- the world of communication .
there was a time when i was a boy , because you had any telephone that you wanted to be , as long as he was bell by the ma .
they &apos;ve got your phone . they didn &apos;t buy it .
and a consequence of that was that the telephone was never broken .
these days are over .
we have an infinite choice of phones , especially in the world of mobile phones .
these are the mobile phones of the future .
my favorite one is in the middle -- mp3-player- , nasen-haar-trimmer and crème brûlée .
and if you don &apos;t have that until you haven &apos;t seen it , you can be sure that you &apos;re going to be soon .
and what it does is it causes people to walk into the business and ask this question .
now , you know what the answer is to this question ?
the answer is &quot; no . &quot;
it &apos;s not possible to buy a cell phone that doesn &apos;t do too much .
in other aspects of life , which are much more powerful than the buy of objects , the same explosion of choice is true .
health care -- it &apos;s no longer the case in the united states that you &apos;re going to doctor and the doctor tells you what to do .
instead , they go to the doctor and the doctor , they &apos;re telling you , we could make a , or we could make b .
a has these benefits and risks .
b has these benefits and risks . what do you want to do ?
and they say , &quot; doctor , what should i do ? &quot;
the doctor says , a has these benefits and risks and b has those benefits and risks .
what do you want to do ?
and if you say , &quot; if you were , i doctor , what would you do ? &quot;
the doctor says , &quot; but i &apos;m not . &quot;
the result is -- we call it &quot; patient autonomy , &quot; but in reality , a shift of the burden of the responsibility for the meeting of a little bit -- namentlich the doctor -- the doctor &apos;s doktor -- and not most likely to be sick and not in the best constitution is a choice -- namentlich the patient .
there &apos;s an enormous marketing for verschreibungspflichtige drugs for people like you and me , if you think about it , doesn &apos;t make sense , because we don &apos;t buy them .
why do you make us if we can &apos;t buy ?
the answer is , you expect the doctor to come out and ask for us the doctor in the next morning and ask for a change of the verschreibung .
something like that , like our identity , is a question of choice , like this slide .
we don &apos;t have identity ; we invent them .
and we &apos;re making ourselves as often as we want .
that means that every day you wake up at morning , you have to decide what kind of person you want to be .
in terms of marriage and family , there was a time when the standard-annahme was that almost everybody had one and they could quickly heirateten the way they could , and then they got the kids as fast as they could .
the only real choice was &quot; who , &quot; no , and not what they were doing after that .
now , it &apos;s all easy to have .
i teach wonderful intelligent students , and i &apos;ll give you 20 percent less work than i did .
and it &apos;s not because they &apos;re less smart , not because they &apos;re less carefully .
it &apos;s because they &apos;re busy with other things , you ask yourself , &quot; should i marry or not ? should i get married ?
should i get married ? should i have children or do a career ? &quot;
they &apos;re all einnehmende questions .
and they &apos;re going to answer these questions , whether it means all the tasks that i &apos;m going to show you and i don &apos;t get a good grade in my course .
and in fact , they should do that . these are important to be important questions .
work -- we &apos;re blessed , as carl has , with the technology that allows us every single minute of every single day from every single place on the planet -- to the randolph hotel .
by the way , there &apos;s a corner that i &apos;m not going to tell you about the wirelesslan .
i &apos;m not going to tell you because i want to use it .
so what it means , this incredible freedom of choice we have made decisions in terms of work , again and again and again , whether we should work or not work .
we can watch our kids playing football , and we have our cell phone on the one hip , and our blackberry on other hip , and our laptop probably on our lap .
and even though you &apos;re all off , every minute of our child at the verstümmeln of a fußballspiels zugucken , we &apos;re also asking ourselves , &quot; should i take that call ?
should i respond to this email ? should i write this letter ? &quot;
and also , if the answer to the question , &quot; no , &quot; it &apos;s certainly prägen your experience of your child &apos;s fussballspiels prägen system .
wherever we look , big things and small things , material things and lifestyle , life is a question of choice .
and the world we lived in the world looked like .
so i want to say , there were some choices , but not all of it was a question of choice .
and the world we &apos;re living in now that looks like this .
and the question is , are the good or bad news ?
the answer is &quot; yes . &quot;
we all know what &apos;s good about it , so i &apos;m going to be bad about it .
all these choices have two effects , two negative effects on people .
an effect , paradoxer wise , is that it &apos;s lähmt instead of free .
so with so many options you can choose , it &apos;s very hard to make people really hard to decide .
i &apos;m going to give you another example of that , a study for investing in volunteer .
a colleague of mine had access to investitions-akten from vanguard , the giant fondgesellschaft of about one million employees and about 2,000 different jobs .
and what she found was a 10 investmentfonds that the arbeitgeber anbot , took the participation to two percent .
they offer 50 investmentfonds -- 10 percent less employees are going to be part of them than if they were only five . why ?
because there are 50 investmentfonds that are available to choices , it &apos;s so hard to decide what to vote for , they &apos;d aufschieben it .
and then tomorrow , and then tomorrow , and tomorrow , and tomorrow , of course , never comes .
and you know , it &apos;s not just that people have to eat food food if you go to the retirement retirement because they don &apos;t have enough money to go , it means that the decisions is so hard to make you miss the great investitionsangebote of your own .
by not participation , they give up to 5,000 u.s. dollars a year on the arbeitsgeber that would have been happy to reproduce their contributions .
paralysis is a result of a number of choices .
and i think it makes it that the world looks like this .
they want to really make the decision really right , if it &apos;s all the time , right ?
they don &apos;t want to vote the wrong investment , or at all the wrong salatdressing .
so this is a effect . the other effect is that even if we cross paralysis and make a decision , we end less content with the outcome of choice than we had the possibility to decide between less choices .
and there are several reasons for this .
one of them is a lot of different salatdressings , if you buy one , and it &apos;s not perfect -- and what salatdressing is perfect ? it &apos;s just imagine that you could have a different decision , and what happens is that the bildlich alternative alternative causes that you regret regret , and that regrets makes you feel negative to the happiness you had made of your gemachten
the more possibilities there , the more simple it is nothing to regret at all , that &apos;s disappointing to the choices they make .
second , what economists call oppertunitätskosten .
dan gilbert has made a big point in this morning by telling how much the way we judge things , depends on what we compare it .
well , if there are lots of other alternatives to consider , it &apos;s just attractive characteristics of alternative choices that you &apos;re ausschließen , which makes you less content with the alternatives that you voted .
here &apos;s an example . for those of you who are not new york , i apologize .
but here &apos;s what you should have thought .
here &apos;s a couple of the hamptons .
very expensive real .
beautiful beach . great day . they have everything for themselves .
what could be better ? &quot; damn &quot; man thinks , &quot; it &apos;s august .
everyone in my most manhattener neighborhood is gone .
i could park right in front of my house . &quot;
and he &apos;s verfolgt two weeks from the thought that he missed the possibility of having a great parking lot .
oppertunitätskosten down the happiness that we receive from our choices , even though that &apos;s what we chose are fantastic .
and the more options there are available to choice , the more attractive properties of these choices are going to consider into the oppertunitätskosten .
here &apos;s another example .
now , this cartoon is a little bit of the statements .
he makes a statement about it now and maybe slow things to it .
but a very important point that he does is always who decide for one thing , don &apos;t decide to do other things .
and these other things like many attractive characteristics , and it &apos;s going to be doing less anziehend .
third : eskalation of expectations .
this has met me when i wanted my jeans .
i &apos;m wearing jeans , almost all the time .
and there was a time in which there was just jeans of a way , and they bought them , and they were schlecht , they were incredibly unkomfortabel , and if they carried them long enough and they &apos;d have enough clean enough , they started themselves , &quot; ok , &quot; they started .
so , to buy new jeans for a lot of years old , the old tragens , and i said , &quot; i &apos;d like to have a couple of jeans , here &apos;s my size . &quot;
and the verkäufer said , &quot; do you want to anliegende , easily anliegende or large ?
do you want to push , or reißverschluss ? stone or säure ?
do you want to jeans with holes ?
you &apos;d like to cut down , kegelig , blah blah , blah ... &quot; and so on .
my jaw was down , and after i was erholte , i &apos;d like to have the way the only way was the only way . &quot;
he had no idea what that was , so i spent an hour all of that damn jeans anzuprobieren , and i was going to go to the business -- and i say the truth -- with the best jeans i ever had .
i had better . all these choices made it better .
but i felt bad .
why ? i wrote a whole book to try to explain myself .
the reason i felt worse with all these available possibilities , my expectations for what was a good pair of jeans , went up .
i had very low expectations . i had no more expectations than they were in a kind of a way .
when they got in 100 species , damn one of them would be perfect .
and what i got was good , but it wasn &apos;t perfect .
and so i compared what i had to get what i expected , and what i had was disappointing in comparison to what i expected .
and so , adding opportunities to people &apos;s lives , inevitably inevitably , people have to be expectations of people , and how good they are .
and this leads to less satisfaction with outcomes , even though the results are good .
no one in the world of the marketings knows this , because if you would , you wouldn &apos;t know what it &apos;s going on .
the truth is more like this .
the reason that used to be worse than anything was worse than anything worse , it was possible for people to make experience a comfortable surprise .
today , in the world that we live in -- we have wealthy , industrialisierten citizens , with perfection as an expectation -- the best for which to hope is things as good as you expect them .
they &apos;re never angenehm überrascht. because their expectations , my expectations , are haushoch .
the secret to the glücklichkeit -- that &apos;s what you all came to -- the secret to the glücklichkeit are low expectations .
i want to say -- a short autobiographischer moment -- i &apos;m married with a woman , and she &apos;s really wonderful .
i couldn &apos;t have it better . i didn &apos;t have a niedergelassen .
but niederlassen is not always a bad thing .
finally , a consequence of a bad sitzenden jeans is that if you &apos;re just a way of buying , that if you &apos;re a unzufrieden , and you ask yourself why , who &apos;s responsible , the answer is clear . the world is responsible . what would you have ?
if hundreds of different kinds of jeans are available , and they &apos;re buying a enttäuschend , and they ask why , who is responsible ?
and it &apos;s also clear that the answer is the question : it &apos;s .
you could have done it better .
with a hundred different kinds of jeans in the schaufenster , there &apos;s no excuse for mistakes .
and so , when people make decisions , and also when the results of decisions are good , they feel about frustrated about them , they &apos;re beschuldigen themselves .
clinical depression explodierten in the industrial world in the last generation .
i think a signifikanter -- not the only one , but a signifikanter beiträger to this explosion of depression , and also suicide , people have experienced the enttäuschend because their standards are so high , and then if you have to explain these experiences , you think it would be your fault .
and so the bilanzergebnis is that it &apos;s generally better , we &apos;re going to make it , and we feel worse .
so let me remind you .
this is the official dogma that we all think of the right thing , completely wrong . it &apos;s not true .
there &apos;s no question that &apos;s better than not a choice , but it doesn &apos;t follow that more choices is better than a choice .
there &apos;s a magical amount of stuff . i don &apos;t know what it is .
i &apos;m pretty sure that we missed this point long , where we have a chance to improve our lives .
now , as a rule -- i &apos;m almost finished -- as a policy question , the thing about thinking about this , which is what all of these choices enabled in the developed societies , is the material that is wealth .
there are many places in the world , and we &apos;ve heard about many of you whose problems are not that you are too .
and the problem is they have too little .
so the things i &apos;m talking about are a curious problem of modern , rich , western societies .
and what &apos;s so frustrating and ärgerlich : steve levitt has told them yesterday about how these expensive and hard to do not help the car seats . it &apos;s a waste of money .
what i &apos;m telling you is that these expensive , complicated decisions -- it &apos;s not easy to help .
they even hurt .
you &apos;re worried that we &apos;re going to be worse .
if something that makes our society makes such decisions to make decisions to people who are very little choice , not only would be able to improve the lives of people , but our dignity of being improved .
economists call this a pareto-verbesserungs application .
einkommensumverteilung is going to make it all better -- not just the poor -- because all these big choices are plagt .
finally , read this cartoon , and a hochentwickelte person , says , &quot; ah ! what &apos;s the fish ?
you don &apos;t know anything possible in this goldfischglas . &quot;
verarmten imagination , a kurzsichtige view of the world -- and that is the way i read it first .
and the more i thought about it , the more i got to think that the fish knows something .
because the truth is that if you break the goldfischglas , so that everything is possible , you don &apos;t have freedom . you have paralysis .
if you break the goldfischglas , so that everything is possible , you lower happiness .
you increase the paralysis and lower happiness .
everybody needs a goldfischglas .
this is almost limited to almost perfect security -- possibly for the fish , definitely for us .
but the abhanden of a metaphorischen goldfischglas is a recipe for misery , and , i guess , disaster .
thank you very much .
you know , i &apos;ve talked about some of these projects already earlier , about the human genome , and what that means , and about the discovery of new groups of genes .
in fact , we &apos;re starting from a new point : we have digitalisiert biology , and now we &apos;re trying to create a new kind of code of biology by designing new lives and build new lives .
we always have the whole significant questions .
what &apos;s life ? it &apos;s something i think many biologists have tried to understand and that in different levels .
we tried to simplify different ways to simplify it down to the minimalen components .
we &apos;ve been digitalisiert by nearly 20 years , and when we sequenced the humangenom , the transition from the analog world of biology to the digital world of computers .
now , try to ask whether we can regenerate life or can we create new lives , from this digital universe ?
this is the map of a small organism , a mycoplasma geitalium , the smallest genome of a species that can replicate itself in the lab , and we tried to reach that with a little more genome .
we &apos;ve done it on about a hundred genes to get rid of the 500 or something like this .
but if we look at this metabolic map , which is very simple , compared to our , and trust me , that &apos;s simple . but if we look at all of these genes that we can eliminate from one another , it &apos;s very unlikely that this would lead to a living cell .
so we decided that it &apos;s the only way to actually the front of the chromosome to actually synthetisieren what allows us to vary the individual components and ask some of the fundamental questions .
and so we started with the question , could we be able to make a chromosome ?
so , enables chemistry to make these really big molecules , what &apos;s never done before ?
and if we can , we can start the chromosome ?
one chromosome is like the way , by the way , a piece of inertes chemical material .
our steps in the digitalisierung of life were exponentially .
our ability genetic code has been very slow , but still increasing , and our final point now would be on a exponential curve .
we started in the 15 years ago .
it actually took a few years starting with a bioethischen review before we did the first experiments .
and it turns out that dna-synthetisierung is very difficult .
there are tens of thousands of machines around the world can make small pieces of dna , but it &apos;s a degenerativer process , so the longer you make a piece , the more mistakes happen .
so we had to develop a new way of making these little pieces and correct the mistakes .
this was our first attempt , starting with the digital information , the genome x x .
it &apos;s a little virus that kills bacteria .
we made small pieces , made a fehlerkorrektur and had a dna molecule by about 5,000 letters .
the exciting phase was when we took this piece of inerte chemical and put it into a bacterium , and the bacteria started reading the genetic code and made a viral particles .
the viral particles were then freigegeben by the cells and came back and kill e. .
i &apos;ve recently talked to the oil industry , and they said they were really verstünden this model .
they laughed more than her .
so we think that this is a situation in the software that actually can build your hardware in a biological system .
but we wanted to go much further . we wanted to build an entire bakterielles chromosome . it &apos;s got more than 580.000 genetic code , so we thought we could actually build it in a kassetten way of the size of the virus , and could vary the size of the kassetten to understand what the individual components of a living cell .
design is the key , and if you want to launch with digital information in the computer , this digital information needs to be really accurate .
when we first sequenced the genome in 1995 , the fehlerrate was a mistake of a 10.000 base of pairs .
we found the resequenzieren 30 errors . if we had used the original sequence , it would never have been possible .
part of design is to make pieces of the 50 letters long , and the other 50-buchstaben are überlappen to be able to build smaller sub-einheiten , so that these fit together .
we have unique elements here .
you might have heard that we &apos;ve built waterzeichen .
think about it : we have a 4-buchstaben code : a , c , g and t.
triplets of these letters -- these letters are kodieren about 20 amino acids , and there &apos;s a single purpose of every one of these amino acids .
so we can use the genetic code to write our words , sentences , thoughts .
at first we &apos;ve signed .
some people were disappointed that it was not a word poetry .
we &apos;re just designed the pieces that we could just break them up with enzymes , and there are enzymes that reparieren these and again .
and we started to make pieces , starting with pieces of the five to siebentausend letters , each other fügten to make this aneinander to put together together to 72.000 this .
in every step , we made these pieces in the same way that we could sequence them , because we were trying to create a very robust process , which you &apos;ll see in a minute .
we tried to get to the point of the automation .
so , it looks like a basketball-playoff .
if we get to these really big pieces -- with over 100,000 pairs -- then they don &apos;t just grow in the e. of the universe . it &apos;s all the way to the possibilities of modern molecular biology , and so we use other mechanisms .
we knew about a mechanism of the homologe rekombination , which is used to fix the biology that can be able to bring together these pieces .
here &apos;s an example of this . there &apos;s an organism called deinococcus radiodurans , the three million wheel of radiation .
you see in the upper field that your chromosome is simply falling apart .
12 to 24 hours later , everything was zusammengefügt as it was .
we have thousands of organisms that can do that .
these organisms can be totally ausgetrocknet , they can actually live in a vacuum .
i &apos;m absolutely sure that life exists in space and move around looking for aquatischen conditions .
in fact , nasa has shown that there are a lot of them out there .
here &apos;s a gefügeaufnahme of the molecule that we &apos;ve made by using these processes -- actually , we used only use hefe-mechanismen , using the right design of the pieces , we put them together . yeast adds up these together .
this is not a elektronenmikroskopaufnahme mikroskopaufnahme .
it &apos;s such a big molecule that we can actually see it with the lichtmikroskop .
these are footage about a dauer of six seconds .
this is the publikation that we &apos;ve just done recently .
this is about 580.000 letters of genetischem code , and it &apos;s the largest molecule with definierter structure that was ever made by humans .
it has a molekulargewicht of over 300 million .
if we could print it with a schriftgröße of 10 and without the abstände , it would be umfassen seiten , just to auszudrucken these genetic code .
now , how do we start a chromosome ? how do we activate it ?
obviously , it &apos;s very simple with a virus , it &apos;s a lot more complicated than it is dealing with bacteria .
it &apos;s also easier when you &apos;re in eukaryonten like we &apos;re doing , you just take the nucleus out and you have another in , and that &apos;s exactly what you all heard about the spaghetti .
in archaebakterien , the chromosome is embedded in the cell but just recently , we &apos;ve shown that you can actually put a full transplant from one chromosome from one cell to another and can activate those activate .
we reinigten the chromosome of a mikrobenspezies chromosome , and in roughly , these two as humans and mice , we gave some extra-gene to select this chromosome , and we zersetzten it with enzymes to destroy all proteins -- and it was very amazing when we put it in a cell -- and they &apos;ll estimate our very ausgereiften .
the new chromosome went into the cell .
in fact , we thought that this is the end , but we &apos;ve tried to get the process further .
this is the hauptmechanismus of evolution here .
we find all sorts of species here , which is a second chromosome , or a third of irgendwoher , each time thousands of thousands in one second hinzufügend to a species .
so people who think of evolution as a gene changed at a moment in time , is not missing a lot from biology .
there are enzymes called the restriktionsenzyme , which are actually verdauen dna .
the chromosome that in the cell has been none ; the chromosomes we &apos;ve put in .
it was exprimiert in the cell and realized the other chromosome as a fremdes material , and so we had a cell with a new chromosome .
it verfärbte blue because of the genes that we put in .
and after a very short time , it had all characteristics of the species and konvertierte completely into a new species based on the new software that we have in the cell .
all the proteins change themselves -- when we read the genetic code , it was exactly what we &apos;ve been doing .
it may sound like genomische alchimie , but we can change the software-dna , things change quite dramatically .
now i &apos;ve been saying that this is not the genesis -- that &apos;s based on 3.5 billion years of evolution .
and i &apos;ve been saying that we &apos;re potentially creating a new form of the kambrischen explosion that could be made a massive new artenbildung based on this digital design .
why should we do that ?
i think it &apos;s pretty obvious in terms of what we need .
we &apos;re in the next 40 billion people in the next 40 years of six .
to ask it in my context : i was born in the year .
today , three people on this planet exists for every year in the year ; within 40 years , it will be four .
we have problems with food , with fresh and clean water , medicine , fuel for 6,5 billion .
it will be a challenge for nine to get .
we need over five billion tons of coal , 30-plus billion barrels of oil . that &apos;s a hundred million of the fässer .
if we think about biological processes or any process to replace that , it will be a huge challenge .
then , of course , there &apos;s all the co2 from this material that land on the atmosphere .
we have now from our discoveries from all over the world , a database of about 20 million genes , and i want to believe that these are the designkomponenten of the future .
the elektronikindustrie had a dozen components and look at the diversity of it .
we &apos;re going to hit the boundaries of biological reality , and that &apos;s the ones that we think about .
we have technologies today because of these fast synthesemethoden to do what we call kombinatorische genetics .
we now have a way to build a big robot that can make millions of chromosomes a day .
if you imagine making these 20 million different genes of genes or to optimize these processes to create oktan or drugs , we can change with a little team more molecular molecular biology than the last 20 years .
and it &apos;s just nurmale selection . we can impfstoffproduktion out of lebensfähigkeit , production of chemicals or treibstoffproduktion impfstoffproduktion and so on .
this is a recording of the actual design-software that we &apos;re working on , which is actually , you know , sit down and new species in the computer , you know , kenn .
you know , we don &apos;t necessarily know what it is going to look like . we know exactly how their genetic code will look .
we &apos;re now focusing on the fourth generation of the fourth generation .
they &apos;ve seen corn , recently , is just seen what &apos;s a bad experiment .
we have the treibstoffe of the zweiten- and third generation that are going to be pretty soon as a lot of zuckerwertigkeiten , like oktan or different kinds of butanol .
but , as we think , the only way to make biology is a huge impact without any increase of the cost of food or the limitation of their availability , when we see co2 as a material , and therefore we &apos;re working on cells that go to the way .
and we think we &apos;re going to be the first generation of the fourth generation , and that &apos;s in about 18 months .
sunlight and co2 are a way of doing .
but in our discovery , we have all sorts of different ways .
this is an organism that we &apos;ve described in 1996 .
he lives in the deep sea , about ein-einhalb miles deep , in almost kochenden wassertemperaturen .
it &apos;s turning co2 in methane as energy as energy source .
we &apos;re looking at whether we can use carbon dioxide that could just be brought to produktionsplätzen , konvertieren the co2 in the fuel to make this process .
in a brief period of time , we think we could be able to solve one of the basic questions of life .
you know , we really have -- moderate goals like the ersatz of the whole petrochemischen industry . right . if you can &apos;t do that at ted , where else ? a hauptquelle of energy .
but the same way we &apos;re working on this is the same approach to development that are going to work .
you saw this year with flu , we &apos;re always a year back in the back , and we have a dollar to a little bit of a little bit when it comes to the right vaccine .
i think that &apos;s going to be changed by creating rekombinante vaccines in the vorhinein .
this is what the future might look like to change , can be accelerating today , with synthetic bacteria , archaen , and perhaps eukaryonten .
we &apos;re light years from being able to improve people , and our goal is that we have a chance to survive long enough to do that . thank you .
at the last ted conference , i had an introduction to the lhc .
and i promised to come back to explain how the machine works .
so it &apos;s so far . and for those who didn &apos;t have the back then , the lhc is the largest scientific experiment that was ever been , 27 miles in diameter .
his job is to create the conditions that existed less than a milliardstel second after the beginning of the universe -- and that &apos;s up to 600 million times a second .
it &apos;s just breathtaking ambitious .
this is the machine below the geneva .
we take images of these mini-urknalle in the detectors .
i work with this . it &apos;s called an atlas detector -- 44 feet in the north , 22 meters in diameter .
this is a spectacular picture of the atlas in the construction that you see the scale .
on 10 last 10 year the machine was going to first time .
and this picture was taken by a atlas .
there &apos;s huge jubel in the control of the room .
it &apos;s a picture of the first strahlenpartikels that the entire strecke would zurücklegte around the lhc , then , to be able to kollidierte a piece of the lhc to make a rain of particles on the detector .
in other words , when we saw this picture on the 10th of september , we knew that the machine works , which is a great triumph .
i don &apos;t know if this is going to produce the largest jubel , or this is when someone went to the google site and find the front page .
it means we have a cultural impact on the scientific basis .
about a week later , there was a problem with the machine that had to do with these drähten -- these golden wires here in this .
these wires run 13-tausend ampere when the machine &apos;s running on hochleistung .
well , the engineers , they &apos;re going to look at them and say , &quot; no , no , you don &apos;t do that . these are little wires . &quot;
you can afford that because if you &apos;re very far down , you &apos;re going to be called supraleitern .
so at minus 271 degrees , it &apos;s smaller than the space between the stars , these wires can be able to push tension .
in one of the compounds , between neuntausend magnet at the lhc , there was a manufakturdefekt .
and by doing the wires , the wires geringfügig and 13-tausend ampere , all of a sudden elektrischem resistance .
this was the result .
now , this is even more amazing if you imagine that the magnet weigh 20 tons and move around about 30 inches .
so we &apos;re beschädigten about 50 of the magnet .
and they had to take away what we were doing .
we konditionierten them , reparierten them .
they &apos;re all back in their way back .
at the end of march , the lhc will be funktionsfähig .
we &apos;re going to turn it up and we &apos;ll expect for the first data in june or july , and we &apos;ll continue to figure out what the building blocks are .
well , of course , in a way , these accidents are the debate about science and ingenieurskunst of such borders . it &apos;s easy to reject something .
i think the fact that it &apos;s so hard to get out of the fact that we reach beyond our borders , is the value of things like the lhc .
i &apos;m going to leave my abschließenden words a english scientist , humphrey davy , who , as he was his nutzlosen experiments of his lehrlings , his student was michael faraday , who said , &quot; nothing is so dangerous for the development of human mind , as a assume that our scientific beliefs are endgültig , that there are no mystery in nature that our triumphe are vollzählig
thank you .
i &apos;m a writer .
books is my profession , but it &apos;s more than that .
it &apos;s my big , dear love and fascination .
and i don &apos;t expect that to be going to be the way .
but there &apos;s a little bit of a weird thing in my life and my career that has taken me to rethink my relationship with this work .
this is a very strange event that i was written a book recently -- a biografie named „ eat , pray , love “ -- that , &quot; you know , &quot; and , &quot; and &quot; anders , &quot; and a big mega-ereignis , international bestseller-ding .
the result is that i don &apos;t care where i &apos;m going to be treated as if i &apos;m going to geweiht the fall .
seriously -- the untergang geweiht .
for example , they get to me and they &apos;re really concerned about me and say , &quot; don &apos;t you fear that you will never be übertreffen that success ?
don &apos;t you have a fear of that you &apos;re weiterschreiben and never created a book that was in the world ? never again ?
okay , this is really encouraging .
it would be worse if i didn &apos;t remember that i was a teenager first told i was a teenager first told that i was faced with the same kind of angstbesetzter reaction .
people said , &quot; „ don &apos;t you have any fear of having any success ? &quot;
do you not fear that you &apos;re killing the demütigung of a absage ?
do you not fear that you nachgehst your life for your life and never come up and that you &apos;re going to die on a schrotthaufen dreams -- your mouth filled with the bitteren asche of failure ?
so , you know , you know .
and the answer -- the short answer to all these questions : „ yes .
yeah , i &apos;m afraid of all of these things .
and i always had it .
and i &apos;m afraid of things that no one would be in the world .
it algae -- and other things are things .
but , if it &apos;s about writing , i &apos;ve been thinking about it recently and i ask myself , why ?
is that reasonable ?
is it logical that you should expect to be afraid of doing the work that he feels ?
and what &apos;s happening with the creative business of what they &apos;re going to make us make of progress of the mutual mental mind -- in a way that other jobs don &apos;t do ?
my father , for example , was chemist , and i can &apos;t remember a situation in his 40 years as a chemist he was asked if he was afraid to be a chemist .
with your chemiker-blockade , john -- how do you go ?
it just didn &apos;t happen , you know ?
but to be fair -- the group of chemists have not been given to the centuries of alkoholsüchtigen manisch-depressive people .
we seem to have a kind of reputation , but not only the writers , but the creative of all the genres , seem to be able to have this reputation , mentally ungeheuer .
all you have to do is to look at the bitteren todeszahlen of really great minds by really great minds , who died , who died , are young and often by their own hand .
and even the ones who didn &apos;t actually have suizid begingen , seemed to be really neglected from their talent .
norman mailer said briefly before his last interview : „ each of my books have been killed a little bit more .
a extraordinary statement that you can do about your lebenswerk .
but we don &apos;t even think about somebody who &apos;s seen someone like this , because we &apos;ve been familiar with this kind of statements as long as long as we have this kind of verinnerlicht and collective accepted that creativity and tired of course , of course , zusammengehören , and that art is -- always lead to the seelenqual .
the question i want to ask everyone here is : is this an idea for you to do all right ?
feel you feel about that ? because only one centimeter is apart , i feel that i don &apos;t feel that this is not a view .
i find them abscheulich .
and i find them dangerous . and i don &apos;t want to watch the next century .
i think it &apos;s better if we &apos;re going to live our great creative .
and i definitely know that it &apos;s -- in my situation -- very dangerous , to start , this dark path of the vermutung , in a way , to a really -- especially in the fact that i &apos;m in my career in my career .
that &apos;s called -- look : i &apos;m pretty young . i &apos;m only about 40 years old .
i &apos;ve got another 40 arbeitsjahre in my mind .
and it &apos;s extremely likely that all i &apos;m going to write about the world is being done by the work that came after the abgefahrenen success of my last book , right ?
i say it geradeheraus , because we &apos;re all sort of a kind of friends -- it &apos;s probably probably my greatest success behind me .
oh , jesus , what thought .
that &apos;s the kind of thought that can get someone to start at nine o &apos;clock in the morning , drink from the gin . and i don &apos;t want to .
i would rather continue to do this work that i love .
so the question is , how ?
after a while of the reflektierens , i seem to be able to continue to write a kind of schützendem psychological design .
somehow , i have to find a way to find a safe distance to the wahren between me and my very natural beklemmung , how the reaction is going to be the geschriebene .
while i was looking for models in the past year , i also looked at the past , and i tried to find other societies to see whether they might help with the emotional or more ideas about how to help with the emotional risks that are connected to creativity .
this is a quest that led me to the old , griechenland and the old rome .
please follow me , because the circle will close again .
but in the old greece and rome , people didn &apos;t believe that creativity is coming , okay ?
they believed that creativity was a kind of göttlicher diener-geist , which is from a distant , unknown source to people -- from unerklärlichen , unknown reasons .
the greeks called this göttlichen diener-geister of creativity „ dämonen .
from the sokrates , he &apos;s known that he believed he had a dämon that was mitteilte him from a long distance .
the römer had the same idea , called this kind of körperlosem creative mind , a „ genius .
this is great . the römer thought not really thought a genius was a particularly smart individual .
they believed that a genius was this kind of magical göttliches being , in the believed that it literally lives in the walls of a künstlerateliers -- something like dobby , the hauself -- the rauskäme and the artist in the work , in the work , is sort of invisible assistierte and the result of work .
this is brilliant -- there &apos;s the distance , where i was talking about -- the psychological set of building that protect you from the consequences of your work .
and everybody knew it worked this way , right ?
the artist of the altertums was protected in some ways , like , for example , too much , right ?
if your work was brilliant , you didn &apos;t have anything to look at you for you , everyone knew you had this kind of körperlose genius that helped you .
if your work is floppte -- not completely your fault , or ?
everybody knew your genius was a little bit .
so people have thought of creativity in the west , really long time .
and then the renaissance came and everything changed . and this big idea was , let &apos;s put human individual into the center of the universe -- all gods and mystery , and there &apos;s no room for the mystische creatures , who take orders from the right .
it &apos;s the beginning of the rational humanismus , and people started to believe that creativity had completely come from their own individual .
for the first time in history , you hear people who or those artists are a genius -- instead of having a genius .
i have to tell you , i think that was a big mistake .
you know , i think , an individual person , he thinks he &apos;s thinking , or it &apos;s like the gefäß , like the becken and the essence , the source of all the göttlichen , creative , unbekanntem , an infinite mysteriums , is a little bit of a lot of responsibility to aufzubürden them to a fragilen , human psyche .
it &apos;s like someone to ask for someone to eat the sun .
the entstellt and verzerrt all of the egos , and it creates all these unerreichbaren expectations of success .
i think that this erfolgs-druck has been vernichtet our artists for the last 500 years .
and if that &apos;s true , and i think it &apos;s true -- is the question .
can we change it ?
perhaps to a altertümlichen understanding of the relationship between people and the mystery of creativity .
maybe not .
maybe we can &apos;t just make the gedankengut of 500 years of rational and auslöschen not just in a 18-minütigen .
and there are people in this audience who would have been anmelden really berechtigte scientific doubt about the notion of -- feen , people &apos;s nachfolgen and feenzauber on their projects .
i &apos;m probably not going to take all of you on this journey .
but the question i want to address is : why not ?
why not thinking about that ?
because it makes much sense of the same thing as everything i &apos;ve heard about , when it went to explain the absolutely crazy launenhaftigkeit of the creative process .
a process that is -- as anyone who has ever tried to do something -- in other words , actually everyone here is always vernünftig .
in fact , he can feel really literally paranormal .
i recently met an encounter as i met the extraordinary american poet of ruth stone , who was now about 90 , but her whole life was a poet , and she told me that she was growing up in the fields in the dörflichen virginia , she said she would feel and hear a poem about the landscape of the landscape .
she said it would be like a donnernder train .
the land would be zurollen on it .
she felt when it came , because it would take the earth under their feet .
she knew she could only do one such a moment , and that was -- in their words , „ running like the devil “ .
she ran out like the devil to the house , as she was tracking from this poem , and it was only about that they had to get enough to a sheet of paper and a pen , so she could capture and capture it on the sheet .
and other than that , she wasn &apos;t fast enough . she ran and ran and ran , but she didn &apos;t get the house , and the poem she would roll through her and she gave it . she said it would go beyond land , and she said -- „ after another poet .
and then there were these moments -- i &apos;m going to never forget -- she said that there were moments in which they were almost verpasste .
so , she &apos;s running out of the house , and she &apos;s going to go after paper and the poem goes through her and she picks up a pen , and she &apos;s taking a pencil and then -- she said -- it was like to grab it with your other hand and get it to be .
they caught the poem on its tail and she pulled it back into her body and took it on the sheet of paper .
and so , in these opportunities , the poem came out and intakt on the paper -- but backwards -- from the last word for the first .
and i thought i thought that i was a „ , that &apos;s really , really -- that &apos;s exactly what my creative process is like .
this is not like my creative process -- i &apos;m not the channel .
i &apos;m a maultier . i have to work with the work that i have to get up every day and sweat , abmühen , and really uncomfortable .
but even i have a ding ding in my maultierart .
and i guess many of you have done that .
i had been working , or ideas , which was from a source through me that i really can &apos;t relate .
what is that thing ?
and how do we step in relation to losing our minds , but to keep us in the opposite of the geistiger ?
for me , the best living example of the way you can do this is the musician tom waits , and i had to interview him a couple of years ago .
we talked about this topic , and you know what ? most of the time of his life was tom the embodiment of the gepeinigten modern artist who was trying to master these unkontrollierbaren , kreativen , who lived in him and with them .
but then he was getting older and quiet , he told me that he was going to go to a schnellstraße in los angeles , and there was all that changed .
he was driving a little bit of a tune , which is , as it &apos;s often , it &apos;s hard to make it greifbar , and he wants to have them . it &apos;s prachtvoll . he lechzt it after that , but he can &apos;t grab it .
he has no piece of paper , he doesn &apos;t have a pencil , he doesn &apos;t have a kassettenrekorder .
so he starts to get this old beklemmung up in him like , like „ , i &apos;m going to lose this thing and will be verfolgt by this song .
i &apos;m not good enough ; i don &apos;t make it .
but instead of panic , he just stopped .
he ended up with the whole gedankengang and doing something completely new .
he just looked in the heavens and said , &quot; „ , can &apos;t you see that i &apos;m driving car ? &quot;
„ is that i could write a song ?
if you really want to exist , come on a günstigeren moment , if i can take care of you .
if not , quäle someone else today .
and go and quäle , leonard cohen .
his whole arbeitsprozess has changed after that .
not the work itself . it &apos;s been more dark as ever as ever as ever as ever .
but the process , and the heavy beklemmung that surrounds him was , when he was a genius , he took the genius out of the genius , where he was going to have nothing to trouble , and he zurückließ him , he would come back , and he realized that it had to be no verinnerlichtes , quälendes thing .
it could be a eigentümliche , wundersame , bizarre collaboration , a kind of conversation between tom and the fremdartigen , äußerlichen thing that was not very tom .
when i heard this story , it was also a little bit of a bit of the way i worked and i &apos;ve saved it .
this idea i was in the middle of the schreibprozess of „ eat , pray , love “ , and i fell into one of these gruben of the zweifels that we all fall when we work on something and it doesn &apos;t work . you start thinking that it &apos;s a disaster . it becomes the worst book that was ever written .
not just bad , but the worst of all time .
i started thinking , i should just einstampfen the project .
but then i remember how tom was talking to the free skies , and i tried it .
so i took my view of the manuscript , and i was talking to my comment in a empty corner of space .
i said loud , you know , „ listen , you and i both know , if this book is not brilliant , it &apos;s not completely my fault , right ?
because you see that i &apos;m going to invest everything i &apos;ve got , i don &apos;t have any more than that .
so if you want to have it better , you have to show up here and get your share of the deal .
okay . but if you don &apos;t do that , you know what , the hell with it .
i &apos;m going to write down , because that &apos;s my job .
and i want to give you to make a point that i was here today for my part of the job .
because ... -- at the end , it &apos;s like follows , and centuries ago , in the deserts of nordafrikas people , people have gathered together with holy tänzen and music that were stopped for hours -- until dawn .
these strong were always great because the dancers were professional , and they were fantastic .
but again , very rarely , something special happened . one of the performers was actually überweltlich .
and i know you know what i mean , because i know you &apos;ve all seen a performance like that in your life .
it was like the time of stillstehen and dancers through a kind of pforte , and he did nothing differently than he did before -- 1,000 nights before , but everything .
and suddenly , he wasn &apos;t really true anymore .
it was erhellt from inside and erhellt from the bottom , and it &apos;s all erhellte by a göttliches fire .
when something happened at the time , people knew what that was . they called it on his name .
they put the hands together and they started singing : „ allah , allah , allah , god , god , god .
that &apos;s god , you know ?
interesting historical figures : when the mohren südspanien came , they brought this practice . the aussprache changed over the course of „ allah , allah , allah “ to „ olé , olé , olé “ , that you still hear about stierkämpfen and flamenco-tänzen .
if a artist in spain did something that is something that did things have done , „ allah , olé , olé , allah , great , bravo “ , that &apos;s a flüchtiger view of god .
and that &apos;s great because we need this .
but , the most part of the knifflige part is the next morning , when the dancers comes up and realize it &apos;s 11 o &apos;clock on a tuesday -- and he no longer trägt a fünkchen of god .
he &apos;s only a alternder sterblicher knien , and maybe he &apos;s never going to climb up to this heights .
and maybe , you know , never will call god &apos;s name when he &apos;s turning . but what would he do with the rest of his life ?
that &apos;s hard .
this is one of the most schmerzhaftesten of a creative life .
but maybe it doesn &apos;t have to be so full of pein when they didn &apos;t believe in the beginning , that the most extraordinary aspects of their existence came from them .
if you just just believe that you &apos;re a leihgabe -- from a unvorstellbaren source of your life that &apos;s being passed on someone else , when you &apos;re done with it .
if we start thinking about it , it changes everything .
so i started thinking , and i think i think i was making sure that i was in the last months while i was working on the book , which is going to be soon as dangerous , frightening , strong , strong expected nachfolger to my abgefahrenen .
what i have to say , constantly , i &apos;m going to be crazy , is not afraid .
it &apos;s not entmutigt .
do your job . &quot;
and be still for your contribution to whatever he may be .
if your job is dance , dance .
if the silly of the silly genius that you &apos;re asking to you , decides for a brief moment , a little bit of a hauch of miracles through your effort , then „ olé !
and if not , dance , dance , dance .
and „ olé ! “ for you despite this .
i believe in this , and i feel like we should teach this .
„ olé ! “ for you , just for that , just for that you have the mere human love and the eigensinn of being there .
thank you .
thank you .
olé !
last year , i showed these two slides to illustrate that the arctic eiskappe , which had the size of the lower 48 states , to reduce 40 percent .
but this doesn &apos;t really express the very ernsthaftigkeit of this particular problem , because it &apos;s not the thickness of ice .
in a sense , the arctic sea is the beating heart of our global klimasystems .
it grows in winter and summer in summer .
the next slide i &apos;m showing you is a zeitrafferaufnahme that &apos;s happened in the last 25 years .
the dauereis is labeled red .
as you can see , it &apos;s markierte to the dunkelblau , and this is the annual ice in winter , and it &apos;s schrumpft in summer .
this so-called dauereis , five years old , or older , is almost like blood that herausfliesst out of the body .
in 25 years , it will be gone here .
this is a problem because warming auftaut the frozen reason for the arctic ocean , which is large amounts of carbon carbon , which is , if it &apos;s auftaut , from microbes to methane .
compared to the entire amount of klimaverändernden material in the atmosphere , that amount could double when we cross that critical point .
already , today , sprudelt in some of the flat lakes in alaska methane from the water .
professor katey walter in alaska , with one another , went to a different arbeitsgruppe lake for the last winter .
wow !
you &apos;re all fine . the question is , how will it be ergehen .
and one reason is this enormous wärmespeicher of the norden , and it &apos;s rising up from the north .
this is a jährlicher tauwasserfluss .
but the volume are far bigger than ever before .
this is the kangerlussuaq river in südwest greenland .
if you want to know , like sea level of sea levels , you &apos;re going to sea .
these rivers are moving up very quickly .
the other end of the planet , the antarctica , the largest eismasse on the planet .
last month researchers , researchers , the whole continent has a negative eisbilanz .
and the westantarktis that showed up above a few unterwasserinseln is especially strong in the melting of the melting .
this is 20 feet , like greenland .
in the himalayas , the drittgrössten eismasse , they see new lakes that were glaciers in a few years ago .
40 percent of all people in the world are getting half of their trinkwassers from this schmelzwasser .
in the anden , this glacier is the trinkwasserquelle of this city .
the wassermengen have a lot of the time .
but if you versiegen , it will also be wegfallen .
in california , a 40 percent reduction in the schneedecke were seen .
this is the speicherbecken .
and the predictions as you read them are serious .
this austrocknung in the world , has a dramatic increase in fire .
and the disasters all over the world have really increased in a really ausserordentlichen and before , dagewesenen .
four years four years in the last 30 years , like the vorhergegangenen 75. .
this is a completely unhaltbares entwicklungsmuster .
if you look at this in historical context , you can see what it &apos;s anrichtet .
in the last five years , we have 70 million tons of co2 every 24 hours -- 25 million tons every day in the oceans .
if you look at the realm of eastern pacific , from the american continent , western and beiderseits of the indian subkontinents , where there &apos;s a drastischen decline of the oxygen in the ocean .
the biggest single factor for global warming , is to deforestation , which is 20 percent , is burning by fossil fuels .
oil is a problem , and coal is the most powerful problem .
the united states is one of the two largest verschmutzer , combined with china .
and the suggestion was to build a lot more kohlefabriken .
but we &apos;re starting to see a change .
here are the ones who were taken out of the last few years , with some green alternatives that were proposed .
trotzdessen is a political debate in our country .
and the kohleindustrien and ölindustrien spent a viertelmilliarde dollars in kalendarjahr to promote clean coal , which is a contradiction in itself .
this picture reminded me of something .
around christmas , they were walking in my home at home , a billion tons of kohleschlamm .
you &apos;ve seen it in the news .
this is in our entire country of zweitgrösste abfallfluss .
this was what happened to christmas .
one of the werbespots of the kohleindustrie of the kohleindustrie for christmas was this .
frosty of the kohlenmann is a vergnügter , happy guy .
it &apos;s in the shell and abundance in america , and it &apos;s helping our economy .
frosty , the kohlenmann will clean every day .
it &apos;s affordable and liebenswert , and workers remain in lohn and bread .
this is the source of most coal from west virginia .
the most powerful bergarbeiter is the head of massey coal .
let me say a very clear . al gore , nancy pelosi , harry reid , they don &apos;t know what they &apos;re talking about .
so the alliance for climate change has been called two campaigns .
this is one , a part of her .
at the coalergy , we see climate change as a serious threat to our business .
so we set it to the top court , a beträchtliche geldsumme auszugeben to get a werbeaktion on the way to get the truth about coal .
in fact , coal is not dirty .
we think it &apos;s clean -- and smells of smells of it .
so , don &apos;t worry about the climate change .
leave this quiet .
saueber coal , they &apos;ve heard a lot of it .
so let &apos;s take a tour of this modern , clean kohlefabrik .
fantastic ! this machine is pretty noisy .
but it &apos;s the sound of the clean kohletechnologie .
and yet , the burning of coal is the global warming that &apos;s the global warming , the remarkable clean kohletechnologie that you see here changes everything .
look at it , this is the today &apos;s saubere kohletechnologie .
finally , the positive alternative to our economic challenge and our challenge of national security .
america is in a crisis , the economy , the national security , the climate crisis .
the red line that connects all of those is our dependence on kohlenstoff-basierenden fuels like dirty coal and ausländisches oil .
but now there &apos;s a bold , new solution to get us out of this kind of misslichen situation .
versorge america in the next 10 years of clean electricity , within the next 10 years , within the next 10 years .
a plan to get america back to work , make us secure and help stop global warming .
finally , a solution that &apos;s big enough to solve our problems .
versorge america . find out more .
this is the last .
it &apos;s about a neuversorgung of america .
one of the fastest ways of , our dependence on old , dirty fuels that we &apos;ve had to bring our world down .
the future is here . wind , sun and a new energy system .
new investment for creating good jobs .
versorge america is time to accept reality .
there &apos;s an old african saying , &quot; if you want to be fast , go alone .
if you want to come , go together . &quot;
we have to get far , and it &apos;s fast .
thank you .
i want to ask you to ask to take your childhood &apos;s time when you were playing with bauklötzen .
while they realized how you can get out of your hands , and zugreift the klötze , it &apos;s actually moving to thinking and problems by understanding and change räumlicher .
spatial thinking is deeply connected to how we understand a lot of our environment .
as a computer scientist , inspired by the way of our interaction with real objects , and my colleague jeevan kalanithi , i began to wonder : what if we could use computers to move instead of a maus-zeigers that moves on a flat arbeitsfläche , ... ... what if we could intervene with both hands and could organize data and so could we organize the data that we want
this question was so ergreifend that we went to explore the answer and developed siftables .
in short , a siftable is an interactive computer in the size of a kekses .
you can move with your hand , you can perceive each other , you can capture your movement , and you have a screen and a funkempfänger .
more importantly , are physical , so you can only move them through the ausstrecken of hands and access .
and the siftables are an example of a new generation of hilfsmitteln to the manipulation of the digital data .
and if these tools are physical and a conscious conscious awareness are developing each other and detect the feinheiten of our umgangs with them , we can start exploring new and more exciting .
i &apos;ll start with some simple examples .
this siftable is for the videowiedergabe konfiguriert , and when i go to a direction , the video will be going forward , if i move it in the other direction , it &apos;s going backwards .
and these interactive portraits are taking each other &apos;s true .
so if i put them on side side , you &apos;re going to be very close .
if you &apos;re surrounded by the voneinader , you can notice that also , and you can be a little nervous .
and they &apos;re also feeling their movements and the slope .
and an interesting thing about the interactions that we started to realize was that we could use everyday gestures on data , like the color of color , how to do this with the fluid .
in this case , we have three siftables of the als , and i can use them to put color in the middle , where they &apos;re going to be mixed .
if we go back it , we can zurückschütten a little bit .
there &apos;s also some kind of nice ways in education like languages , mathematics or logikspiele , where we can give people the possibility of fast fast and see the results immediately .
here i am -- this is a series of a series i &apos;m doing with a simple gleichungsprogramm .
this is a game with words that is a kind of mixture of scrabble and boggle .
basically , each round of round up to be siftable letters and while you &apos;re trying to build words , they &apos;re going to be tested for a dictionary .
then , after about 30 seconds , again , again , and you have a new new new opportunity and new possibilities .
thank you .
these are some kids who came to a trip to the media lab , and i could make them try and taken a video of it .
they really loved it .
an interesting fact of this kind of applications that you don &apos;t have to give people a lot of instructions .
all you have to say is &quot; form words &quot; and you know exactly what to do .
here are some people who are testing it .
this is our recent beta-tester beta-tester on the lower right .
it turns out he just wanted to be able to climb up the siftables .
so they were just bauklötze .
this is an interactive trickfilmanwendung .
we wanted to develop a lernmittel for sprachlerner .
this is felix .
it can bring new characters into the scene by aufhebt the siftable from the table that shows this character .
here he &apos;s got the sun .
the sun is going to go to the sun .
now he &apos;s catching a traktor into the scene .
the orange one .
good work ! yeah !
by shake the siftables and schüttelt it next to side , he can interact the characters .
... he invent his own story .
hi hi .
it &apos;s a story with open end , and he can decide how to evolve .
flying cat .
the last example i have today to show you is a musik-sequencer for live-auftritte that we &apos;ve developed recently and in the siftables as sound , like führungsstimme , bass and schlagzeug .
each one has four different variations ; you can select which one wants to use .
and you can sequence these sounds into the sequence , which you can see in any patterns .
and you &apos;re speist them by holding a ton-siftable on a sequenz-siftable .
there are effects that can be able to change live , like hall and filter .
you connect it with a specific note , and then it tends to be a einstellen .
and then , even more übergeordnete effects as speed and volume that you &apos;re doing in the entire sequence .
so let &apos;s see .
we start in which we put the führungsstimme into two sequenz-siftable , and we can expand them in a row , and add a little more of the voice .
now i add a bass .
now i &apos;m going to do something more schlagzeug .
and now i &apos;m going to put the filter with the schlagzeug so i can drive the effect live .
i can accelerate the whole sequence by the pace of one or another direction .
and now i &apos;m going to give the filter with the bass , for something more .
i can change the sequence while it &apos;s going to be .
so i don &apos;t have to plan it in the front of the vorfeld , but it can improvise ; they &apos;re going to increase or verkürzen .
and finally , i can ausblenden the whole sequence by running the lautstärke-siftable on the left .
thank you .
so , as you can see , my excitement is to develop new mensch-computer-schnittstellen that make better than how our brains and bodies work .
and today i had time to show you a part of these new design-welt and some of the possibilities that we work in our lab .
the thought i &apos;d like to give you with the way we &apos;re at the threshold , is that we &apos;re at the threshold of this new generation of werzeugen , with digital media , which bring information to our world , which is the demands of our demands .
thank you .
i &apos;m happy to talk to you .
yes , good day .
i &apos;m excited that i &apos;m there .
yeah , what should be biohacking ?
i have to take a little bit back , and it &apos;s a beschäftigt in the modern molecular molecular biology .
i study molecular science and a lot of years ago , i &apos;ve been working with the biohacking , and i started , because i just wanted to know and do it , and also , even though , i wanted to do what i learned in the study of the study .
so , that was my primary motivation .
so it was a curiosity , and i was kind of a closer to get on the matter , so .
i think molecular biology generally talking , generally , biotechnology , everything that you can matter , synthetic biology and so on .
extremely important , now , is extremely important , and much more important , much more important in the future .
there are so umstrittene things like this whole gentechnisch plants on the äckern .
there are craig venter in the u.s.a that tries to make biofuel , so the fuel of algae .
well , there &apos;s things that are really , you know , that &apos;s really aware of the everyday life , which is not aware of the most people , for example , for example , that allow us to wash the vierzig , auch wäsche , also gentechnisch optimierte .
and the list can continue on and on .
and so from interest in this technology , i &apos;m just going to continue to keep on .
so what &apos;s now hacken ?
most people know most people know that from the softwarebereich .
computers are hacken , and then it will always be like the hackers , and the hackers are breaking down somewhere and klauen data and so on .
so , it &apos;s kind of sad for the hackerszene , because it doesn &apos;t really true what it actually is like actually , and what &apos;s actually going on .
and that &apos;s the software-hacker , in the &apos; 70s , achtzigerjahren with computerbasteln , and it &apos;s also made the internet .
and it &apos;s about a playful , creative , original way of solving a problem .
and the problem , it &apos;s not just a technical problem , it can be a social problem , it can be just a zugangsproblem thing , which simplify things like things , so any problemstellung , a question , and how can you do it differently , or how can you make it better .
and it &apos;s been just großgeworden , but there &apos;s also a whole bastlerszene thing that &apos;s also a whole bastlerszene thing that can do with elektronikschaltkreisen all kinds of things .
and there &apos;s this metaphor that &apos;s going on in biology , and there &apos;s this metaphor that &apos;s actually coming from synthetic biology , because the d.n.a code is a abstract code , which is , it &apos;s not quite a very same way , because it &apos;s dynamic because it &apos;s matter , so it &apos;s matter , so real matter , and not just cyber .
but it &apos;s also a code , and you can also program it , and you can also hacken it , so , and that &apos;s what i found , i find incredibly fascinating , and i just wanted to get a lot deeper into the process .
it actually took eight really zweitausend , actually , these networks .
there &apos;s hackteria dot , which is originally from switzerland , which is with europe and with cooperation into india , but that &apos;s now members and active people all over the world .
this is a more artistic orientation , so there &apos;s a lot of artists and philosophers and philosophers with scientists that are involved with these technologies and ask them to ask and to do the creative , there &apos;s museumsausstellungen and yes , all kinds of things .
but it &apos;s always about how to find such a kind of a kind of lockeren access to that kind of a spielerischen way of doing it .
and then there &apos;s do-it-yourself-bio dot , d.i.y.bio .
this is from the u.s.a network , which is actually more like a kind of place where where you &apos;re going to meet and be discussing online .
they &apos;re a little bit of a technical ausgerichtet and also a little bit of businessmäßiger , and then , you know , are gestellt questions .
and based on these networks that all the popular popular , it &apos;s a scene that i &apos;d like to just porträtieren a little bit .
here in the picture on the left , you see biocurious , which is a hackerspace , so basically a kind of school , a private school , nonprofit , nonprofit institution where everybody can be able to be .
kids , old , all kinds of people , go around , just to give them up , they put a laboratory and look at what can be , if these laborprotokolle .
here &apos;s the left , there &apos;s a group in indonesia , house-of-natural-fibers , which is , they have quite long .
it &apos;s longer than these two networks .
the brain also also in such an artistic aspect of biological materials , and yes , also elektronikbasteleien , and combine it in a pretty abgefahre way .
a group of ankara i &apos;ve met a while ago , who &apos;s a studentengruppe , who would love to convey the public more , what they &apos;re learning in college , and they did so on straßenfesten little actions and try to explain what d.n.a is .
and i have a lecture in the other picture in copenhagen at the medical museum in a kombination museum at a time .
and this is , yes , this is the most of the most people , but the only thing that one of which is actually all the united is this fascination of the technology .
and what you can do with that , and also , in particular , to be able to zuzugehen and ask , okay , what do you know , what do you want to do , you have an interest in that you &apos;re bringing to you ?
so , o.k , in order to hacken biology , you need some kind of material .
you need to be biological materials , and you need tools , and that &apos;s a lab .
and what you normally understand under a lab is that sort of abgefahrene machines , extremely expensive , extremely distanziert , just for fachpersonal , educated academics with a doktortitel and so on .
and our approach was just saying , &quot; o.k , &quot; that you don &apos;t have to do it .
it &apos;s actually not necessary because each every one every kaffeeautomat has actually developed technology than most of the laborgeräte , that &apos;s really like this .
and it &apos;s really o with this premise of this premise then , for example , brian degger in england trying to ein a minimallabor , then he &apos;s taken a dampfdruckkochtopf , a heizplatte , and that &apos;s what it &apos;s going to be gezüchtet .
so everyone who &apos;s a soup is vergammelt that he has failed to have too long , even did .
i was trying to take this back in my lab , a little bit , and then i could buy the so auf on ebay and made a bisschen analysis , trying to vaterschaftstest , so that &apos;s the same as an d.n.a , and it &apos;s a daheim .
now that &apos;s not a joke at all , but .
and here &apos;s the lab , in the anführungsstrichen , in anführungsstrichen , so it &apos;s so a zugestellte garage with also so much möglichen , a group in paris , which is what &apos;s been doing and it &apos;s pretty successful and also doing quite interesting things , and i want to go through a project .
and this is biocurious , which is just mentioned , that &apos;s sort of a kind of volkshochschule kind of volkshochschule in principle for molecular biology .
and , you know , it &apos;s relatively relatively heterogen , so that &apos;s there &apos;s a halt for people who are doing that alone , to large larger organizations , which are already betreiben by institutionalisierter .
but always the approach that it &apos;s just to be just and it &apos;s supposed to be available .
the first project we &apos;ve done as international group , when we were actually aware of ourselves , o.k , there are now a real scene , and we &apos;re online , and we know people who are always and chatten and so .
and then , from the do-it-yourself-bio org website , the founder , and i said , we have to actually meet , too , also meet real meeting , and then organized two events , one in london , zweitausend 10 , and shortly in the u.s.a , in san francisco .
and then , there &apos;s also about this , yes , who are we , what are we going to do , what do we want to say , what do we want to say ?
and what are our values and what are our purpose of our purposes , our foundation ?
and then we &apos;ve got a code-of-conduct ausgearbeitet .
it was very intuitive , so everyone has just so his wishes , his and what he would move , &quot; then .
there was , i think , is done a very good code .
and we then have it not , but that &apos;s , you know , i think , i think , well , it &apos;s pretty good , people are quite convinced of that .
and we actually tried to zurückzubringen that into the academic world , but there &apos;s no way that it &apos;s not .
so i think we &apos;re out of the biohackerszene in terms , even more than the world &apos;s academic world .
well , what do we actually do for projects now ?
one project i did with the hackteria-netzwerk hackteria-netzwerk in switzerland was that we wanted to have an optical optical or optical pinzette .
that &apos;s when you focus a computer beam , you can capture little particles in the room , or in the liquid , and then move in this focus , so that &apos;s captured there , so like a traktorbeamstrahl principle .
this really works , this is done in academic setting , and we then thought , o.k , we might have it , then we have a webcam , the aufgeschraubt , the lens , the lens , and then you have a microscope , it &apos;s going to be vergrößert up to vierhundertfach .
this is what you see .
and then we put a d.v.d brenner auseinandergeschraubt and the laser brenner rausgeholt the laser , and then we try to focus on this camera .
and it didn &apos;t work out , but we &apos;ve learned a lot .
so another project that came from the french group of paris , which has been , it &apos;s pretty cool .
and it &apos;s like this , like a hirnwellenmessgerät , so e.e.g , or something like this , so he &apos;s engaged with neurobiologie , his nickname is sam neurohack .
he then made this one these helmet there , and in cooperation with the museum , that &apos;s the place .
and then the visitors could go in the room , sit in this chair , put this helmet .
and then their brain had measured , and the after they thought or how they thought , are different lights in the room .
it was a pretty pretty schickes project .
another thing from the united states that we can do with this vaterschaftstestgeschichte is the p.c.r , which is the polymerase-kettenreaktion , complicated word .
so it &apos;s about copy gene , reproduce , d.n.a , fragmente , so you can see it visible .
so , if i do the profiler of the scene , then they go to the profiler , they go there , and then they do this kind of method , and then they can say , o.k , that hair is from that person , so that &apos;s the human .
and the machines that make something like this is pretty expensive that you buy commercial commercial commercial , the billigsten are going to go to viertausend dollars .
and that &apos;s not in the hobbybereich , but it &apos;s a really cool technology that can also be a lot .
so this is just one application of many , you can do it .
and they have two bastler rangesetzt and said , and we &apos;re making it easier and cheaper , and then it &apos;s open source , so freely available hardware , elektroniksachen , and they &apos;re now actually gebracht this device , and now they have actually taken that to the marktreife and they &apos;re now the billigste of the billigste of these devices around the world .
i think it &apos;s kind of like sechshundert dollars or something like that .
but anyway , it &apos;s still not cheap , but it &apos;s definitely in a frame where it &apos;s going to be available .
so i think it &apos;s a very gelungener hack .
a project i started to do was building a gene-gun .
gene-gun is , yes , like a kind of luftdruckpistole , which is schießt , or so far , two centimeters or so .
you use d.n.a to goldpartikel and then the goldpartikel then into these luftdruckpistole , and then i shot the zwiebeln and then put the light on the way that they were .
so the device you can see , it doesn &apos;t work .
but this is my prototype , which looked pretty much like , but it &apos;s like a branch , which is it , put it on it , put it on , and it was the pressure , and that was the pressure thing , the thing has gone .
and then i took a sahnespender and i &apos;m connected it .
a sahnespender , if you &apos;re full of water , the amount of pressure , so i think , vierzig , it &apos;s like vierzig .
and so you can accelerate the particles that are very much speed up and then go into the zwiebel .
and the commercial device costs about fünfzehntausend euros or something like this , sahnespender as the fünfzig .
so it doesn &apos;t have the same efficiency , but it &apos;s basically feasible .
so , in the moment , this is the kernanliegen of the scene , the kernanliegen of the scene , to increase this availability of technology , and also increase the information and the verständlichkeit that there are more people who can get involved in that .
because , as the beginning said , it &apos;s an extremely important technology , and most people have relatively little idea of it , and also no chance of being able to build up .
because if you just read about it , it &apos;s not the same as if you &apos;ve done it yourself or you &apos;ve seen it .
and i think technology is always going to be more important in our modern societies .
and if you can also make a sinnvolle citizens of the society , you can make a good decisions in society , and you need to have access to knowledge and technology .
and you have to do it and understand it and understand it and understand it .
and then the firmiert then the schlagworten open source of science and the citizen .
so that you can be versetzt as a citizens of being able to get a bürger and you &apos;re going to be able to use these scientific technologies .
and this is the kernanliegen of the biohackern .
these are the people who are at least officially eingetragen on the website , d.i.y.bio-dot-org website .
this is a relatively remarkable number of people around the world .
and also interesting , they are also in the emerging asia .
this is i think there are fewer people in eingetragen than actually exist .
so i know some of some of some who don &apos;t have eingetragen .
and this is just the biohacker , the individual people .
in part of these , these hackerspaces , these places put together in this place .
and it &apos;s very , very , very , in the beginning .
as i said , zweitausendacht has just started .
and hackerspaces , the computerhackerspaces , because the c-base c-base in berlin was the first one , neunzehnhundertfünfundneunzig .
and this is now a giant network of very good , yes , infrastrukturzentren , who are represented everywhere .
and we hope , of course , we &apos;re also going to spread and also spread , and then also be similar to be well , so that might be involved in more than that .
and i &apos;d invite everyone to be in this , and also try and try .
it &apos;s not that simple now , but it &apos;s not impossible to be there , if you have enough curiosity and reinsteckt enough energy , then you &apos;ll get there .
thank you very much for listening .
that &apos;s it .
yeah , hi .
how do we work for people ?
this is a question that i &apos;m very moving as designer , but also in the area of the forschungsbereich usability and all of things in the field of user .
there &apos;s about how you &apos;ve encountered people in interactive media so you can use these interactive media and make it a very different experience .
i think that interactive media into us archaische , cognitive models , are the paradigm that have been einprogrammiert in our biological memory , very long time , and that we can be able to generate the same as interactive media .
and this is very amazing because you actually believe that these hochtechnologie that you have in the face that you &apos;re in there that you &apos;re actually bringing you into the future , but actually it &apos;s like the future is right in our archaischen roots .
what are actually archaische models ?
i &apos;ve been aufgeschrieben four stichworte , and i want to leave you in a short story .
zu cognitive models , and that is the models that we have in the most powerful times .
to these archaischen models , we have a natural natural relationship to the point of view .
this is basically a ungewöhnlich thing .
i &apos;m going to go to the same again and i &apos;ll prove you to try to prove a natural relationship to you .
the second thing is that we &apos;ve been able to be able to talk to these archaischen models , very , very , very , very powerful , even though we use a kodifizierte language today .
and the third area that explains itself .
we all know that interactive media is an definition of definition , what includes the verneinung of the linearität , and what &apos;s of course tells us that we are a normal feeling of the normal .
the fourth point is that the story of us is a place of informationsweitergabe .
now , what &apos;s the virtualität that is actually the most natural thing in the world .
i want to prove that to you .
how many doors have the house that you live in ?
we &apos;re not going to answer them immediately immediately , but it will happen and happen right now .
you go in the spirit through this house , in demn , and look at how many doors are there .
and that &apos;s what they &apos;re doing .
they &apos;re virtualisieren reality , and it &apos;s not a computer .
fantastic , right ?
and there &apos;s the way that we &apos;re trying to try to see the virtual reality in our v.r.-labor , and we can actually see that all the time .
and this wealth of this wealth is the virtual reality of the reality , which is needed people in the vorindustriellen times , because they had nothing to do .
they didn &apos;t have books .
or they didn &apos;t have any fotolitografie .
they didn &apos;t have a mass media .
the only thing that had was their head .
and in that head , memory was playing .
in this head , knowledge has been abgerufen and using these virtual images , imagination , they were also passed away .
and so it &apos;s also so strong in us that we can interact with the virtualität .
the interesting thing is , if i can make a little trip .
yes , that &apos;s .
the interesting thing is that at that time , the human being was both medienproduzent and medium themselves .
now , if you think about a piece of time .
what are media today ?
then you &apos;ll notice that there &apos;s a change .
but i &apos;ll get to talk about that .
the wesentliches tool of the informationsvermittlung have been in the history of the same story .
schamanen , priest , so-called wissenswächter , were extra abgestellt to keep knowledge in stories .
and today we &apos;re still hanging on , very strong .
the author of the book , the storytelling animal , jonathan gottschall , we &apos;re still verbingen and eintausendneunhundert hours with the stories of stories every year .
this means for a child that has spent most of the time of the most time of the most time of his life , with the rezeption of stories .
now we think our love is to stories on that we sat down to our parents as a child .
no , no , it &apos;s not .
this goes back to the cultures of the vorindustriellen times .
but for me , in the realm of interactive media , as a particularly impressive , we &apos;ve had a verankert in our biological memory , the ability to think .
i &apos;ve brought one example from the nordamerikanischen tribe of the nootka-indianer .
and the live living in the british columbia of british columbia .
and as you can see , this is a very inselreiches area , and you had to go through an island of island to island to get food .
and they &apos;ve done this with what we call a lead-landkarten .
you may know that , you know , if you &apos;re interested in this , you know , the central african .
they have similar principles .
they don &apos;t have a lead-landkarten , but they used to use gennanten songlines or traumpfade .
and what &apos;s interesting about this is that the navigation and the topographie of regions could be used to be used .
while the language was rang by untergeordnetem .
that means you &apos;re navigierte about sound and rhythm .
and these sounds and this rhythm , the geologie , the topographie of an region , and it also enabled you to be able to defragmentieren these songs and put it in different and so on the left , and again , back to the back of the ausgangsort .
why don &apos;t we sing from a to b from a to b ?
anyway , to navigate .
what &apos;s happening in this ?
it &apos;s happening that &apos;s the way that gennante is so gennante .
we moved to the genannten of vogt-zeitalter .
it &apos;s happening in the age of the maschinenzeitalter , and it &apos;s the book , and it &apos;s happened that &apos;s the fotolitografie .
and that &apos;s exactly what happens is that we have the responsibility for our memories and our individual &apos;s production of our individual memories on external media .
it &apos;s the book and the picture .
so , unfortunately , we have god ein a piece of verlernt .
now , virtualität is suddenly alien to us from ourselves , and has nothing to do with reality .
bruce brown , a famous designforscher at the brighton-university , has been so far to say that these media mass , he means the book and the picture , so not tv , the internet and so on , we think that these mass media has been versteinert and our ability to have virtualisieren .
let &apos;s make a little zwischenbilanz .
from the vogt-zeitalter to the maschinenzeitalter .
what has it affect our thinking and our erinnerungsvermögen ?
then the verblassenden of the vorindustriellen cultures are the vorindustriellen of the vorindustriellen cultures .
and they &apos;re going to have more and more überschrieben over the years of überschrieben by the einflüsse of the maschinenzeitalters .
that means , instead of us , we have to be able to have a lot of standardisierte , far , masses , common patterns of memories that we can hang on our personal memories .
we don &apos;t produce more .
we have an abstract language .
we don &apos;t think of the thing anymore in images , not anymore , but we &apos;re kodifizieren them our language .
we used to have that things happen linear .
and we accepted the linearität as the law , and there &apos;s only exceptions , like the non-linearität .
what stayed us is the storytelling .
we &apos;re still in the storytelling , as a informationsvermittlung , very strong .
the question is , what &apos;s going on ?
we had the vogt -zeitalter , we had the maschinenzeitalter , and we &apos;re going to go to this as the so-called cyber-zeitalter .
it sounds very spacig and sounds very like a science fiction , i know .
but these concepts of the cyber-zeitalters , which bring us these possibilities back back to our capabilities .
there &apos;s about virtualität , it &apos;s about non-linearität , it &apos;s about storytelling .
i want to explain a little bit about this .
there are technical concepts like like the augmented reality , which is called the extended reality .
so if you look at google glasses , for example , then a concept of what makes us combine the virtual world with the real world , that means our affinität , the virtual way to make the virtual normal , natural natural natural natural natural natural natural natural natural natural natural natural system .
another example is the so-called virtual reality .
so , as crazy as this , of course , this sounds sound like my speech , we &apos;re moving into not existenten , virtual worlds , a very different way of the holodecks model .
and other examples are the most ambienten , smart systems .
these are spaces that can respond to a human being .
all this needs the ability to accept our basic ability to accept the virtualität of the real habitat .
i graduated in conclusion , and i hope that video works , a very , very beautiful project , that &apos;s the bachelorarbeit of michael burk , ann-kathrin krenz , joris klause and jan-moritz müller .
and the two letzteren are here today .
you might have to get up , so you can be able to talk about the project in the break .
and this project i brought as an example of how again , again , this archaischen cognitive models .
so the whole thing is a game , i have to say .
and of course , the storytelling of course , extremely entgegenkommt , and it &apos;s a computer game .
and if i say , you know , you &apos;re very likely to see people who are people who are irgendwelchen people who are irgendwelchen people or some konsole in the hand .
in any case , they &apos;re doing that .
this is a game out of the outside .
and this is specific to that i found the outside world , so i &apos;m going to see the real world .
and this game connects the virtual world , so the data that we produce , the real world .
i apologize that i have to be so much about that .
you can explain that much better , there &apos;s more than that there is more than that .
and it &apos;s about that i &apos;m going to find a city by looking at which places positive or negative .
and so i get a whole lot of sight from the city , a very different impression , which is i see negative and positive zones of a city and a way that is a very different , virtual map of a very real city .
and we can now look at this .
ah , what you can see here , sorry , is another little explanation of what you &apos;re about to see .
of course , this virtual world is in the walls of our cities , right .
and with a kind of a kind of a kind of thing , we can make these virtual worlds .
so , i &apos;d like to say that my talk and the skills that we &apos;ve acquired from the vogt -zeitalter , and the uns that we &apos;ve been doing is going to be a little bit of verschütt in the maschinenzeitalter that we can be activated with the help of the cyber -zeitalters that we &apos;re in this way , not that we &apos;re not in the future ,
thank you .
yeah , i &apos;m really excited to be with you .
i &apos;ve been asked , if this is a bag there &apos;s a sprechender , and i &apos;m going to talk instead .
it won &apos;t make it .
i &apos;ll also get a auflösen , which is in there .
but i &apos;m just doing it just a little bit more .
you know , children are kind of curious , or should be curious , designers also .
i &apos;m a gestalter of house , so i &apos;m also involved with the subject of curiosity and how change curiosity , and why , we may also lose curiosity , and we need to neu the s and so on .
this is a whole bunch of things that you &apos;re doing next to the point in your mind .
if professors are curious , they &apos;re often reingeschoben in such n .
and that &apos;s what i &apos;ve had over half a year .
a forschungssemester of the subject of natural user interface .
now you &apos;re going to ask , why are the whole gestalter of the whole gestalter system that are so natural , archaischen , interaction and so on .
and there &apos;s only one of these little devices that are going to be high , because the things are always getting more and more , more natural , more and more , and you have to look , what &apos;s actually for us , of course , of course , of course , of course , of course , what &apos;s benutzungsfreundlich or intuitive .
and in the background , i have a bereich interface interface , so the next generation in the process of human computers in the relationship of the human computer is doing how our tools , or how computers are changing by computer computers to digital .
so i &apos;m busy with , when is , of course , intuitive .
you might have to take a look back .
why is that happening ?
so if we look at the development of our society , here , briefly , we &apos;re moving from the third one in the fourth gesellschaftsgeneration or gesellschaftsform .
so , from modern , in the computergesellschaft .
every society is shaped by a primärmedium .
at the beginning of the language , the stammesgesellschaft .
that means that you have been talking to a common language , you could communicate with each other , it &apos;s been pulled into the same cave or other areas , cities have built or villages , and has created so nen stammesgesellschaft .
but the primärmedium was the language , something very natural , something very living .
you also have to learn , so no , a kleinkind can talk to nature , but we learn it , of course , and we &apos;re verhältnismäßig .
and then this was abgelöst through ancient society and the first form of abstraction .
this was a riesen-aufschrei , because of course , the living language began to manifestieren in the form of schrift , which is what &apos;s fluid and alive , i &apos;m going to start and meißele it in stone , and i &apos;m going to do it .
the one after i meißel and when i meißel , it &apos;s a very different coverage than if there &apos;s a living alive .
but sukzessive , then , this script was zog as a primärmedium , given einzug .
then the next generation that we actually live in today is actually a very serious life .
this is just by druck and print schrift with gutenberg and others .
it was also a affront , where adel , klerus and others have said , are you actually going to be insane when the people starts to read , then the afterwards want to be still , and that &apos;s completely fatal .
and now we &apos;re going to the next generation and the exciting thing , so a generationswechsel is just a generationswechsel , and we &apos;re really in this sort of phänomenalen stage that we &apos;re going to be in this sort of phänomenalen stage .
and this is really confused by us , of course , because we &apos;re seeing the new media , social social media , facebook and so on .
so , with total transparency , what the new thinking is , what the new thinking is , what &apos;s going to be knallt , don &apos;t tell you that in the lasagne pferdefleisch , and no beef is more or other phenomena , which is that i just want to just vertuschen it .
and these two worlds are just going to be able to think of each other , new and old thinking .
the exciting thing is , if you look at this , this new society , these computergesellschaft , very many mechanisms , principles and archaischer paradigm that are out of the stammesgesellschaft .
but it &apos;s not more at the local level , but it &apos;s a global level .
we understood that the weather is global .
that the subject of ecology is a global global .
not if i think local and the neighbor &apos;s denkt , it &apos;s less ökologisch , and then it doesn &apos;t work .
that means , from local village , a global village has become a global village , as well as , of course , as well , but also the total transparency .
as you knew at the time in the village , who has what to whom and when , this is what happens to this expansion of our own erweiterung , through these mobile endgeräte on global level .
whether we know global anhäufen and always and faster and better and better .
so , as it used to be , very quickly , what happened to be .
i just looked at it , what &apos;s really , what &apos;s it , of course , what &apos;s natural for us , of course , what &apos;s also , of course , what &apos;s also instinktiv , so what does the difference ?
because often people are coming , they can &apos;t make it benutzungsfreundlich , so everyone can handle with it .
so you have to deal with it , which is , what is that , and not just changing it , it &apos;s different , but it &apos;s supposed to be better .
and then , of course , it &apos;s also intuitive and how can i take a gestalter and make things like that , you know , the things that you &apos;re a benutzungsfreundlich , so you &apos;re very intuitive , because then you &apos;re fun and you &apos;re just to use .
you &apos;re going to be doing yourself , as well as a while , with the subject of perception and the wahrnehmungspsychologie .
and this is , of course , where you &apos;re starting and look and say , okay , now i &apos;m just looking at the inside of the inner yourself .
and what &apos;s it really about ?
so how do we work if we &apos;re reingucken ?
and what does mean , of course , intuitive , and how do our channels of perception and how does the cognitive work work ?
because steve jobs said , you know , you &apos;re going to works you to dig deeper .
so you really have to look at detail if i want to make something like benutzungsfreundlich or intuitive handhabbar , which is called the core .
and you can see that you have our seven senses , most of us , we just think five , we &apos;ve even been anerkannte , and there &apos;s certainly seven anerkannte , and it &apos;s certainly going to be the next , but an extension , again , and even an extension of our own .
and to look , how do we process information , how do we take information ?
in the way , what is information ?
information is all different difference , which is a difference .
many use the word , don &apos;t know what it &apos;s then en .
but i have to understand at the core , in the essence , when becomes information information , when information information , and from information , i know how to make things like that , or , of course , to make things like that .
and of course , how does design influence .
we see this , when i make things , then i can make you look confusing like the right , where i don &apos;t know what is salt and pfeffer , or i can make it intuitive in a way that i &apos;m showing you things .
so much of natural , in a gefäß , but i &apos;m looking at it , where is salt and the pfeffer .
and if i tell someone , give me salt or pfeffer , then he &apos;s going to be thinking about the right one , where &apos;s in the right .
and the left is just intuitive , and then hopefully , i hope , is not sugar in the matter , the salt just .
but also our perception of how , how are they täuscht us .
for example , this perception in context .
the right circle looks bigger than the small one , even though it &apos;s not the case , but they &apos;re just very large , and yet our perceptions changes the way we &apos;re reinstellen things .
anyone know what that is ?
come on .
pattern recognition should work .
there &apos;s a more likely to be in my glasses .
so it &apos;s an n circle .
a second circle starts to relate to certain resemblance to me .
and then , if i stop a halboval , then we don &apos;t even see a unit of one , and that circle , and that circle , circle , and we see a unit , we don &apos;t see more , a circle , a circle , a circle , a circle .
this is something called gestaltgesetz , or a eben , which also affects us in perception .
the main thing for the gestalter , who have the most part of the first time , the great gestaltgesetze .
gestaltgesetz , gestaltgesetz , the continuity and so on .
often , in the third , you know .
but this is an essential important part of the case that you want to make things very intuitive .
the next phenomenon , which is also very interesting , that &apos;s very interesting .
so it &apos;s really banal , but it &apos;s interesting to get closer to it .
so we have the eyes in front , and now you think , we &apos;re looking at the back from the front .
that &apos;s wrong .
you &apos;re looking at the back of the back .
and they &apos;re projiezieren , and they &apos;re thinking about the beginning of what they see , what they recognize , beispielweise circle .
that means we &apos;re just looking at our vision , before we see it , again , back to the back of our seheapparat reinbringen , to say , okay .
i have a ne cognitive rückkoppelung , you have what you want to see .
and then that &apos;s the same thing that comes back .
and then again , it goes back , because the back of the front of the front , and i &apos;m going to say , now , look at the front of the front , and i &apos;m sure you can ask you , &quot; what you see , too , is what you want to see .
and then it goes back , and then it &apos;s actually going to be .
so a very , very spannender process , how certain things are doing and what &apos;s happening for millisekunden-bereichen .
i don &apos;t know who knows this picture .
there &apos;s exactly the same thing i &apos;ve described .
now , everybody &apos;s trying to see something out of this pattern .
i don &apos;t know who &apos;s aware .
does anybody see something ?
a dalmatiner , right .
once i saw that , that &apos;s that there &apos;s a dalmatiner in there , you know .
you &apos;ll never forget about it because i &apos;m showing you where the dalmatiner is .
now you see the dalmatiner .
and then , you know , you &apos;re always seeing it .
that means i actually verdorben you , that you don &apos;t recognize any patterns of dadrin , but i &apos;ve konditioniert them in a very short picture , over and over and over and over again , again , and again , again , that dog in this picture .
and this is this projection of the vision , rückkopplung .
now i know , and now i &apos;m going to go forward to see the dalmatiner .
i see the dalmatiner .
so , really , really interesting processes that then in this , yeah , gray is not , but here in this rosanen mass , you &apos;re just doing it .
anyone know what three seconds ?
long , yeah .
this is our present .
so it &apos;s always interesting to know as designers .
if i know , a little bit of seconds , until i kind of überbrücken the present , i can also bridge a very well wartezeiten , where i &apos;m always looking for a three seconds .
it &apos;s just going to process it as a present present .
and then it goes into the past , and so i can bridge very elegant wartezeiten for example , if i know this phenomenon .
what do you need to do ?
yes , milliseconds .
it &apos;s an interesting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the time you fall in love with .
that means , if you know , you know , you &apos;re looking at it , who you look at as long , because i don &apos;t have any gewähr for you to happen to what you can do .
and sechzehn milliseconds , also an interesting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the zeitraum of most perceptions we have .
that is , this first impression is happening in a very rapid fast speed , how we perceive things .
and as we also see things that we look at , and how we &apos;re kind of absichern against our environment , so we can think about it .
of course , the gestalter is not just about perceptions and neural verarbeitungen or kognitionsergonomie , but primarily of course , of course , with the subject of the mensch-objekt-beziehung .
so , how a human being is doing that way .
there &apos;s a practical functions , so there &apos;s so formale aspects or formalästhetische aspects .
there &apos;s anzeichen-funktionen , where i know exactly where i actually have to reach .
but also , there are symbolic features , why are somebody for this kind of a täschchen , where does not have any reinpasst , so horrende summen money , even though it &apos;s not so practical ?
there we are more like the symbolischen , on the bedeutungsebene that we also have to deal with as a gestalter .
back to my actual subject of natural user interface and the subject , of course , dahinterliegt , is usability .
and usability always means , how can i reach very quickly a certain goal , or how can one users have very effective , efficient and efficient goal to reach a goal .
so it &apos;s really the norm that it says .
how can i do something more like this ?
i can use that right , i need &apos; n manual or i need to do that i &apos;m doing a schulung .
and less usable or benutzungsfreundlich .
i &apos;m just making it different and beautiful , doesn &apos;t mean that it &apos;s better .
you have to understand that .
and then , in part , the software we &apos;ve seen is , you know , you can also understand why neunundneunzig percent of our current software is not intuitive or not to be available to anhieb , including the i-pad in many areas or i-phone , even though it &apos;s a lot more intuitive than classical software .
in this process , intuitive benutzbarkeit is not just since apple has a elementarer wirtschaftsfaktor , nen elementarer , if i can make technology of technology to use .
why ?
because in the rule we &apos;re usually by this new kind of nutzbarkeit , which is the natural user , for example , five times a little faster at our goal .
you have to imagine that if you do something of the classical softrware , you need five hours and with this new kind of natural software just an hour .
this doesn &apos;t mean that you probably have to go home for four hours , but your own , or someone , you can tell you , you &apos;re going to work with them in four hours .
but i want to say that it &apos;s a very important way for us to do , of course , to be a certain amount of things .
and then , if we put ourselves in the field of software , the first command line interface that were very abstract , where it took months to deal with these systems .
then the next that came with the nem model or mental model like the software sagen , working with software , working , which is , you have a notion of something , the metaphor , the metaphor of a desktop to make the computer available .
so not like zeros and ones or kryptische code , but a metaphor .
and this was a lot of benutzungsfreundlicher , but it &apos;s also a lot better .
the next generation of graphischen benutzungsoberflächen works a lot more with behavior .
so i &apos;m going to be doing as a gestalter , much more common than what it looks like .
this is also a paradigm shift .
i think that this is what it looks like to be a applikation for success , just the usability of the success .
and then , if i take a step back into this natural user , where i can use a voice , by language , by touch , by geste , by geste and cursor , i &apos;m still faster and still left .
and that &apos;s what does me , again , to the point , when are the things that we &apos;re actually getting more intuitive ?
if you &apos;re more intuitive , and then i have to go back to my little friend here and watch , what does that mean from the point of view , when is now a little intuitive ?
and that &apos;s one thing that &apos;s for us , always , is something intuitive , if i have to think about it .
so it doesn &apos;t seem like to be like thinking , but it &apos;s just a way to do it .
the less i think about it , the more intuitive it is .
and what does it mean for the designers ?
that means that we can take existing handlungsmodelle from one to something else , for example , the metaphor , then i can use it to be a gestalter .
that means i can just transmit a intuitive , human handlungsmodell in software and make the software a lot more benutzungsfreundlicher .
and of course , the question , of course , is the most intuitivste of us , and now i &apos;ve been telling you .
this is what we call the sogenannte .
it &apos;s used to use every one of us and osit is an akronym and it &apos;s for orientieren , selektieren , informieren , transagieren .
and this is all of you all of them , but it &apos;s unbewusst , and it &apos;s sort of intuitive , or some kind of intuitive , or some .
the model is already going to be in the womb and it &apos;s interkulturell , so it works in the world in young and old , and it &apos;s used by all of us without that most of the time that the model is present .
osit osit will be about fünfzig to siebzigtausend times , so that &apos;s what &apos;s going on , so in the sleep , it &apos;s been found that it &apos;s less often strapaziert than the day .
i can now orientieren this mental handlungsmodell , selektieren , informieren , transagieren übertragen to a interaktionssystem .
and through this kind of transmission , like the metaphor of the desktops , but not a metaphor of a physical object , but a metaphor of a handlungsmusters , a handlungsprinzips .
and this is a higher gral of the benutzungsfreundlichkeit , as the transmission of a classic metaphor , which is the desktops .
and so , for example , when i put this in , for example , i orientieren as a übersicht , selektieren , informieren , it comes up to me , i can look at it in detail , and yes , transagieren means i can send it anywhere or shop or shop or buy it .
and then i can transmit the whole thing .
i try and use a beispiels .
and we &apos;ve had a pie for a long time .
so , i mean , i &apos;m talking to the object , and i can reinzoomen it again .
i &apos;ll get the whole track of this , and now , can filter this , and can say , just show me all of the thing about chocolate .
and once upon a interface , what &apos;s much more intuitive and much more natural .
because i can grab the things like the bits and touchen and they come to me , is much more natural than when over hierarchisch &apos;s organized web pages or other kinds of mechanisms , they can make these things available .
imagination is more important than knowledge , and with that phrase i would like to close to , a and give the point of the hinweis , also designers have to think differently to come to new solutions , and in that sense , thank you very much for your attention and ask you .
i want to give you a very specific aspect of curiosity .
the first thing that you &apos;re going to be big as a child is that you might take care of what you have , yes ? and the after your parents have allowed them to play more or less in the töpfchen and to rühren , the more , of course , their curiosity will be in the process of course .
and the curiosity doesn &apos;t matter .
so , all of those are , are , are , in fact , people who have a property that you can &apos;t learn .
i &apos;m now about this , basically this whole umweltdiskussion , weltuntergang , 40 years , in quality .
and there &apos;s a central point there .
and it &apos;s based on phosphorus .
give pee a chance .
every day you give the + spend on order to give you about two grams phosphorus , and every day you have to take two grams phosphorus .
otherwise you can &apos;t have teeth .
you can &apos;t store energy .
you can &apos;t have bone .
we could only be gleiten as amorphe mollusken through the weltmeere .
if we did not take phosphorus and make phosphorus .
and what &apos;s amazing is that we &apos;re actually concerned about something that would be , &quot; ne , &quot; but not that .
because everyone talking about energy , but no one talks about the phosphor-problem .
the phosphor-problem is a lot of critical .
we depend on two countries .
we have only for two years , and now , by the phosphor-bergbau , the world is far more uranium in the environment than in all the atomanlagen .
in the last 20 years , fünfzehntausend tons of uranium in the fields were distributed in germany .
and that &apos;s what we &apos;re taking .
it makes leukemia with children .
and we think we would protect the environment if we &apos;re a little less harmful .
so , for example , schütz the environment , the fahr of the environment .
schütz the environment , make less waste .
schütz the environment , verbrauche less energy .
that &apos;s not protection .
this is like i would say , schütz your child , it only hit three times rather than five .
that &apos;s just a little less destruction .
if we think about the wiege to the bahre , our entire earth will be used to be a friedhof .
that &apos;s the wiege of the wiege .
and the most important thing is to look at the ground , as a first thing .
in the ground , we saved over sechzig percent of the kohlenstoffs .
right now we &apos;re building corn and lose between 11 and 30 kilograms of 30 pounds per hectare , or auf auf .
that means we &apos;re losing in the ground , about five times more than a thousand times , as a new .
we can , of course , to look at the müllproblem .
and everything is packaging or content .
in offenbach , for example , at the hausmüll 20 percent of the müllmenge &apos;s müllmenge .
and because we &apos;re older , the windeln are going to be bigger .
this is , in a sense , they &apos;re all in the vorwindelphase .
yes ?
one baby needs about six windeln .
we could reduce that by 10 percent , but what does it do ?
this is ausgeglichen in china in a second .
this is completely trivial .
so the question is , how do we go to these windeln ?
here &apos;s the proof of the evidence that men are not pigs .
i want to tell you .
because the phosphorus is being made in the pigs that are abgegeben from the solid parts of the festen .
people are about the urine .
yeah .
so that &apos;s the men who can &apos;t be pigs .
because that &apos;s what &apos;s happening , or it &apos;s done ?
we think , traditionally , in the umweltdiskussion , we &apos;re too many in the world .
and if you think people who are the people who are abspricht it , if you say that , you &apos;d be better , you wouldn &apos;t be there , then you will be raffgierig and feindselig .
and so someone like al gore , one of our big heroes , there &apos;s nothing to be wichtigeres than the human population .
in israel , you say , if you &apos;re a human , you &apos;re rettest the earth .
here &apos;s the more you umbringst , the better .
yeah .
the first question is , are we really too many ?
if you look at the ants , the weight of ants on earth , the ants would weigh about four times more than we humans .
i could also take a termiten , but in the u.s. , no one like that , in that way , even though they &apos;re a vegetarier .
that means the ants are weigh a lot more than we are .
and because they work much harder than we and because they &apos;re only three to six months , they &apos;re in their weight , in the energy consumption , a dreißig billion people .
that means we &apos;re not too many , we &apos;re too stupid , yes ?
and where you can see how far we want to get , and how sad we are , we can &apos;t see on earth , you can see that for example , offenbach has a program , to 20 40 , you &apos;d like to be here , right ?
you can only be klimaneutral if you don &apos;t exist , right ?
the only chance .
have you seen a klimaneutralen tree ?
yes ?
one ? one ?
that means , our whole intelligence means that we want to be a bäume , right ?
yes ?
no tree is kohlenstoffneutral .
luckily , not ?
there &apos;s no überbevölkerungsproblem in trees .
there are still six billion trees in the amazonasgebiet alone .
you &apos;ve heard about a little bit of überbevölkerungsproblemen of trees ?
that means , all of our intelligence , is that we want to be a bäume .
and where you see , even in something like demeter , die bio- , no longer allows our own to go back .
every year we &apos;re losing so three million tons of phosphorus that would have to go back in a classroom .
and so we &apos;re too many .
just about it .
that &apos;s what we feel so guilty about the earth that we say , there &apos;s no bio-landbau , no bioland , no nature-et-progrès , and as you &apos;re all , the allowing that allow our own exkremente .
isn &apos;t that sad ?
so we &apos;re too many .
it &apos;s safe to be less harmful , which is more harmful .
but where are we useful ?
we &apos;re trying to reduce our ecological footprint , but it &apos;s about having a big footprint , which is useful .
we want to be good for society , we want to be good for the economy , but if it &apos;s all about the environment , the highest thing is there , right ?
nullemissionen , yeah ?
you can only have nullemissionen , if you &apos;re not there .
even if you were shooting , you would have emissions .
so you can &apos;t solve it .
we can different .
we can get our nutrients .
we &apos;re doing agriculture in brazil where we get nutrients .
right , we can zurückkriegen nutrients in this way .
we &apos;re doing this in china for example , where we &apos;re going to take the waste of it .
in china , a nachttopf is still honigtöpfchen , so , in a way , yes ?
and in our western world , we were always stupid , we were dumm .
that means the whole western zivilisationsgeschichte is drawing out of the city , but the farmers never returned to the farmers .
and so the cities always had to grow more because the farmers went into the cities , and the cities would keep going to get their nutrients .
that all the western rich are always expanding , until they &apos;re not able to have the infrastructure , and then they &apos;re implodiert .
yes ?
in china , it was different .
you &apos;ve been able to do bruchlos civilization for five years because you were always able to eat nutrients .
even today , if you &apos;re invited to lunch , you &apos;re expecting to eat the food you &apos;re going to stay as long as you &apos;re going to go to the bathroom .
because it &apos;s unfreundlich , to go and take nutrients .
you &apos;ve got them to eat them , not to the nährstoffdiebstahl .
that means you can see the internet that you can get nutrients .
this is actually a beautiful thing , if you do , so agriculture generates , in a hectare of fünftausend people in favelas , so a farmer can make a etwa dollars , and they &apos;re waiting for the plants to come and eat chickens and chickens and vegetables and vegetables and vegetables .
and the great thing about this is that the verbrechensrate in the favelas are going to go over the neunzig .
so we don &apos;t have to control people , so we &apos;re going to be very bad .
we can support them to be good .
this is , of course , high-tech-landwirtschaft , but the facilities are carrying themselves .
the oil is clean water .
and they &apos;re designed to design , through design , that a farmer can just bewirtschaften .
that means that , that &apos;s where the verbrechensraten go back .
and none of these facilities , we &apos;ve built over hundertfünzig over the last 20 years , none of these facilities ever been sabotiert .
they could just easily reinwerfen a liter of altöl and then the plant would be ruined .
it doesn &apos;t happen .
that means we don &apos;t need to control people , so we don &apos;t have to be bad .
we can support them to be good .
that means we need to be zurückkriegen .
and by the way , if you want to do what you &apos;re going to do , you write in germany , in germany , is best designed by all the treatment systems that are in frankfurt .
and unfortunately , not in offenbach , but maybe you can help the frankfurtern a little bit .
because the frankfurter facility could be the best that we could get .
and it has to go back .
we see that phosphorus is really critical .
and we see that it &apos;s actually done .
we &apos;ve been deployed in the netherlands now about three years .
the dutch government explained it will be the first country in the world , which is phosphorus .
but we need that overall .
you can understand , there are two countries , which is almost 70 percent of the world &apos;s population .
there &apos;s a bunch of waisenknaben &apos;s opec .
these are sechsundzwanzig countries , the 40 percent of the ölvorräte are controlled .
and the oil will be , we can replace it by other people .
but the phosphorus is not going to replace .
that &apos;s not about making the existing existing one little less , but it &apos;s about making something right .
and first of all , first of all , questions about what is right .
that is , it &apos;s about efficiency , not about efficiency .
in the netherlands , you understand that , of course , because in the netherlands , the land is built on flowers .
yes ?
imagine if your wife is sad when you get them , and you come with the fünfzig .
completely inefficient .
but actually , really , yes ?
or take a lippenstift .
a woman in germany , like six komma , she eats three pounds in their lifetime .
and this is what .
that &apos;s not scientifically accurate , because we don &apos;t know how much weggeküsst is going to be .
but a lippenstift , even at the lighting , can i tell you , is completely inefficient , but it &apos;s really effective , right ?
all of this is that it &apos;s beautiful , it &apos;s not efficient .
that &apos;s not resource efficiency , but efficiency .
to ask , what is the right ?
not to burn the klärschlamm a little bit better and abzulagern it and to lose it all the materials for the whole thing , but first to ask , how do you make a difference ?
imagine mozart efficient .
yes ?
if i einlade you for dinner , and i say , yes , there &apos;s a tablette and a glass of water .
wonderful , ne ?
that &apos;s efficient .
all of which is beautiful , it &apos;s not efficient .
if you fall in love with somebody , efficient ?
yes ?
that means , everything that matters in life is not to prevent it .
all the umweltdiskussion .
we say , &quot; well , you know , you haven &apos;t got a green green .
no , that &apos;s just the right thing , right ?
every point you can get wegwirft , you can get back again .
but the wrong things .
if you &apos;re wegwirft the wrong things , you have a müllproblem .
it &apos;s like we think of north .
there is every footprint that &apos;s nachteilig .
if you walk , yes , every footprint is destroyed the floor .
because the ground is going to die off the surface , and the wind will die and the water washing the floor .
but if you &apos;re in italy , every footprint means that the water remains longer in the meadow .
so , it &apos;s about creating a big footprint that is going to be a feuchtgebiet .
not schuldmanagement .
we &apos;re in germany , sustainability .
yes ?
but if i ask you , how are you going to do this ?
what do you say ?
sustainable .
then i say , herzliches beileid , yes ?
that &apos;s just the minimum of the minimum .
so not save , verzichten .
everybody &apos;s waste is nährstoff .
and it &apos;s a really lust when you see in italy , like the people in the high bow of the car that i &apos;ve got to get out of the car .
because you know , this is a lustvoller process .
it &apos;s a ne form of revierverhalten , right ?
you can show , i was there .
but with the right design , please .
we &apos;ve developed a eiscremeverpackung , for example , that &apos;s at room room .
they can go back where they go and stand .
in two hours , they &apos;re building everywhere .
and it contains seeds from rare plants so that it &apos;s contributing to biodiversity .
that means we &apos;re useful , not less harmful .
so it &apos;s going to happen two cycles .
not all of course should be kompostierbar .
a television or a washing machine , they &apos;re just using them , they don &apos;t use them .
just the things that verschleißen , like schuhsolen , like bremsbeläge , like autoreifen , who have to be that they are in biological systems .
the things that are just used are in technical systems .
but today we &apos;re just talking about the biological systems .
yes ?
for example , the sneaker , yes ?
direct ads , and it &apos;s not for the company puma per , but for that this company to help make these products succeed .
because we don &apos;t make things from the things that we &apos;re doing .
yes ?
so , if i &apos;m going to eat you for food and say , it &apos;s free of hähnchen , then it &apos;s not going to help you .
no , we &apos;re going to lay what &apos;s in .
positive .
so not like detox .
it &apos;s not toxic .
it &apos;s all in it , it &apos;s useful .
these are the first shoes that you can put the kavalierstart on the fußgängerampel , and that gummi can go into biological cycles , right ?
it &apos;s all about kompostierbar .
and if we do , it &apos;s of course for adidas , for nike , for hennes and mauritz and the whole industry industry .
and that &apos;s half of the abwasserprobleme worldwide that are caused by the textilindustrie industry .
so they help with the people , ask questions for people .
hey , puma , do you really get your serious ?
because they &apos;ve already changed the vorstandsvorsitzenden twice .
and i &apos;m not sure that they really dabeibleiben .
so , help me a little bit of this .
but it &apos;s all about .
yeah .
that &apos;s what &apos;s been shown right now .
that &apos;s going .
we can make things like that , if you verschleißen , if you &apos;re kaputtgehen , you can get into biological .
technical cycle , you know .
there &apos;s a direct rücknamesystem for this .
this is the first ecological rucksack , actually , that &apos;s made for that , to go back in the cycle .
so , you know , in every store , you can be zurückkriegen .
if you come to that , right ?
remember the windel of the windel ?
and when it is in the moment , the garbage is .
all around the way , these windeln are around , almost .
in the countries where people get to money .
there &apos;s the deponien , but also in the landscape , right ?
if we change the plastics , so that it can go into biological systems , if we can change the wasserspeicher , it &apos;s where you can go back to zellulosebasis , and then you can plant trees in israel or in tunisia trees .
yes ?
just when you take these windel , you zerkleinern , sterilisieren and the powder to plant trees .
so the baby &apos;s kohlenstoffpositiv for the whole life , it &apos;s beginning .
so we don &apos;t need to be klimaneutral , we can be klimapositiv .
it &apos;s sort of a beneficial poop print .
yeah , i say .
yes ?
we can do that .
we can invent everything again .
i started a research institute .
in the world , there &apos;s a lot of people who are working with and they can all get involved .
there &apos;s extra times a little bit of a verein where everybody can be part of the part of the state .
so no longer save , verzichten , avoid , reduce , not a schuldmanagement , but intelligent waste .
does it get the curious ?
thank you .
the work of the interpreten .
music is a language .
in the description of my speech , written that i as a interpretin , i understand , in english , in english .
interpreten are written by the written music in music music .
that when a translator &apos;s not just überträgt word word for word , they have to use text into a different language , but also to understand the deeper sense of words and wortzusammenhang , to make a meaningful translation , everybody who has to do with fremdsprachen .
already , from german into english , more knowledge can require , if you then get poetry , or anything about poetry .
it &apos;s very strange to laien , which we do with our musiksprache .
as a interpretin , i first had the written notes .
you think that the composer has hineingeschrieben everything that he had dreamed of .
in fact , the notes are very vague and ungenau .
these notes are about as exactly as precise or ungenau , like a verbale , if it &apos;s very seemingly penibelst , description of a landscape .
because in this verbalen landschaftsbeschreibung , the smell of flowers is not to smell the degree of the grüns , the grad of the windes , not to feel the säuseln of the windes .
that means that the interpret has to put these ungenauen angaben into a different , which is hörbare , concrete , nonverbale musiksprache .
today , i want to show you what i &apos;m saying to be a musikalisch , so interpretiere , even a language language .
so basically a translation of translation .
so i prefer to do this all rather than german , because if i had to translate it even once in english , it would be gleichbedeutend to me as a translation of translation translation .
so the music works , so that &apos;s kind of like spoken language .
the notierten notes , the function of the letters of a script .
so it &apos;s not just going to be able to learn to read the notes , and they can use the keys on the piano or the right place on a violinsaite .
that &apos;s just the letters that you learned to paint .
the point of letters , you can see the language of the language .
and so you need to musiksprache the learning process for the learning process for at least as long as spoken language .
and then there &apos;s also a abstufungen , whether you learn it for the hausgebrauch , you can only understand passive passive , or you can also speak to that until the musical speaker .
the work of the interpreten starts similar to like a theaterregisseurs .
after first , a piece of chose has chosen to play because you &apos;re excited about it , you &apos;re erstmal to the hintergründen of the composition .
you collect information about the piece of the sekundärliteratur .
you read the letter , tagebüchern , notes , or whether it &apos;s words , thoughts by the composer .
you studied the works that he &apos;s written before and after .
you compare comparison .
the beweggründe , the beweggründe , to write .
how did he feel ?
how were his life of life , like the society and the politics ?
that &apos;s all interested in me .
you think of that time in this period , using contemporary images , or literature .
but also , you have a rich knowledge of the time , as an interpret , and you have a rich knowledge of the composers that you play more and more and easier to feel and feel .
the composer becomes more like a friend you live together with .
and his cause to write the piece is always more and more and more to my personal concerns to play .
now , the notes are other than a very accurate record of the composer , but it &apos;s a framework , and i turn this framework to make it sense of meaning and meaning .
i then say , in my own words , what might be written between this framework .
i play erklärend , which might be these sounds .
now for me and for the composers , and what they might now mean for him today .
every note , every phrase gets a sense , because i feel it , because it comes from my right now .
it has to be in the right now , and i can &apos;t make my audience to it , i can &apos;t convince my audience to that that &apos;s my cause .
it &apos;s always a very happy concert , if i can have the experience , the piece that i &apos;ve been doing as long as i &apos;ve seen the way i can &apos;t experience .
how you ever experienced a happy new day , despite the same rituals of life , your life , your life , go to work , so i &apos;m going to be able to get the same piece over again .
i &apos;ve become a day older , changing seasons , my pulse is going down in the morning , in a konzertsaal , a konzertsaal takes longer that sound back back home .
i suppose the full of the audience , consciously or unbewusst .
all of this affects me and all of that affects my experience with the composition .
so wonderful , though i &apos;m standing with a duo-partner on stage , and we have the same wavelength .
and then the same thing as in a good , angeregten conversation .
you get a new idea in and it gets into a reaction to a reaction .
it &apos;s exciting because , then things that we don &apos;t have to do , and what you can &apos;t get to samples .
it &apos;s great fun to do it , and you have the audience , you know , the music that &apos;s communicating alive .
this is how each concert is a different concert .
i will never play like this , like in this moment .
i can &apos;t play today like this in 20 years .
i &apos;m going to have more lebenserfahrung than today and i &apos;m going to have a lot more farbnuancen about the musikklänge of the musikklänge , in emotions and emotion than today .
sure , i &apos;ll have some farbtöpfe also , but for this .
i have a nice example of this .
it was on a klavierkursus for musikstudenten for my beloved old teacher , professor jürgen ude , a famous beethoven-spezialist , konzertpianist and langjähriger professor of the musikhochschule here in stuttgart .
i was still too young that i was too young so he was already emeritiert when i finally started studying .
but i had the great fortune , very early , with the age of 13 , and i was at the time i was in high school .
i was 17 when i was in one of his courses , and i was played the last one of the four balladen by the chopin , a spätwerk .
he asked me what the einleitung of this ballade was for me .
this is so a getragenes part .
and in my jugendlichkeit , i said , expectation .
and he schmunzelte , and he said , &quot; ?
this must be the altersunterschied .
because for me , it means memory .
he was already sechzig .
well , with 17 , you have dreams , but not a significant memories .
i play this piece today for a piece of years , and always , i &apos;ve been gewandelt , though not a single grade .
so every time it &apos;s exciting , because every time i &apos;m reading something new .
one example of this is a completely different area . and the monet has made the seerosen x-mal .
it &apos;s always the same garden , but it &apos;s a different tageszeit , in verschiedenem light .
he translated the seerosen verschiedentlich , as he saw her , as she was doing it at this moment .
his personal impressionen of the seerosen .
the x-malige interpretation of a piece is comparable .
now , i &apos;m also very much older than a chopin and a half years ago when he wrote the piece .
he lived only for neununddreißig years .
and it &apos;s important to me , and i &apos;m going to be able to look back in the notes , even though i mean , you know .
to hold zwiesprache , right by the composer .
because the notes are the only connection to him .
especially when he died .
now , how do you start to speak the language of music ?
i said , you know , you need for about as long as spoken language .
a lot of the musikunterricht is that you &apos;re just learning to learn the notes .
you learn to read it first before you just speak one word .
you learn to find sound at the notes on the instrument .
if all finger in time and right just like the notes , you know , you get sound that sound like music .
when the fehlerfrei is happening , the students gets the nächstschwierige piece of the piece .
and you can &apos;t talk about interpretation in the anfängerunterricht .
well , there &apos;s a very quick piece of the front of the front , that &apos;s a quick piece .
lento , slowly .
according to leisezeichen , and r and b , etc .
that &apos;s what most of them know .
but even though you put these data on , it &apos;s still just a technical technical .
and still it &apos;s still no interpretation .
i wonder .
i wonder that you often don &apos;t forget a bit of elementares .
because that , to make music on the instrument , to do your musical musical and feel there before .
that &apos;s the singing .
a child who doesn &apos;t learn the singing because it doesn &apos;t have vorgemacht , it won &apos;t be done .
this is like the sprechenlernen .
it &apos;s necessary to have your own experience and an idea of music , and then it &apos;s about another possibility , so that we can sound a tool .
people who never have ever singing , have never felt immediately with the own body , as it is , to make a sound .
and gestalten a phrase with his own breath .
the instrument is that the extension of our body .
our stimmbänder , for the singing , our hands and feet to dance .
so the hammerköpfe of the piano is the fortsetzung of my fingers .
the tune comes out of the gesungenen and the rhythm from the dance .
the dauernde berieselung today &apos;s musik is not förderlich .
you don &apos;t need to make it more even more to yourself when it gets bored .
no need to whistle or sing a liedchen or sing .
every one of your music is plattgemacht if you &apos;re constantly beschallt from the outside of the outside .
sure , there are some of you who say , yes , but what do you do when i can &apos;t sing ?
i ask that , can &apos;t you sing , a , because you believe you can &apos;t sing ?
or b , because they didn &apos;t have learned to sing ?
it &apos;s not too late to start to figure out whether you can &apos;t yet , or learn how to put these little muscles that are einstellen the stimmbänder , right .
that &apos;s how you train .
or c , because you &apos;ve got them to get them untauglich .
i ask , how fachlich was the diagnosis of this diagnosis ?
have you already got a zweit- or drittmeinung , how you say it &apos;s beautiful ?
or d , you don &apos;t like music , and therefore , you want to be able to do that .
but what i would regret for , because music is a beautiful , kommunikative thing .
but maybe you can still umstimmen them .
well , you see , there &apos;s no one need to be a aussichtsloser candidate .
but don &apos;t ask me , i don &apos;t understand about classical music .
i can &apos;t say if it &apos;s good or bad .
i &apos;m going to say , but surely you can tell you whether it like you or not .
because i don &apos;t think it &apos;s saying somebody , i don &apos;t know if it &apos;s taste me because i can &apos;t cook .
so they don &apos;t give it to eat , because they can &apos;t cook .
so they don &apos;t have to give you a classic music because it doesn &apos;t play an instrument .
hear consciously and tell them whether it &apos;s taste or not .
whether the music is to gepfeffert or to sweet .
tell what you &apos;re feeling .
and at the time you &apos;re also getting ansprüche , and you want to be something more gewürze out of drinhaben or taste even fine differences .
why do i ask now to ask about my audience that it &apos;s also active to listen ?
because the music is a language , and a language is communicating to communicate .
a piece of art you never look at is not a force .
the food that was made by a chef or a chef , they have to eat , and not only just looking at them and ausgetauscht recipes .
so you ask , please , if you &apos;re playing music .
it &apos;s not just a nice geräuschtapete .
if in an environment , where the adults are active music or at least active music , it &apos;s very easy to ask a musiklehrer , to ask , what color is your flower ?
can you also play in blue ?
and the child plays after a gedenkpause , instead of a red flower , instead of a blue flower .
and this sounds very different from a time .
and that was the first beginning of a musical expression .
so the first step is to take a interpretation .
and what happens when you play a piece today that was written in the beginning of a hundred or a hundred ago ago , or even ago ago ?
meanwhile , the tools have fortentwickelt .
it was in the time of the time that the instrument was not a klavier .
it wasn &apos;t even invented .
i think the stream would have been thrilled to have the klanglichen possibility of modern modern klaviere .
i can now see the klangvorstellungen that the stream has had , on the modern wing , to sound what a barockes cembalo can &apos;t .
and also , by beethoven , you know that he heard more than he had been deaf .
today , a modern orchestra is able to play everything , which has been abgelehnt a orchestra of the back of the time .
so the composers rely on us interpreten that are erfinden the pieces .
so they &apos;re going to be hörbar , what they &apos;re just thinking about in the mind .
and also , what you think in the mind today .
or what i &apos;m doing today because what you might think .
thank you .
do you know what &apos;s going to be out ?
were you already neidisch ?
and how did it feel ?
suck .
i have a friend , who drives a passerati .
if i come to my little v , w , piesel , and i think , it comes up with this feeling .
i &apos;m going to take a difference through my head .
i say , ulf , what do you need for the n of the n ?
that &apos;s actually going to lose half of his value for the first year .
and at all , you work much less than i do .
why is i going to do so much of the n of my car ?
and then immediately , i &apos;m going to mind , that &apos;s ungerecht .
it &apos;s against justice .
and as i say the word justice , this uncomfortable feeling is gone .
our organism has invented a great way to get such as a kind of unangenehmen feelings like heart out .
you can also try that with words like rache or gewinnsucht or something .
i want to explain to you with this mechanism today or something that is something you &apos;re familiar with familiar with .
the mechanism comes from the lie .
but don &apos;t think about the lie , as you might have heard , if people say , no one has a wall to build a wall on the purpose of the purpose .
and then auftürmt stones so he &apos;d versperrt them .
at one of those lüge , you can see that the liars itself doesn &apos;t believe what he says .
it &apos;s easy to see , which is easy to see that it &apos;s in the sense of it .
he &apos;s just not making them and not themselves .
no , the lie i &apos;m talking about is that they &apos;re wrong themselves .
they need this lie to get a lebenslüge to get a selbsttäuschung upright .
you can get less easily , yes , nachprüfen , or even einsturz .
they need time .
and from this time , an anecdote that you might know .
the spanish painter pablo picasso once portraitiert a woman .
this woman has been beschwert , the portrait wouldn &apos;t be the same way .
picasso says , wait for it .
it &apos;s going to be more like you .
and at this point , and when you laugh , you can see how important this lie is and how much time you need to learn something that artists can tell us very well .
because artists have a gestörtes relationship to the lie .
the artist shares them with something , and especially this lady , what she doesn &apos;t see if she just looks in the mirror .
the artist shares them in a portrait of a portrait of what they &apos;re just familiar with , if you &apos;re always watching this piece of work .
and then this uncomfortable feeling , it might not look like you , and it will always be more like you .
here &apos;s this mechanism that we can use the lie to the lüge of the lebensverhältnisse of our lebensverhältnisse .
and not only in art , also in the volksmärchen , in the mythology , it comes back to stories .
you might know this idea of the lady who looked at every morning in the mirror and asked him who &apos;s the most beautiful in the country ?
one day , this mirror says , yes , there &apos;s a schönere .
there &apos;s behind the seven mountains and so on .
and you also know how much of the feindseligkeit from this true auskunft , also the mirror can lie to lie from that true input .
but we should just be familiar with that one woman can &apos;t tell a woman that there &apos;s a schönere somewhere else .
here &apos;s what we need to get under politically correctness .
we need this one that lüge lüge that aufrechterhält us , without the way we can &apos;t even live .
we don &apos;t just have in art , in the volksmärchendichtung , but also in science such as great lies .
and there &apos;s this story about the woman &apos;s wife by worchester .
she heard about this book of charles darwin , the origin of species and the abstammung of the human .
that the human being should be abstammen from the monkey and , yes , there would be a common ancestor between humans and monkeys .
and then she ran her to her husband and said , that &apos;s not true what charles was writing .
the human being should be vom from the monkeys or a common ancestor .
no , no , it &apos;s not .
and if it &apos;s true , we need to prevent people who get more interested in this .
why do we need to prevent people from the time that people get from something that is true ?
because we can &apos;t live without these lebenslüge .
because we have this selbsttäuschung , this feeling of being great , abstammung from the highest creature , not from one such one , from such a kind of unberechenbarem like an organism , which is still like a stone , and otherwise what things that is for us .
so , we can &apos;t bear these things .
we need to prevent people who are kenntnis of things , especially when they &apos;re true .
so you can see how slowly this mechanism is auflöst and how the trace of the tracks that &apos;s leaving on something else than this great image of ourselves , i want to give you a more story .
a particularly beautiful story , as i mean .
my wife told her to me .
she came from school one day she &apos;s teacher , and she told a student .
a autistischer student .
she likes to love it , because he &apos;s got a slope for him .
and she asked him , what are your hobbys ?
and there he says , well , i &apos;m at the fire department .
and because i &apos;m in the fire department , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
yes , you feel it when you &apos;re heiter , and there &apos;s something wrong .
i said , i used to say , when a human being in a moral rechtfertigung , the wörtchen is that we should try to replace it .
and you &apos;ll be able to do that , and then you experience the sentence .
although i &apos;m at the fire department , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
you feel that , that &apos;s the actual truth behind the auskunft .
so a small bub , who doesn &apos;t care about the feuerlöschen .
and the interest is the feuermachen .
but there are no clubs , where we can look at the way we can learn how to learn how to make fire .
there &apos;s only the best best thing that the fire department .
he signed up .
and überdies , you also don &apos;t say to your teacher that you like to put fire somewhere and you &apos;re going to be happy if the fire nachher out of the nachher .
no , it &apos;s just a lot better if we show that we &apos;re in charge of beseitigen the dangers that are just going to be the other than they put fire .
here &apos;s this little mechanism .
this verweis that , in the innersten of the bub , had already known that he &apos;s actually related to the fire , but that he can &apos;t say that .
here you have this zensor between the unbewussten and the conscious conscious , which is immediately anspringt , and the things you know that they &apos;re going to look very different is that they can sound much better for them and others .
so , then , the words that we &apos;re using in the language of political korrekten , in the language of political .
we actually know that something else is the case .
but we know , if we call it , the social verhältnisse are very sensitive .
we can &apos;t just do that .
it &apos;s impossible to present things in a society that would work .
i want to give you a little bit of what we found in my institute .
what logic is this deception , these selbsttäuschung , the willingness , a different reality than that , we know , in the unconscious know that it &apos;s gültig to spread out .
so , here i want to present two examples , maybe , maybe three examples .
the first example is , in advance , what many of you know and some of you are very likely to take very few .
i mean the soul .
what is the soul ?
the soul is so geistiges , says about leibniz .
it &apos;s something that &apos;s not by stop stofflicher , material nature .
and if you have people who are a soul , or you can say that you have been able to have a soul , or you can say that you have been able to have a soul to life , then it &apos;s like the soul is such a geistiger framework of them , not from matter , it &apos;s just from meat and blood , something more important to
and from this soul , you think it &apos;s kind of in this wolkigen nature , in this luftigen nature , anima , in the latin , the lufthauch , the präsent .
and when this lufthauch then ergießt over the people , he &apos;s filled with the würde , with nature , with nature that can only live , right with soul .
and then he can davonlaufen .
this is the idea of how the soul works .
so it &apos;s supposed to be hinzukommen from outside .
so we should perceive them as something that is really what &apos;s going to be present for our lives .
and if you have these premise , you can understand the logic that we &apos;re experiencing that happiness can be able to improve our world through a lie .
because now you can apply a dreisatz .
dreisatz , you know , know of school .
this is a dreisatz that describes us a logic .
this is the most part of the most part in my talk .
here you need a logic , but also the willingness to lie .
and that &apos;s how to lie that they can just apply these logic wrong .
in this dreisatz , three sentences come from .
the first sentence is , klaus claims , there &apos;s no soul .
so the second sentence is , if klaus has right , it &apos;s not got a soul .
now there &apos;s a third sentence .
i was in particular , i was in my hervorgehoben .
a third sentence that immediately can happen to people who have a strong sense of a soul .
the people say who doesn &apos;t have a soul , who is dead , and can &apos;t say anything .
and here you feel it .
this is the logic in this , yes , in this täuschenden speech , that &apos;s what &apos;s really like .
you can see it immediately .
the first two sentences that are logical correct .
i can say anything that is going to say .
the logic doesn &apos;t make any statements about reality .
i can say the kanzlerin is a man .
and if i have right , the kanzlerin is a man .
if i don &apos;t , the kanzlerin is not a man .
the logic is not saying to say about what &apos;s true .
i can say anything .
but the key thing is , if i have right , it &apos;s true .
so if klaus says , there &apos;s no soul .
second , if he &apos;s right , he doesn &apos;t have a soul .
these things are logical correct .
and now our consciousness instantly feels instantly , that can be done .
it depends on a third sentence that doesn &apos;t have nothing to do with the first two sentences and it does as if the opposite of the first sentence already proven and vorausgesetzt .
because actually , we would have to prove whether it &apos;s the soul or not .
but with this logic that it just uses that two sentences are logical correctly , and a third dazuhängt that looks like it would be like it could be doing something , so we can save our lebenslüge .
so , we &apos;re doing it as if it &apos;s actually impossible to live without a soul .
and we &apos;re very happy about that .
we can continue these things to different examples .
in the present , we have a very modern example of the tageszeitungen of the tageszeitungen .
and this is a more important subject subject , a dauerbrenner subject that &apos;s present from philosophy .
and that &apos;s what we have to go back to the vierzehnte century .
there was a gelehrten named named johannes buridanus , and after that &apos;s the buridansche esel .
the buridansche esel is a esel esel .
it doesn &apos;t have that soul .
this is a naturding .
and if you put the exact exact exact right in the middle between two gleichgroßen heuhafen , it &apos;s verhungert .
because he doesn &apos;t know what to do the heuhaufen he &apos;s going to go .
so it &apos;s in the middle .
so the naturdinge is introduced .
gleichgroße forces with gegensätzlichem vorzeigenzeichen are lösen each other .
there &apos;s nothing happening at all .
just if you take another example , so if you &apos;re going to make a difference in a little bit , it doesn &apos;t need reason to do it .
automatically , he &apos;s going to the right thought .
so if you have this idea , you &apos;re kind of being driven in nature , and it &apos;s going to be determiniert , from the larger piles that would be put in a immediately , you also have the feeling that it has to give something like a free will .
and if we &apos;re at the main here , in the main , i remember the max-planck-institut of brain brain .
there &apos;s a gelehrten , which is called a wolf , and he said , sometimes , wolf singer , there are no willensfreiheit .
now we can form the second sentence and say , if the wolf has recht , he doesn &apos;t have a willensfreiheit .
these sentences are absolutely logical and correct .
and what we can now read about daily daily daily , that &apos;s what they find in this third sentence .
it looks like who doesn &apos;t have a willensfreiheit , it can &apos;t be pulled for his actions and claims to responsibility , and he &apos;s therefore unzurechnungsfähig .
again , you have it again .
actually , you have to prove to you whether it &apos;s such a bit like willensfreiheit .
but the logic of deception allows us to do so , as if the first sentence is wrong , it would be , of course , to take the opposite of any evidence .
and now you can just make anything you want to do anything , if you want to test anything , and especially if you want to make people happy , the courage to be üben .
so , for example , if you meet a person you can say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
and please don &apos;t use the german word for vorhersager , which is called the prophet .
you can &apos;t call it , that would be a little political inkorrekt .
they say there are no vorhersager .
immediately , you will find one of these things for granted , you can &apos;t prove that .
and already , you have a problem .
because while they &apos;re busy with it , they &apos;re not going to be able to prove that there &apos;s no vorhersager , the man is very happy .
he &apos;s very happy about it because he &apos;s getäuscht them .
because he led them to a fährte , which he doesn &apos;t even aufhält .
because actually this person is not interested in any evidence .
he &apos;s only interested in the need to prove themselves to prove that there &apos;s vorhersager .
so , in the way the shift of the beweislast experience the großartigkeit of the lie .
and once you have an opportunity to feel these dreisatz , in other people , do it , because they &apos;re going to be happy to others if they don &apos;t remember their selbstlüge .
thank you for your attention .
yes , good day .
i &apos;ve allowed myself to ask lilly , whether i &apos;m allowed to mention it .
it &apos;s one of the most veranstalterinnen of this great event , and i asked myself if i could give you a talk here and give my idea .
i have to say , you know , you &apos;ve got it , it occurred to me with my idea at first .
and i may be my inselprojekt thinking that i &apos;m trying to imagine you .
but of course , it &apos;s the sum , of course , of many ideas .
i probably probably , are the two nice girls still , i &apos;m probably one of the generation that &apos;s been very worried about this bad öko image , because i &apos;ve already started studying engineering engineering in karlsruhe , engineering , i think , kit .
and i went back in berlin in the achtziger years , because i wanted to make renewable energy , and that &apos;s not what i did .
there was the kernforschungsanlage leopoldshafen .
the hießen then kfa , also , was called kfa .
the hot today are called projektträger .
because a good engineer has been built a great car or atomkraftanlagen .
but this is something like an n solarpendel , from a kind of a hundred watts of the square meter , that was a toy .
and in berlin , there was a crazy ingenieurkollektiv .
i &apos;m grateful to the premium-kola-mensch that he &apos;s rehabilitiert the word again , because after the mauerfall , you couldn &apos;t use the word anymore , because everything left was bad .
but it wasn &apos;t that in the achtiziger years .
there was just that there was selbstverwaltete alternativbetriebe , and one was sitting in kreuzberg in kreuzberg where you were going to do evil .
the place of the terrorismusses , but this was meant wuseltronik and made wind and solar power , and i started the middle of the achtziger .
and yes , much of what i was told today , i &apos;m very , very , because many , many beautiful expressions i &apos;ve been through .
i worked in the collective of the collective , that was basisdemokratisch .
we were 20 people .
if one said , the vetoprinzip , it was a completely zermürbt , and i &apos;ve been hard for 10 years , i &apos;m hard to get on a schwachsinnige thing , because all my colleagues in my father &apos;s father have always zugeredet him , you have the money to the window on your child .
it &apos;s been involved with the schwachsinn .
and this was really very , very bitter , and then you also come into such a ne stage , just diving it up to a picture of durchhalten , where i was asked for 10 years , a thousand d-mark , and then einheitslohn , of course , of course , to be the great thing .
and i got it up to sechsundneunzig , and then we have a mitbegründer of the company , which then came together with the spin-off q-cells of the largest zellenhersteller in the world .
and also , we have a riesenerfolgsgeschichte problem , and we have a small group of zweitausendsechs , and we have a small group , decided that we start to start and go back and go back and think about the next topic of the future , and that &apos;s the way that i think it &apos;s going to be a bit crazy , and it &apos;s starting to say
and i brought you a project i want to introduce you now .
and the title of the talk was , yes , as you get to a hundred percent renewable .
and we just started with a relatively einfach-verrückten history of questions , where could you use a memory of value today .
on this island , this is the island of graciosa on the azoren .
yes , that &apos;s the data .
there &apos;s a viereinhalb thousand people .
they have renewables today , 15 percent of 15 percent .
and the question is , why don &apos;t you have any more ?
it &apos;s just technological .
if you zubauen more windkraft each other , the system starts to fail .
i always tell the politicians when they besichtigen our facility in berlin-adlershof .
and then they always say , why ?
we have 20 percent in germany yet .
but it can &apos;t be a problem .
but not , we have seven percent in europe , and our network is the european , the european .
if we had 20 percent in europe , we &apos;d have the same problems that people have on this island .
the question was just , the math was zweitausend2006 , the first kontakte of the island started , but just the first way to do it .
how big would have to be a battery so that you &apos;re going to get an island on 20 , 30 , 40 , 50 , maybe even 70 percent renewable .
and yes , i &apos;m going to go again .
the conventional system looks like this all over the world .
by the way , a year , about a hundred gigawatt electric performance on the planet , in the world .
that &apos;s the equivalent of a hundred power power , because this is particularly fast .
the energiehunger of the world , which is taking place , is gelöscht by the time because you don &apos;t need any permission .
this is fast .
you put it on top box .
and then it looks like this .
and in the run , three of the dieseln , two are always waiting .
yeah , this is what &apos;s going on the bottom .
we also get very detailed data .
and the windkraftanlage or the solaranlage or whatever it is , is the rule a back-up system or a system , which can only be einspeisen in small amounts .
our goal was just to say , okay .
the diesel is back-up , the wind , the sun will use the load , that they can map the larger percentage .
and if you want to go over 20 , 30 percent renewable energy , so energy per year , not the performance at the moment , you have to turn off the diesel .
that means that , in the moment , you have to worry that renewables will be able to take the whole net over the whole net .
and of course , you can only be able to get up in any kind of way .
this is not one of the world that &apos;s got in the world .
there &apos;s a little style , so you can also serve your rasierer on a little wechselrichter car .
people always ask me , what are you doing in the adlershof ?
it &apos;s all about .
but if you want to put up several of these wechselrichtern , and they want to build a network , it will be extremely complicated .
and our goal was , we wanted to get to the siebzig percent of the renewable , and then there &apos;s the rest , the last rest , the last 10 , 20 percent renewable , which will become very , very expensive , and it &apos;s not going to work that you &apos;re doing it .
that will be a energieträger , which then , hydrogen , methane , power to gas , or sch , that will be .
you then have to go to a saisonalspeicher and winter-sommer winter-sommer and not just ausgleichen .
we just wanted to know what &apos;s a normal , stinknormalen elektrochemischen battery .
how far is you ever going to happen ?
and then they did a whole bunch of the simulation .
and have wind and sun and the load came along , and it came up with an interesting result that you need to be a mittleren system , which takes a mittleren strompreis from about 50 cents per kilowattstunde , about vierundvierzig cents .
these were the first calculations six years ago .
and then we said , okay .
well , it &apos;s great , we have a business model .
we &apos;re cheaper as the diesel-system , when the average five percent increase a year .
and then we started to negotiate with the insulanern .
what would have to be done ?
i was thinking about investors , i was looking for new gesellschafter .
we were at the time , at the time , five people to rebuild the society .
and here &apos;s the representation .
the brown is sort of the conventional system , the green one is our system .
that our system has a preisanstieg , because we &apos;re still 20 percent of the diesel and also durchschlagen a preissteigerung on the other things .
and the power-utility that the elektrizitätsversorgungsunternehmen on the island , which is , we &apos;re very excited .
we want to support , but we don &apos;t think that you can solve the technical problem .
and so we decided to build a hall in berlin , where we kind of can map the electrical verhältnisse of the island of the island of the island of the island .
that means we then went to find them to find the greatest battery in the world .
here &apos;s it .
it comes from asia , in the case of japan .
and witzigerweise , in the &apos; 70s , she &apos;s been in the &apos; 70s , at the siebziger mannheim , and they were developed , and then auslizensiert the japanese .
you can see it &apos;s a very , very big battery .
it has a power of power and can bring it for six hours , and that &apos;s the battery that we kind of rausbekommen simulationstechnisch .
and then they set up .
we also have one of these diesel-aggregate in the same size , as he &apos;s standing in the hall , actually , the full dynamic behavior of this grid , so in the halle , it looks like this , there &apos;s the big battery here , here &apos;s the big battery , here &apos;s the big battery , where we simulate the net .
over here , we &apos;re going to simulate the entire übertragungsleitungsystem , the kilometer-physik of the cable , to sort of represent the schwingungsverhalten of the web .
and here you can see the whole thing again .
we can also aufschalten zweihundert kilowatt photovoltaik on the net .
here we see this again again , again , again , again , again , again , the whole , single aggregate .
and what we &apos;ve done since zweitausendneun was the hall &apos;s hall , until today , zweitausendzwölf basically , all of the system that &apos;s here between the single system of electronics , developing software , we did .
so we &apos;re not a batteriehersteller , we &apos;re define as a company that &apos;s only between the topic and the subject on the net and everything between them .
you have to communicate to the battery , and you have to communicate to the web , and that &apos;s very complicated .
the beauty is that you &apos;re actually taking on this island today , you can actually take all the vorwegnehmen of problems that we &apos;re going to get , if we want to increase our share of renewables .
so this whole debate , how will you go back and herbewegt , energiewende , like that , on the island , for example , we &apos;re going to exzessenergie for fünfundzwanzig percent , so we &apos;re müdsen the wind and the sun .
natürlicht offers smart-grid .
so smart-grid , a riesenthema everywhere .
we can start to integrate elektromobilität , rumzufragen , because you can manage the load .
that means if you &apos;re renewable percent of the renewable , you will not be able to do it without any memory .
you can smart-grid through the n , you can ausbau nets , yes , you should do it , too , the percentage of erhören , but you will never be able to get any of the memory .
and that &apos;s the n of the message .
so many people get there and look at this , just because you can see what problems you get .
if we turn off the diesel , you just don &apos;t have that much more powerful mass that causes a certain amount of the brain .
and our europäisches verbundnetz is essentially just made up of a lauter masses of big kraftwerken , wherever the wave is about all over the whole of europe .
we look in this net , the 50 hertz , and when it &apos;s neunundvierzig komma , we &apos;re going to start a couple of ventilchen , and then again , a little merh steam goes back , then we get up again .
that &apos;s the system .
and of course , this is incredible träge .
if you runterreißen it somewhere , it &apos;s a little bit more time .
the spinning reserve has at least 10 seconds to keep the net stable .
and in the time , you can react to other things .
if you don &apos;t have that , these are the same mass , then you have to replace that with leistungselektronik and elektrochemie .
and we can rein-rausschalten up with this big battery , two milliseconds .
there you are , there &apos;s enormous geschwindigkeitsmöglichkeiten there .
and the message is , we need to get rid of these rotierenden masses , if we &apos;re sort of , to 20 , 20 , 20 percent , 20 , 30 , 30 percent , and so on , if we &apos;re going to get to the at all .
then we have to break our must-run capacity on the net .
must-run is simply , the power station is going to be able to keep the frequency .
yes , this is a riesendebatte moment , zubau from the kohlekraftwerken , because we don &apos;t , or gasturbinen , because it &apos;s not .
and we just try to make a sense that you can have the capacity , the must-run capacity , by bringing the elektrochemische memory to the net .
there &apos;s now a lot of studies that are now there .
and that purpose then people are always coming up and look at our versuchsstand , like , to the inselteststand of the inselteststand .
and yes , the discussion always goes to the question , how far can you go there a bit of a future of future .
and many discussions i had in the last six years , i was similar to the discussion i had been in the last 30 years .
it &apos;s not , it &apos;s schwachsinn , kinderspielkram , we &apos;ve got everything we &apos;ve done .
we have 30 gigawatt photovoltaik in germany today .
this is vorbildlich .
and i just go out , in the next 30 years , we &apos;re going to be able to store the same capacity in the elektrochemischen store all over the world .
just , it will come .
there &apos;s a whole bunch of widerständen and streitereien .
the beauty is that i &apos;ve just experienced the last two years that the scientists are going to be on my side .
we &apos;ve got over 10 million förderprojekte , even though , ne zehn-megawatt-batterie now to the german net .
it will take place in the next april .
so , you know , there &apos;s a change that &apos;s there and it &apos;s just from this abwehrhaltung to the idea , to the idea , a hundred percent renewable .
and if you have a hundred percent renewable , it &apos;s like a autarkes system .
so far , in discussions , we &apos;re trying to do this , these insulaner , they have a own little net , that &apos;s nothing to do with our verbund .
the question is , really , very simply , if you &apos;re totally independent from any fossil or uranen energierträgern , which will be rausgebohrt anywhere in the world and you &apos;re going to become hingebracht , you &apos;re an island .
then they just consume the sun , which is there , and wind there , where they live .
and this is a little bit of our vision of a vernüftigen energy , and i &apos;m also grateful for you to say , solar energy .
and that &apos;s what we do , and we &apos;re going to come in and it &apos;s the talk that you can be able to be a collective and use energy energy , here &apos;s a little bit together .
and yeah , i just want to encourage you , in the sense that you can be quiet and you can have a vision .
and you really have to stay pretty zäh , but i think it &apos;s going .
thank you .
when steve lopez , the los angeles times , one day , in the center of los angeles , he heard a wonderful music .
she came from a man , an afro-amerikaner , sympathisch , rau , homeless , who was playing a violin that had only two strings .
many of you will know the story , because from steves articles this was later a book that was verfilmt , again , steve lopez and jamie foxx als ayers , who was nathaniel anthony ayers , who was beendet by his paranoide schizophrenia .
nathaniel juilliard , suffered a nervenzusammenbruch and 30 years later he lived as a homeless homeless at the streets of skid row at the center of los angeles .
i recommend reading the movie , or you can see the movie , so it &apos;s not just the wonderful connection that came between these two men , but also how the music made that connection , and how it finally was the instrument , as it &apos;s been able to get the wortspiel , nathaniel away from the road .
i met mr. ayers in 2008 , two years ago , in the disney disney hall hall .
he had just heard a demonstration of the orchestra first and fourth symphony , and came out of the stage to imagine myself .
he was talking to a very heiteren and geselligen note about yo-yo and hillary clinton and how the dodgers would never be able to create the baseball world series , and all of this is the tückischen passage of the first geige in the last sentence of the beethovens &apos;s fourth symphony .
we came to the theme of music , and a few days later , i got an email , which was , that was nathaniel to me for geigenunterricht .
i need to mention that , nathaniel , a medical treatment was ablehnte because he had been treated with elektroschocks and handschellen , a trauma that has been verfolgt by his whole life .
and so , as a result , he &apos;s especially vulnerable to these schizophrenen periods , and they &apos;re sometimes bad , and he days disappears , in the streets of skid row , always ausgesetzt that horror and the folterqualen of his own mind .
and in this case , in exactly a reizstadium , nathaniel was started by our first class at the disney disney hall hall , he had this irre flackern in his eyes and had completely lost .
he talked about invisible dämonen and smoke and about how to poison him in sleep .
i was afraid , not meinetwegen , but i was afraid i could lose it , that he could be able to get into one of his states and i could destroy his relationship to the geige , when i started talking about scale and arpeggios and other exciting forms of the didaktischen geigenpädagogik .
so i started playing .
i was playing the first sentence of beethovens violinkonzert .
and while i was playing , i realized that in nathaniels eyes , a total change was going to happen .
it was like he stood under the impact of an invisible arznei , a chemical reaction whose katalysator was my game .
nathaniels manischer anger transformed into understanding , in a quiet curiosity and anmut .
and as a miracle he took his violin and started playing some of the ausschnitte of violinkonzerten , and i asked me to end up playing , mendelssohn , tschaikowski , sibelius .
we started talking about music , starting from bach through beethoven , brahms , bruckner and all the other bs , from bartók to esa-pekka .
and i realized that he had not only had a enzyklopädisches knowledge of music , but he had to connect with her also a personal personal relationship .
he talked about her with a passion and an understanding that i had just known from my colleagues in the philharmonie of los angeles .
by playing music and talking about music , from this paranoiden , verwirrten man who was moved by the streets of los angeles , a liebenswerter , gebildeter , ausgezeichneter , in juilliard ausgebildeter .
music is medicine . music is changing us .
for the nathaniel , music means emotional health .
because the music allows him to think about his thoughts and the wahnvorstellungen with the help of his imagination and creativity in something real .
and so he entflieht his quälenden .
i understood that this is exactly the nature of art .
and that &apos;s why we make music : so we &apos;re in the middle of all of us , deeply deeply inside , our feelings , through our artistic lens , through our creativity , through our creativity .
and the reality of this is really reached us all , and move , inspired , and it &apos;s united us .
what nathaniel is about , so it brought him back to a community of friends .
the erlösende force of music has brought him back to a family of musicians who understood him who recognized his talent and achtete him .
and i &apos;m always going to make a nathaniel music , whether it &apos;s in the disney disney hall hall , or in skid row , because he reminds me of why i &apos;ve become a musician .
thank you .
thank you : thank you . thank you .
robert gupta .
robert : i want to play something that i stole the cellisten .
i hope you &apos;ll forgive me .
so i knew a lot of fish in my life .
i only loved two .
this first one , that was more like a passionate .
it was a beautiful fish , wohlschmeckend , good , gehaltvoll , a bestseller , a bestseller .
what a fish .
even better , he was considered to be the angeblich of the angeblich standards of sustainability .
so you could feel about selling it .
i had a relationship with this beauty for several months .
one day , the head of the company called , asked if i could give a case to an event , about sustainability .
&quot; of course , &quot; i said .
here was a company trying to solve what this incredible problem for our food has become , how do we keep fish on our speisekarten ?
in the last 50 years , we &apos;ve been able to have the oceans gefischt as we &apos;ve been beaten .
it &apos;s hard to überbewerten the destruction .
90 percent of the big fish that we love , the tunas , the heilbutte , the lachse , schwertfisch , they &apos;re collapsed .
there &apos;s almost nothing left .
so , you know , will be übel , fischanbau , a part of our future .
many arguments are about it . fischzuchtanlagen verschmutzen the environment , most of you , and they &apos;re inefficient , we take tuna . a big disadvantage .
he has a futterverwertung for 15 to one .
that means , 15 pounds of wildfisch are necessary to get a pfund zucht-thunfisch .
not very sustainable .
don &apos;t taste very well .
so here was a company that was trying to make it right .
i wanted to support them .
at the day before , i called the head of the öffentlichkeitsarbeit head for the company .
let &apos;s call it &quot; don . &quot;
&quot; don , &quot; i said , &quot; just to have the facts , you are famous to grow out of the ocean that you don &apos;t verschmutzt the environment . &quot;
&quot; that &apos;s true , &quot; he said , &quot; we &apos;re so far out that the waste is distributed from our fish , not concentrated . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; we &apos;re basically a world .
these futterverwertung of 2.5 , &quot; he said .
&quot; the best in the industry . &quot;
2.5 to one , great .
&quot; 2.5 to one ? what do you feed ? &quot;
&quot; sustainable proteins , &quot; he said .
&quot; great , &quot; i said .
and i was lying in bed , and i thought , what &apos;s the hell of hell ?
so i called the next day , shortly before the event , don &apos;t .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t , what are sustainable proteins ? &quot;
he said he didn &apos;t know that . he will be an nachfragen .
well , i &apos;m telefonierte with a few people in the company . no one could give me a ordentliche answer , until i finally telefonierte the senior biologists .
let &apos;s call it a don .
don &apos;t , i said , &quot; what are sustainable proteins ? &quot;
well , he mentioned some algae and some fischmehle , and he said , &quot; hühnchen-pellets . &quot;
i said , &quot; hühnchen-pellets ? &quot;
he said , &quot; yeah , federn , skin , knochenmehl , reste , getrocknet and verarbeitet . &quot;
i said , &quot; how much percent of your futters is chicken ? &quot;
in the assumption of maybe two percent .
&quot; well , that &apos;s about 30 percent , &quot; he said .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t , what &apos;s sustainable to feed chicken ? &quot;
there was a long pause in the leitung , and he said , &quot; there &apos;s just too much chicken on the world . &quot;
i entliebte myself from this fish .
no , not because i &apos;m a selbstgerechter genießer and gutmensch .
that &apos;s me , i &apos;m actually .
no , i actually have micht of this fish because , i swear to god , the fish after that conversation after chicken .
this second fish , that &apos;s a different kind of love story .
it &apos;s the romantic way , the way you can get to know your fish , you get the fish more .
i ate him in a restaurant , in südspanien .
a befreundete reporter had been talking about this fish for a long time .
it &apos;s sort of verkuppelt us .
he came up with a bright white color , almost white color .
the chef had verkocht him .
stop twice .
amazingly , he was still delicious .
who can taste a fish that &apos;s so good after he &apos;s got to verkocht ?
i can &apos;t , but this guy can .
we call it miguel . actually , he &apos;s called miguel .
and no , he &apos;s not cooking the fish , and he &apos;s not a chef , at least in the way that they and i understand them .
he &apos;s a biologist at veta la palma .
this is a fischaufzucht in the südwestlichen corner of the spaniens .
it &apos;s near the mündung of the river .
until the &apos; 80s , the farm in the hands of argentiniern was .
they were raised fleischrinder on what was essentially the feuchtgebiete .
they did this by entwässerten the land .
they built this complicated episode of channels , and they were drängten water out of the land and beyond the river .
well , they couldn &apos;t make that work , not economically .
and it was a disaster for a disaster .
it took about 90 percent of the birds , which is a lot of birds for this place .
and so , in 1982 , a spanische company with green green was bought the land .
what did they do ?
they are umgekehrt the flow of the water .
they literally umgelegt the levers .
instead of water water , they used the channels to hereinzuziehen the water .
they were fluteten the channels .
they created a 11.000 of fischaufzucht -- barsch , meeräsche , shrimp , aal -- and they have miguel and his company to the ecological destruction .
the farm is incredible .
i mean , you &apos;ve never seen anything like this .
they stare at the horizon that &apos;s a million miles away , and all they see are geflutete channels and that density , the üppige .
i didn &apos;t have a long time ago .
he &apos;s an incredible guy , three parts of charles darwin and a part of a krokodil .
okay ? there we were , and we fought for the feuchtgebiete and i keuche and schwitze , have matsch to my knee , and miguel keeps a biologievorlesung .
this is a rare gleitaar .
now he mentioned the mineralbedürfnisse of the phytoplankton .
and here , he sees a pattern of bündeln that reminds him of the tansanische of the tansanische .
it turns out that the most miguel of his career in the national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national national
i asked him how he became like this .
he said , &quot; fish ? i don &apos;t know about fish .
i &apos;m an expert for relations . &quot;
and then he goes , and he goes into more gerede of rare birds and algae and strange wasserpflanzen .
and you don &apos;t get me wrong , which was really fascinating , you know , the biotische community , so that kind of art. .
it &apos;s great , but i was in love .
and my head was weak to this verkochte piece of köstlichen that i had on the vorabend .
so i cut him . i said , &quot; miguel , how is it that your fish taste it &apos;s so good ? &quot;
he showed the algae .
&quot; i know , boy , the algae , the phytoplankton , the relationships , that &apos;s incredible .
but what do you eat your fish ?
what is the futterverwertung ? &quot;
well , he &apos;s driving on me that it &apos;s such a very rich system that the fish that they eat in the wild .
the pflanzliche biomass , the phytoplankton , the zooplankton , that &apos;s what the fish feeds .
the system is so healthy , it &apos;s completely selbsterneuernd .
there &apos;s no food .
the one from a farm that &apos;s not feeding their animals ?
later on this site , i was driving around with miguel , and i asked him , i said , &quot; for a place that seems to be so natural , &quot; unlike any farm i &apos;ve ever been , &quot; how do you measure ? &quot;
at the moment it was like a director had an bühnenwechsel .
and we bow around the corner , and we &apos;re going to see the most incredible sight , thousands and thousands of thousands of pinker , literally , pinker carpet as long as the eye .
&quot; that &apos;s success , &quot; he said .
&quot; look at your bäuche , pink .
they schlemmen . &quot;
schlemmen ? i was completely confused .
i said , &quot; miguel , don &apos;t you put your fish ? &quot;
&quot; yes , &quot; he said .
&quot; we lose 20 percent of our fish and fischeiern to the birds .
well last year , on this site , there were 600.000 birds , more than 250 different species .
it &apos;s the greatest one and one of the most important private vogelreservate in europe has become a whole place .
i said , &quot; miguel , is a good gedeihender vogelbestand not the last thing you want to have on a fischaufzucht ? &quot;
he kept schüttelte his head , no .
he said , &quot; we &apos;re building extensiv , not intense .
this is a ökologisches network .
the flamingos eat the shrimp .
the shrimp eat the phytoplankton .
so the pinker the belly the system the better . &quot;
okay , let &apos;s rethink this . a farm that doesn &apos;t feed their animals and a farm that measures their success on their predators &apos;s health .
a fischaufzucht , but also a vogelreservat .
oh , and by the way , these flamingos of the vornherein don &apos;t even be there .
they breed in a city of 240 miles where the bodenbeschaffenheit is better for the nestbau .
every morning you fly miles miles to farm .
and they fly fine miles every night .
they do that because they can follow the gestrichelten white line of the landstraße .
seriously .
i had introduced my kind of journey of penguins , so i looked at miguel .
i said , &quot; miguel , fly out of a mile to the farm , and you go back to 5,000 miles at night ?
do you do this for the children ? &quot;
he looked at me as i &apos;d been quoted a song by the whitney houston .
he said , &quot; no . they &apos;re doing this because the food is better . &quot;
i didn &apos;t mention the skin of my beloved fish that was delicious , and i don &apos;t like fischhaut . i don &apos;t like sautiert . i don &apos;t like them .
it &apos;s this beißende , verkohlte taste .
i almost never cook .
and yet , when i tried it in this restaurant , she didn &apos;t have nicht for fischhaut .
they liked sweet and they &apos;d be in the way to take a bite off of the ocean .
i mentioned the other to the miguel and he &apos;s nickte .
he said , &quot; the skin works like a sponge .
it &apos;s the last one , before something enters into the body .
it evolved in the course of evolution , to unreinheiten unreinheiten . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; but our water has no unreinheiten . &quot;
okay . a farm that doesn &apos;t feed their fish , a farm that measures their success on their predators .
and then i realized , when he says , a farm that doesn &apos;t have a unreinheiten , he untertreibt enormous , because the water that comes from this farm comes from the river in the river .
it &apos;s a river that comes all the things that rivers are these days of , of course , are fighting them , chemical pollutants , abfluss from schädlingsbekämpfungsmitteln .
and if it fought for the system , and this leaves is clean water than it &apos;s hereingekommen .
the system is so healthy , it &apos;s clean up the water .
so not just a farm that doesn &apos;t feed their animals , not only a farm that measures their success on their health &apos;s health , but a farm that literally is a wasser-aufbereitungsanlage , and not just for those fish , but for you .
because if the water water , it versinkt it in the atlantic .
a drop in the ocean , i know , but i take it , and i should do it as well , because these love love , as romantic as you always , is also aufschlussreich .
you could say that you &apos;re a recipe for the future of good food , whether we talk about barsch or fleischrindern .
what we need now is a radical new concept of agriculture , from one that food actually taste good .
but for many people , it &apos;s a little bit too radical .
we &apos;re not realisten , we &apos;re genießer . we &apos;re liebhaber .
we love wochenmärkte . we love small familienbetriebe . we &apos;re talking about food food . we &apos;re eating food .
and if you say that the things that &apos;s good to suggest the future of good food , someone is someone somewhere up and says , &quot; hey , people , i love pinke flamingos , but how are they going to feed the world ?
how are they going to feed the world ? &quot;
can i be honest ?
i don &apos;t like this question .
no , not because we &apos;re going to produce enough calories to feed the world more than just .
a billion people will be hungry today .
one billion -- that &apos;s more than ever before -- because of krasser ungleichheiten in the distribution , not the gesamtproduktion .
well , i don &apos;t like this question because they have the logic of our nahrungssystems system for the last 50 years .
füttere grain on the pflanzenfresser , schädlingsbekämpfungsmittel of monokulturen , chemicals on the earth , chicken , and all the time the agrarindustrie has simply said , &quot; if we feed more people cheaper , how awful can it be ? &quot;
that was the cause . it was the rechtfertigung . it was the business of american agriculture .
we should call them what it is , a gewerbe in abwicklung , a gewerbe , which is fast ökologisches capital that allows these production to be able to do that .
this is not a gewerbe , and it &apos;s not agriculture .
our kornkammer is threatened today , not because of abnehmender , but because of abnehmender resources .
not by the latest mähdrescher- and traktor-erfindungen , but by a very fruchtbares country , not through pump , but by fresh water , not by kettensägen , but by forests , and not through fischerboote and nets , but by fish in the sea .
they want to feed the world ?
let &apos;s start with the question : how are we going to feed ourselves ?
or better , how can we create conditions that empower every community to feed itself ?
to do that , don &apos;t look at the agrarindustrie-modell for the future .
it &apos;s really old , and it &apos;s done .
capital , chemistry and machines are obenan at that and it never made a difference to eat .
let &apos;s look at the ecological model .
that &apos;s that , that &apos;s zurückgreift , that &apos;s arbeitserfahrung .
look at miguel , farmers like miguel , who are schauen .
and the ones that are not worlds for themselves , they &apos;re in betriebe , betriebe , betriebe , who are growing up the extensiv , instead of intense , farmers , who are not only erzeuger , but experts for relations .
because they are the ones who are experts in taste too .
and if i really am , you &apos;re a better chef than i will be .
you know , this is right , because if that &apos;s the future , it &apos;s going to be delicious .
thank you .
and if i want to just try to you one thing today , the whole of the data we consume is greater than the sum of the parts and rather than thinking about informationsüberladung , that you want to think about how we can use information that are patterns and we can see the trends that otherwise would not be visible .
so what we see here is a typical sterbediagramm nach .
the program i used here is a little experiment .
it &apos;s called pivot , and what i can do with pivot is that i can filter after a certain cause of death , we say accidents .
and immediately i see a different pattern that makes you .
and that &apos;s because in the mittelbereich people here , people are the most active and they &apos;re over here at the gebrechlichsten .
we can step up and line the data and see that kreislauferkrankungen and cancer are the usual , but not for everyone .
if we &apos;re going to go on and to go to the age , we say 40 years or younger , we &apos;re even seeing accidents that are the most common cause that people should be concerned about .
and who &apos;s watching the weiterforscht , that is particularly true of men .
so you can see that this is a very lebendigen of information and data in this way , in this way , a living informationsgrafik .
and if we can do this for raw data , why not for content ?
now , what we have here are the titelbilder of each single &quot; sports &quot; illustrated , which are ever printed .
it &apos;s all here . it &apos;s all online .
you can actually test it to my zimmern after my talk .
with pivot , they can be in a decade .
you can be an eintauchen in a particular year .
you can jump to a specific issue .
so if i look here , i see the athletes that appear in this issue and the sportarten .
i &apos;m a lance armstrong , so i &apos;m going to go back to where i &apos;m going to show all of my ausgaben armstrong .
now , if i want to give you a gröberen , i could think , &quot; ok , what if i look at everything with the subject of fahrradfahren ? &quot;
so i go back and take a step back and take a point .
now i see greg lemond .
and so you get an idea that if you look at this kind of information , gezielter , bigger , reinzoomen , rauszoomen , you don &apos;t want to look at not just a surft .
you do something that &apos;s a little different .
it &apos;s something between and we think it changes the way information can be used .
i want to take this idea a little bit more about something like a little bit crazy .
what we &apos;ve done here is we took every single one , and reduce it down to a little bit .
the summary contains a short übersicht and a symbol of the region that you come from .
i just show the top 500 of the popular line .
but even in this eingeschränkten view , we can do a lot of things .
immediately , we get a sense of the issues that are on wikipedia at the end of wikipedia .
i &apos;m going to vote for the government .
now , after i elected the government , i know that the wikipediakategorien that most of the time are most of the time , &quot; people &apos;s &quot; people .
this is really important , because this is a realization that &apos;s not in a single wikipediaseite .
this is just to see if you go back and look at the whole thing .
so , in a particular one , i can go into a certain of these pieces , and then i can go back to the subject of time , &quot; people who go into &quot; in &quot; and all together . &quot;
so if i look at all these people , i know the majority of them are regierungsbeamte . some of them come from science . some , even less , come from the economy . here &apos;s my boss . and one comes from the musikbereich .
and interestingly , bono is a ted prize prize .
so , we can jump and take a look at all the ted prize .
you can see , we &apos;re surfing the first time as it &apos;s actually a web , not only from side to side , but much more abstract .
and so i want to show you what else could be , what a little bit of surprise could be .
i just show you the new york times website .
pivot , this application -- i don &apos;t want to call it a browser ; it &apos;s really not browser , but you can look up and look at websites for this -- and we bring these zoom-technologie to each individual website like this .
so i can go back and jump to a specific sektion .
that &apos;s why you &apos;re just looking at the way of web websites in this way , and you can look at all the way in the same way .
so i can zoom in my course in a particular time .
here &apos;s the one of the most demonstration that i &apos;ve been held by .
and i can sort of look at everything i &apos;ve looked at today , again .
and , if i take a step back and look at it , i can actually anordnen my process , i can go to my such-vergangenheit , and here i went to nepotistisch &apos; search for bing , or live , hier .
and from here , i can go into the site and go back .
it &apos;s a metaphor that &apos;s used to be used and every time it makes the picture bigger than the sum of the datenteile .
right now , in this world , we think that data is a fluch .
we &apos;re talking about the fluch of the informationsüberflusses .
we &apos;re talking about &quot; drowning in information . &quot;
what if we could turn this situation and put the internet on the head so that we &apos;re always going from one to another , start from many things to lots of things and see patterns that would be hidden out of otherwise ?
if we can do this , then these bisherige will be datenfalle , maybe a new source of information that &apos;s available .
and instead of moving in information , we can get knowledge from it .
and if we know knowledge , we can actually even pull out of it .
i hear that , thank you very much .
i grew up with a gehörigen portion of science fiction .
i went to the bus of the bus , every day a day per track every day .
and my nose always always put in a book , a science-fiction-buch that i &apos;m entführte my thoughts in other worlds and auf my deep neugier .
and this curiosity showed that i was , when i didn &apos;t go in school , went through the forests , and walked and proben and snakes and beetles and teichwasser and betrachtete and looked at under the microscope .
i was totally wissenschaftsbegeistert , you know .
and it always went to try to understand the world and try to figure out the boundaries of the possible .
and my love of science fiction seemed to be in my environment , because at the time , in the late &apos; 60s , we flew to the moon and we were exploring the deep sea .
jacques cousteau came in our living room with his amazing shows that we were moving and places and a world of miracles that we could never imagined before .
and that &apos;s what i think it &apos;s going to be very good at the science-fiction-rolle .
and i was an artist .
i could draw . i could paint .
and it wasn &apos;t a video game that it &apos;s not , and these übersättigung , with the whole bildsprache movies , all the way that i had the media landscape , i had to make the images in my head .
we had to all of that . when we read a book , we took the description of the autors and we put them on the screen in our heads .
my reaction was drawing and drawing from aliens , aliens worlds , robots , raumschiffen and all that .
in the matheunterricht , i was constantly caught by the teacher , as i was hiding , hinterm , herummalte .
the creativity had to be somehow out .
and what happened was interesting , which is what i was fascinated by jacques cousteaus &apos;s sendungen , the thought of a completely unknown world of our earth itself .
i certainly would never have an alien world to a spaceship , and that seemed pretty unlikely to me .
but here was a world i could actually walk here , here on earth , and it was just as fascinating and exotic as all of what i &apos;d been imagined when i had read these books .
so i decided to be able to get to the point .
the only problem with this was that i was living in a small village in canada , a thousand miles away from the nearest ocean .
i didn &apos;t leave them into the entmutigen .
i nervte my father until he finally had a tauchschule in the buffalo , new york , to find out , right on the other side of the border where we lived .
i made my tauchschein in a pool of ymca in the winter in the winter of buffalo , new york .
the ocean , but a real ocean , i got two years later , when we moved to california .
since , in the 40 years that &apos;s now verstrichen , i spent about 3,000 hours of water , 500 hours of davon in tauchbooten .
and i &apos;ve learned that the world of the deep ocean , even in the most flacheren oceans , is so rich in faszinierendem lives , as we can really imagine .
the nature of nature knows no boundaries , unlike our own , kläglichen human imagination .
until today , i feel deep awe for what i see on my brother .
and my love of the ocean keeps holding the same intensity as ever and the one .
and when i was a adult aussuchte , it was the filmemachen .
this seemed the best way to tell my inner stories , to tell stories , to unite with my need .
as a child i was drawing and i was doing the comicbücher and so .
so , films were the way , images and stories together . that fit together .
of course , the stories i aussuchte from the science-fiction-bereich , &quot; terminator , &quot; aliens , &quot; abyss . &quot;
and in &quot; abyss , i could connect my vorliebe for the unterwasserwelt and the diving diving with the filmemachen .
so , basically my two passions .
something interesting happened in the &quot; abyss &quot; -- to solve a erzählerisches problem in this film -- and that &apos;s what we had to create a kind of liquid wasserwesen -- we &apos;d actually griffen on computergenerierte animation , cg .
and what came out of this is the first computergenerierte soft-surface-figur ever to see in a movie .
the film didn &apos;t take money , and actually , he was just played his produktionskosten , but i found something fascinating : the audience around the world was hypnotisiert by the magic that came from it .
according to arthur clarke &apos;s law , bekanntlich technology and magic are not distinct from each other .
so they saw something magical .
and i found that incredibly exciting .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s really what &apos;s going to be involved in the filmkunst . &quot;
so we went to &quot; terminator 2 , &quot; my next film , even more .
together with ilm , we created the guy from liquid metal , and success was all about how this effect would come .
and it worked . again , we created something that was done , and the effect of the audience was the same thing . but we &apos;ve been doing a little more money with the film .
and from those two experiences , a new world has come up , a whole new world of creativity for filmschaffende .
so i started a company with my good friend , stan , who was the best make-up- and creature-designer at that time . it was called &quot; digital domain . &quot;
the idea of this company was to get the stage analoger processes with visual data and the same to begin with digital produktionen .
and then we did , and we also do a wettbewerbsvorteil for a while .
but in the middle &apos; 90s , we realized that we were in the creature- and character-design -- we actually started the company -- to slow down .
i had written this piece of &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; avatar &quot; and computergenerierter effects in the very new heights , with the realistischen human characters that were produced by cg , and the hauptfiguren should be all cg . and the world should be cg .
but the messlatte hit quite nicely , and the people in my company told me that we &apos;re not able to be able to do that .
so i went through and did this other film about the big ship , the untergeht .
and i was selling this as &quot; the romeo and julia at a ship , &quot; it was a liebesfilm epischen , a very passionate movie .
but i was actually , really , to really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really ,
that &apos;s why i made the film .
that &apos;s the truth . the studio didn &apos;t know that .
i believe it , by saying , &quot; we &apos;re diving up to the wrack . we film the real .
we &apos;re going to show it in the eröffnungssequenz of the movie .
it &apos;s immensely important . it &apos;s a good marketing for marketing . &quot;
and i was überredete them to finance an expedition .
sounds crazy , but this is what &apos;s going on again that your imagination can be able to make a reality .
and then we actually created a reality in which i actually created a reality in a russian tauchboot wiederfand , four miles under the surface of the atlantic , and i was looking at the real titanic through a bullauge .
this wasn &apos;t a movie , no hd , that was real .
so , that really blew my mind .
and the amount of the amount of this is enormous . we had to build cameras and lights and all kinds of things .
and i noticed how much these tiefseetauchgänge , a weltraummission ähnelten .
well , they were also planning to be hochtechnisch and bedurften .
you go into these , then you &apos;re going to go into this dark , feindselige environment , where no hope is to be able to save , if you don &apos;t get it back .
and i thought , &quot; wow , it &apos;s like i was in a science-fiction-film .
it &apos;s really cool . &quot;
i was really obsessed with exploring the deep sea .
but the part that i did with curiosity and science has been it . it was adventure , it was curiosity . it was imagination .
and it was an experience that hollywood could not give me hollywood .
because , you know , i could imagine a creature that we could make a visual effect , but i couldn &apos;t imagine what i would see outside of the fensters .
and in some of the next expeditions i &apos;ve seen creatures in thermalquellen , and sometimes things that i &apos;ve never seen before before , sometimes things that had no one before before , and for the science at the time we saw them , nothing had found words .
so that &apos;s really umgeworfen me , and i wanted to get more .
and so i met a slightly unusual decision .
after the success of &quot; titanic , &quot; i said , &quot; okay , i want to put my hauptberuf as a filmmaker in hollywood , put a vollzeit-forscher for a while . &quot;
and then we started , we were diving up to &quot; bismarck , &quot; and we were exploring them with roboterfahrzeugen .
we went back to the wrack of the titanic .
we took little robots that we built , which was a fiberglaskabel abwickelten .
our purpose was to look at the internal of the ship , which was never done before .
no one had explores the inside of the wracks , and you had no means to do that . so we developed the technology .
so , i &apos;m sitting here on the deck of the titanic , in a tauchboot , and see planken , which is quite similar to these brettern , and i know that the band was played there .
and i fly with a little roboterfahrzeug by the gänge of the ship .
i &apos;m actually bediene it , but my consciousness is within the vehicle .
it felt like i was physically in the schiffswracks of the titanic .
this was the most powerful form of a déjà-vu i ever experienced . because before i was making a corner of the vehicle , i always knew what was going to be in the lichtkegel of the vehicle , because i was doing a monatelang monatelang when we were doing the film .
the set was , which was a very accurate copy of the baupläne of the ship .
so this was a highly strange experience .
and she made me realize that you could use such roboterhafte avatare and so you can move your own conscious conscious system in the vehicle , to be able to move this other shape of existence .
it was really , really , really , really profound .
and perhaps a little bit of a view of what might happen in a few decades , if you have cyborg-körper to explore something or other things , in all sorts of post-humanen that i can imagine as a science-fiction-fan .
so , after this , we started learning what we had seen the bottom , and really appreciate these tiefseequellen , for example , where we saw these incredibly amazing animals , that &apos;s kind of alien , but here in the world .
they live with help from chemosynthese .
they don &apos;t exist in a sunlight , of the sunlight , how we do that .
and so you can see animals that are right next to a 500 degrees centigrade that they can survive .
i was also very interested in the same time , and that was the science-fiction-einfluss of my childhood .
and so i ended up to the people who are interested in space and sit with nasa and sit in the nasa-sachverständigenrat and plan right to do , go to russia , go ahead , the biomedizinische record , is all about the drum and turn it into international weltraumstation , and take our 3d-kamerasysteme .
that was fascinating .
but at the end , it was going out that i was weltraumwissenschaftler with us in the deep sea .
i took them with them and verschaftte them from the world down there : astrobiologen , planetenwissenschaftler , people who were interested in such an extreme situations , and i took them to the sources to look at samples and test and test tools and so on .
we were making it , and we did it , but actually science , genauer , weltraumwissenschaft .
so the circle of my existence as a science-fiction-fan , then as a child , and the execution was going to reality .
i learned a lot of that this journey .
i &apos;ve learned a lot of science , but i &apos;m now thinking you can have a director , can be a leader like a schiffskapitän or something .
i didn &apos;t understand much of leadership before i antrat these expeditions .
because at a certain point i had to say , &quot; what do i do here ?
why do i do this ? what &apos;s coming out ? &quot;
these blöden films don &apos;t make us any money .
we &apos;re just playing the cost of the cost of the produktionskosten .
everybody thought i was between &quot; titanic &quot; and &quot; avatar &quot; and had a nägel on a handtuch on a beach somewhere .
i &apos;ve all made these films , these dokumentarfilme , for a very small audience .
no credit , no honor , no money . what do you do ?
you &apos;re doing it for the task of the challenge , and the ocean is the most efficient environment that there are . you &apos;re doing it because of the entdeckerrausches , and because of the odd connection that comes out when a small group of people are a team .
because we &apos;ve done all these only 10 to 12 people who worked for years of time , and sometimes we were two to three months in the row of lake .
and in this community , you realize that the most important thing that &apos;s the achtung thing you have before one another , because you have a problem that you can &apos;t explain to other things .
if you go back to shore , and you have to do it , the fiberglas , the schallschwächung , the schallschwächung , and the schwierigkeiten , the human leistungsvermögen , if you &apos;re working on lake , you can &apos;t just explain the other . it &apos;s like police officers or soldiers who have gone through something in common and know that you can never explain it .
there is a connection , a gegenseitiger respect .
so when i came back to turn my next movie &quot; avatar , &quot; i tried to use the same leadership , which is that you respected his team and deserves respect to respect .
and this is really changed the dynamic .
so i stood back with a small team on unbekanntem terrain , and we were drehten &quot; avatar &quot; with a new technology that we haven &apos;t had before .
very exciting .
a huge challenge .
and we were at a very viereinhalb family for a period of four and a half .
and by doing , my way of making films , completely .
there were people who thought we were really gut these ozeanwesen , and we were transportiert on the planet .
for me , it was more a more prinzipielle way of doing my job , the actual process that changed in the outcome .
so , what can we all close from all of this ?
what lessons are we learned ?
i think first , i think , curiosity .
it &apos;s the most powerful human property .
our imagination is a force that can even create reality .
and the achtung of your team is more important than any lorbeer of the world .
i get young filmmaker who say , &quot; give me a advice , like i can do something like this . &quot;
and i say , &quot; don &apos;t make yourself .
they &apos;re going to get some of you . don &apos;t pretend to yourself , bet not against yourself , but take risks on you . &quot;
nasa has such a lieblingssatz , &quot; failure is no alternative . &quot;
but in art , and studying failure , there must be an alternative , because there it is a vertrauensvorschuss .
it &apos;s not an important effort to ask innovation , it was ever taken by the risk .
you have to be willing to take those risks .
this is the idea i &apos;d like to give you with the way . failure is not an alternative , fear is not . thank you .
today i &apos;m talking to you about energy and climate .
and this may be surprising to something that my vollzeitbeschäftigung at the foundation is mostly about vaccines and seed , to make things that we invent and we need to make the poorest 2 billion lives .
but energy and climate are extremely important for these people , actually , even more important than any other on the planet .
klimaverschlechterung means that their saaten are not growing over many years , it &apos;s too much regnen , and things will change how it can &apos;t be able to sustain their fragile environment .
it leads to hungersterben . it leads to uncertainty . it leads to a lot .
so , a climate change will be a bad thing for you .
it &apos;s also the energiepreis for them very important .
in fact , if you could reduce one thing , at the price of the price , energy would be more than far by far .
now , the energiepreis is fallen over time .
in fact , the fortschrittsgesellschaft on energiefortschritten is based .
the kohlerevolution drive the industrial revolution and even in the 20th century , there was a very rapid case in the elektrizitätspreis , and so we have kühlschränke , klimaanlagen , we can make modern materials and do so many things .
so we &apos;re in a wonderful situation with electricity in the rich world .
but if we cut the price down -- let &apos;s take the price of cut down -- we hit a new barrier , and this barrier is to depend on co2 .
co2 warming the planet and the equation for co2 is actually quite clear .
they summieren the ausgestoßene co2 that leads to the temperaturerhöhung , and these temperaturerhöhung has a few very negative consequences , effects on the weather and perhaps worse , the indirekte result that the natural ecosystems can &apos;t adapt to these kinds of catastrophic changes , and thus collapse .
well , the exact correlation between a co2-anstieg and the dadurch temperaturveränderung and where the other consequences are , there &apos;s some of them , but not very many .
and there &apos;s certain unklarheit about how bad these are going to be , but they &apos;re going to be extremely bad .
i asked the top-wissenschaftler several times , &quot; do we have to get down to close to zero ?
don &apos;t have that much half or a quarter ? &quot;
and the answer is , until we get close to zero , the temperature will continue to increase .
so it &apos;s a big challenge .
it &apos;s very different to say , we have a 3,5 and a half called lkw , which is going to be under a 3 bridge , and then you can make it underneath .
this has to go down , at zero .
well , we &apos;re going to run a lot of kohlenstoffdioxid every year , over 26 billion tons .
every americans , about 20 tons . people from poor countries , less than one .
on average , it &apos;s about five tons of every planet .
and somehow we need to make changes that lower it down to zero .
it &apos;s up in constant .
only different economic changes have affected it , and we have to go from rapidem increases to decrease and a reduction to zero .
this equation has four factors . you have this thing left -- co2 -- that you want to get zero , and that will depend by the number of people , from the service that every human being used to use on average , the average energy for every service and co2 that will be emittiert per unit of energy .
so let &apos;s take a factor of one and we think about how to get that to zero .
probably one of these numbers must get very close to zero .
now that &apos;s a basic algebra , but let &apos;s go through it .
first , we have the population .
today &apos;s 6,8 billion people today .
and it &apos;s going to be on 9 billion zu. that are going to be 9 billion .
if we &apos;re very successful with new vaccines that are gesundheitsvorsorgung and reproduktionsmedizin , we could reduce that 10 percent to 15 percent , but at the time , we &apos;re seeing a steigung for 1.3 .
the second factor is the service that we use .
this is all the stuff that we eat , clothing , television , heat .
these are very good things and armutsverringerung means to make these services almost every one on the planet .
it &apos;s great that this number is going to go up .
in the rich world , in the upper billion , we could make abstriche and less use , but on average , these numbers are rise to each year and then double the number of services that are being provided by the person .
this is a very basic service . there &apos;s a home that &apos;s home with the homework ?
and these students don &apos;t have it , so they go out and read their schulaufgaben under the straßenlicht .
well , at efficiency , the e , the energy per service , there &apos;s good news .
we have something that doesn &apos;t get up .
because of different successes in the lichtsektor , through other autotypen , through new ways in the häuserbau , there are many services that are reduzieren some of the individual services to be 90 percent .
in other ways , the way that the manufacturing , 105 00 : 56,000 -- &amp; amp ; 00 : 58,000 or luftverkehr or luftverkehr , is the amount of money for improvements much smaller .
in total , if we &apos;re optimistic , we might get one reduction in a factor , or maybe even by a factor of sixth .
but at the first three factors , we &apos;re now at 26 billion to perhaps allerbestes 13 billion tons , and that &apos;s just not enough .
so let &apos;s look at the fourth factor -- and this will be a key thing -- that &apos;s the amount of co2 that will be emittiert per unit of energy .
it turns out to be whether you can get it to zero .
if you burn coal , no .
if you burn gas , no .
almost every herstellungsmethode of electricity today , co2 co2 , except renewables and nuklearenergie .
so , what we need to do on a global level is to create a new system .
we need energiewunder .
now , if i use the term &quot; wonder , i don &apos;t mean the impossible .
the mikroprozessor is a miracle . the computer is a miracle .
the internet and it &apos;s a miracle .
people have contributed to the development of many of these miracles .
normally there are no deadline that you need a miracle to a certain date .
normally , you just say , just next to say , some people , not come .
in this case , we have to give vollgas and get a miracle in very short time .
now , i wondered how can i really get this ?
is there a natural illustration , a demonstration that &apos;s what the idea of the people here are ?
i remember last year when i got mosquitos , and somehow the people liked it .
the idea was really tangible for them , you know that there are people who live with mosquitos .
for energy , this is what i &apos;m going to .
i decided that the freilassen of fireflies would be my diesjähriger contribution to the environment .
so here are some natural fireflies .
you &apos;re told me that you don &apos;t bite . actually , you won &apos;t even leave the glass .
well , there are all sorts of things like this , but they don &apos;t bring all the way .
we need solutions , either or a couple of the kind of unvorstellbare scaling and unvorstellbare , and even though there are many directions that people are looking for after that , i really see five of those big demands .
i &apos;ve left out of the gezeiten , geothermal , fusion and biokraftstoffe .
and they might afford a moderaten piece and if they do better than i expect , but my favorite message here is that we need to work on all those five , and we can &apos;t give up any of them because they &apos;re einschüchtern us because all of the major problems have significant problems .
look at the burning fossil fossil fuel , burning by either coal or gas .
what you have to do is just just seem , but it &apos;s not . you have to capture all the co2 that comes from the burning of the schornstein , capture under pressure and then store somewhere and hope that it stays there .
there are some pilotprojekte that are creating at 60 percent -- 80 percent of the time , but it gets to get a hundred percent , and a einigung for the lagerung of co2 , is a big challenge . but the biggest problem here is the lagerzeitfrage .
who will make it make ?
who can guarantee what literally , literally , many billion times larger than any kind of waste that you can imagine about nuklear- and other things ?
it &apos;s a lot of volume .
so that &apos;s a tough thing .
next : nuklearenergie .
and it has three big problems , the cost of all , especially in hochregulierten countries , the question of security is that you really feel that nothing can go wrong , despite human cooperation , that the fuel is not used for weapons .
and what do you do with the waste ?
because even though it &apos;s not very big , there &apos;s a lot of concerns .
so three of these really hard problems that might be solved , and that &apos;s why you should work .
the last three of the five i have summarized .
they &apos;re renewables as they are often called .
and also , the -- though it &apos;s great , that they don &apos;t need a fuel -- they have some nachteile .
one is the energy that these technologies are generating dramatically than the kraftwerken .
these are energiefarmen , you &apos;re talking about many quadratkilometern , a thousand times more than a normal power station .
it &apos;s also unterliegen .
the sun doesn &apos;t seem to shine all day , it doesn &apos;t seem like every day , and the wind doesn &apos;t always happen .
so , if you &apos;re dependent on these sources , you have to have a way to get energy in times when you &apos;re not available .
so there &apos;s a big amount of preisherausforderungen here . there are challenges with transmission , and for example , if we say that the power power from the country is , you don &apos;t just need the technology , you have to deal with the risk that the energy from where you are from .
and there &apos;s the lagerungsproblem .
and to show the dimension , i &apos;ve been looking at all sorts of batteries that are made , computers , cell phones , cell phones , for everything , and i have the amount of electronic energy that uses the world , compared to that , and i found that all batteries that we can make right now , we could put less than 10 minutes of the gesamtenergie
so we need a big breakthrough , something that will be a factor of 100 better than the way that the approaches is at the time .
it &apos;s not impossible , but it &apos;s not that easy .
this is what happens when you try to get these unterbrochenen sources about saying 20 percent -- 30 percent of the time .
if you want to rely on 100 percent of it , you need an incredible wunderbatterie .
now , where should we go , what is the right approach ?
a manhattan project ? how come to the goal ?
what we need are many companies working on this . hundreds of them .
in each of these five areas , we need at least 100 people .
you &apos;ll say , you &apos;ll say , you &apos;re nuts . that &apos;s good .
i think there are many , in the ted group , there are many , which are already involved in this .
bill has a lot of companies , among other things , a namens solarthermaltechnologien .
vinod khosla spent in dozens of companies doing great things and interesting opportunities , and i try to support this .
nathan myhrvold , and i finance a company that might be a surprise , the nuclear approach .
there are some innovations in the nuklearbereich ; modular , liquid .
and development has stopped in this industry for some time , so it &apos;s not a big surprise that some good concepts are lying around .
the terrapower-konzept means that instead of a part of the urans , one percent , the u235 , we decided to burn the 99 percent , the u238 .
this is a pretty crazy idea .
but in fact , you &apos;ve been thinking about it , but you could never simulate it , but since then there &apos;s modern supercomputer , you can simulate it , and you can see that , right ! with the right materialienherangehensweise , it looks like it &apos;s been working .
and because you &apos;re burning this 99 percent , the kostenprofil is much better .
in fact , you burn the waste , and you can actually use the waste from today &apos;s reactors as a antriebsstoff .
instead of breaking it down , they just burn it . a great thing .
the uranium is going to take a bit of a graduell , a little bit like a candle .
you see it &apos;s a kind of column , often as a &quot; wandernde wave . &quot;
this really solves the treibstoffproblem .
here &apos;s a picture of a place in kentucky .
this is the waste , the 99 percent . you have the amount that &apos;s burned today , so it &apos;s called aufgebrauchtes uranium .
the u.s. triebe for hundreds of years .
and if you &apos;re günstig cheap and just filtriert , you get enough fuel for the rest of the planet .
you know , there &apos;s a lot of challenges , but it &apos;s an example of many hundreds of concepts that we need to come forward .
let &apos;s think about how we should measure our success .
what should our testimony look like ?
well , let &apos;s go to the goal we have to reach , and then we talk about the zwischenschritt .
many of an 80 percent reduction by 2050 .
it &apos;s really important that we get there .
the rest of 20 percent will be produced in poor countries , and still a bit of agriculture , hopefully waldrohdung and zement to that .
so , to reach that 80 percent , the developed developed , including countries like china , are completely changing their elektrizitätsgeneration .
the other note is , if we use the technology technology , whether it &apos;s been deployed in all developed countries , and we &apos;re on the way to get it to the rest .
that &apos;s great .
this is going to be a key part of this .
if we go back from there , what should the 2020 be made ?
it should contain the two elements again .
we should use the effektivitätsmaßnahmen to get reduction in the way , and the less we emittieren , the less the co2-summe will be , and it &apos;s also the temperature .
but actually , this note of the things we do is not completely lead to the big reduktionen , just right , or even something less important as the others that represents the speed of innovation for these breakthroughs .
these are the major that we have to track with vollgas , and we can measure that , in firmenzahlen , in pilotprojekten and regulierungsänderungen .
there are lots of great books on this subject .
and al gore book , &quot; we have the choice , &quot; and david mckays , &quot; sustainable energy , &quot; the hot air force . &quot;
they really go through and create a framework that can be discussed in the broad , because we need support from all sides .
there &apos;s a lot of things that needs to come together .
that &apos;s a wish .
a very konkreter wish that we invent this technology .
if you just take a wish for the next 50 years , i could pick the president , a vaccine , and i love this wish , which is , halbierter energiepreis without co2 , i &apos;ll take that wish .
this has the biggest impact .
if we don &apos;t get this desire , the dig between long-term and the kurzfristig are terrible between the u.s. and china , between poor and rich ländern. and almost all of that two billion will be very much worse .
so what do we need to do ?
what do i do for what do i do ?
we need to be able to use more research .
if countries can meet in places like koppenhagen , they shouldn &apos;t just be talking about co2 .
you should go to these innovationsstrategie , and they were shocked by the ridiculous small resources that are spent on these innovative ways .
we need marktanreize , co2 taxes , cap &amp; amp ; trade is that a preissignal creates .
we need to spread the message .
we have to lead dialogue and vollständiger and also the things that are going to be done by the government .
it &apos;s a big wish , but i think we can meet it .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you . thank you .
thank you very much . just to understand more about a little bit better -- first of all , can you give us an idea of the scale of this investment ?
bill gates : to do the simulation at a supercomputer , all the great scientists that we &apos;ve done , we only have to test for a few 10 million , and even if we tested our materials in a russian reactor , to make sure that it works , it &apos;s just in the 100en million .
the hard step is to build the first of the first reaktors , to find another billion , the regularien and the place that actually build the first of it .
once the first thing is , when he &apos;s going to show , it &apos;s all clear , because the economic economy , the energy density is so different as the nuklearenergie , as we know .
to understand that , that means deep down to the ground , almost like a vertical column of nuclear energy , that it &apos;s urans , and then the process starts up and then work on the bottom ?
bg : right . now you have to get the reactor down , so there &apos;s lots of people and lots of control that can go wrong . this thing you can open and hinein- it , and things like that , and it &apos;s not good .
but if you have very cheap fuel , you can put it for 60 years -- think of a column -- that you &apos;re buried without the whole thing .
and it &apos;s sitting there , and it &apos;s on the equivalent for 60 years , and then it &apos;s finished .
a nuklearreaktor , the self offers a solution for the garbage .
bg : yeah . now , what happens to the waste : you can sit it -- there &apos;s a lot less of the waste that you do -- you take it , put it into the next reactor and burn it .
and we &apos;re starting by taking the waste that exists already in these kühlbecken or trockenbehältern at the reactors . this is our startbrennstoff .
so , what &apos;s a problem for these reactors , which is what we &apos;re in our filling and it will dramatically reduce the müllvolumen dramatically during this process .
but while you &apos;ve talked about different people in this world , you know , these possibilities .
where &apos;s the biggest interest in which really , really , is really ?
bg : now we haven &apos;t picked up a place , and there &apos;s a lot of interesting offenlegungsregeln for everything called &quot; nuclear , &quot; and the people of the company were in russia , india , china -- i was here and i met the energieminister and talked about how this fits the energieagenda .
i &apos;m optimistic . you know , the french and the japanese have something that &apos;s going to be .
this is a variante of one thing that was done .
and this is a more important step forward , but it &apos;s like a faster reactor , and some countries have this built , so everyone who &apos;s done a fast reactor , a kandidatat for our first .
in your imagination , zeitrahmen and chance of calling something like that ?
bg : now , we need one of these skalierbaren , stromgenerierenden things that are very cheap , we have 20 years to invent and then put 20 years .
this is sort of the deadline that we have to have the umweltmodelle that we have to have .
and , you know , terrapower , if everything goes well , it &apos;s a big wish , it might be easy .
and luckily , there are dozens of companies , and we need hundreds of them , as well as their approaches work , that will be able to work for their pilots for their pilots .
and it would be best if it can do several , because then you could use a mixture .
so , in any case , we need a solution .
and the big possible breakthroughs , is this the greatest thing you know ?
bg : a energiedurchbruch is the most important thing .
it would have been without the umweltherausforderung , but it &apos;s going to do it so much more .
in the nuclear sector , there are other innovative companies .
you know , we know about their work not as good as they , but there &apos;s the brain that &apos;s a different approach .
there &apos;s a liquid reaktortyp that seems difficult , but maybe that &apos;s what the thing that &apos;s like .
and so , the beauty of it is that a uranmolekül has a million times a lot of energy like this , say , a kohlemolekül , and therefore , if you can deal with the problems , and those are mostly the radiation , the footprint and the cost , the power is the potential , so the impact on the land and other things , almost in a
if that doesn &apos;t work , what then ?
we need to have notfallmaßnahmen to try to keep the erdtemperatur stable ?
bg : when you get into this situation , it &apos;s like you &apos;re eating too much , and you &apos;re going to have a heart attack , and what do you do ? you might need a herzoperation or something .
there &apos;s a forschungsrichtung called geoengineering , which is about various techniques to verzögern the warming so that we would be given 20 or 30 years for us to get around .
this is just a versicherungsmethode .
you hope that we don &apos;t need it .
some people say you shouldn &apos;t work on your insurance because you might not have a lazy to eat , so you &apos;re going to eat , because you know that you &apos;re going to save the herzoperation .
i don &apos;t know if that &apos;s smart , if you &apos;re going to take the importance of this problem , but there &apos;s a conversation in geoengineering about whether you should have that , if the things come faster , or it takes innovation that need for more than we expect .
klimaskeptiker : have you or two sentences for you to convince you ?
bg : well , unfortunately , the skeptiker live in a very different camps .
the ones who make scientific arguments are very little .
do you say , is the negative effects that have the clouds going to be able to do things ?
there are very , very few things that you can actually tell you , of which there is a chance of a million .
the hauptproblem here is as much as aids .
you make the mistakes right now , and you pay for a lot of them later .
and so , if you have all sorts of problems of being , you &apos;re just going to invest , and it comes out of something that you just have , and it &apos;s that the investment isn &apos;t so clear . actually the ipcc report isn &apos;t very the worst scenario , and there are people in the rich world that look at the other and say , okay
the fact is that that uncertainty should make us care .
but my dream here is that if you can make it economic , and at the same time , the co2 , you know , are not interested in that it &apos;s not a carbon emittiert , i wish it &apos;s not that it &apos;s done , but i &apos;m going to accept it because it &apos;s cheaper than the previous method . &quot;
and that would be their answer to the björn argument that if you use all of that time and energy to solve all the other goals , the armutsverringerung that bekämpfung malaria and so on , it &apos;s a stupid resource of resources to invest , and invest money for the better things we can do .
bg : well , the actual spending on the research -- let &apos;s say u.s. u.s. should spend 10 billion a year than they &apos;re doing today -- that &apos;s not so dramatic .
there shouldn &apos;t be suffering from others .
you can get to large geldsummen , and you can disagree with sensible people , if you have something that is not economic , and trying to finance that . for me , most of the waste is most of the waste .
it &apos;s because you &apos;re very short before a kostendurchbruch and funded just the learning process . i think we should try to do more things that have the potential , much less cheaper .
if the abstrich you get , you &apos;re a very high energiepreis , then you can &apos;t keep up with the rich .
i mean , every one of us here could spend five times a lot of our energy without changing their lifestyle .
for the bottom two billion , but it &apos;s a disaster .
and even lomborg &apos;s lomborg .
his new masche is now , &quot; why is the research that &apos;s not going to be talking about ? &quot;
he &apos;s still going to be , because of his former stories associated with the skeptiker-camp , but he understood that this is a very lonely group , and therefore he &apos;s bringing it to the forschungsargument .
and this is a gedankengang i think is appropriate .
the research , it &apos;s just crazy , as little unterstützt .
bill , i think i &apos;m going to speak for almost all people here , when i say , i really hope that your wish is true . thank you very much .
bg : thank you .
a few years ago , here at ted , peter skillman gave a design-wettbewerb called &quot; the marshmallow-herausforderung . &quot;
the idea is pretty simple . vierer-teams have to have the largest freistehende structure with 20 spaghetti , about a meter tape , and building a marshmallow and a marshmallow .
the marshmallow has to be on top .
and , even though it seems really easy , it &apos;s actually really hard because it &apos;s people who are doing it very quickly work .
and so i thought this is an interesting idea , and i turned it into a design-workshop .
it was a huge success .
since then i &apos;ve been doing about 70 of these worldwide , with students , engineers and architects , even with ctos of the fortune-50-unternehmen and there &apos;s something that enables deep to nature &apos;s nature , and i want to share some of them with you .
normally most people start to get themselves to the task .
they talk about it , they think about what it &apos;s going to look like , it &apos;s rangeln .
then you invest a little bit of time in planning and organization . you &apos;re drawing and lay spaghetti .
they spend a lot of their time in the zusammenbau all the time , and they &apos;re constantly wachsender structures .
and finally , in short before you have no time , someone takes the marshmallow and you put it back on the top , step back and ta-da , and admire your work .
but then , almost always , it &apos;s going to happen , that the &quot; ta-da &quot; becomes a &quot; uh-oh , &quot; because the weight of the marshmallows is that the whole thing is going to be verbiegt and einstürzt .
there &apos;s a bunch of people who have much more uh-oh than others , and under the worst , are fresh bwl-absolventen .
they lie , they &apos;re cheating , they &apos;re confused and they make really dürftige shapes .
and of course , there are teams that have much more &quot; ta-da &quot; -gebilde , and under the best , frische absolventen .
and this is quite amazing .
as peter told us , they don &apos;t just produce the highest towers , but also the most interesting structures of all .
what you might be wondering is : how does that come ? why ? what about the ?
and peter tells me , &quot; none of the kids spend the time of the spaghetti gmbh . &quot;
they don &apos;t invest in machtkämpfe .
there &apos;s another reason .
and that is that bwl-studenten were trained to find a right plan , ok .
and then realize it .
what happens if you put the marshmallow out on the top , you don &apos;t have time and what &apos;s going on ?
it &apos;s a crisis .
sounds familiar , what &apos;s familiar ?
what &apos;s going to do differently is that they &apos;re starting with the marshmallow and build prototypes , successful prototypes , always with the marshmallow at the top , so that they mehrfach the possibility of fixing baufällige prototypes .
konstrukteure , this kind of collaboration is a core of the collaboration that we have a core of a iterativen .
and with every trial , the kids get immediate feedback and what &apos;s not .
so the performance of working with prototypes is a lot -- but let &apos;s see how different teams are doing .
the average of most of the lies for most 50cm , bwl-studenten are creating half of them , lawyers , but not much , more powerful than adults .
who &apos;s the most successful ?
architects and engineers , for happiness .
and three times the highest thing i &apos;ve seen .
and why ? because they &apos;re triangles and sich-selbst-verstärkende geometric patterns are key to build robust structures .
you &apos;re about the average , and it &apos;s going to be interesting here .
you put a exekutive administrator on the team , you &apos;ll be significant better .
it &apos;s incredible . you can see , and see , &quot; this team will win . &quot;
you can predict the predictions . why is this ?
because they have special skills of the prozessbegleitung .
they run the process , they understand it .
and this team that regelt and the work is going to improve the performance of the team .
and the spezialisierte skills and prozessfähigkeiten and their combination are success .
if you have 10 teams , the typical approach , you get about 6 that have a stable structure .
i tried something interesting .
i thought we &apos;re going to bring the pokereinsatz .
so i offered a $ 10000 prize for the winner for the winner .
what do you think of this design-studenten ?
what was the result ?
this was what happened . not a team had a stable structure .
if you had a 2,5cm high construction on this , he would have been carried by the price .
so , is it not interesting that high levels of high levels have a strong effect ?
we did this exercise with the same students .
what happened in this case ?
now they understood the advantage of &quot; prototype . &quot;
so , from the same , bad team one under the best .
they produced the highest construction in the least time .
so there are some tief-greifende lessons for us , about nature and success .
you like questions : why would someone actually invest to create a marshmallow-challenge ?
the reason is , i &apos;m making digital tools and processes to help teams , to make cars , video games and &quot; effects .
and what the marshmallow-challenge does is , they help you identify hidden assumptions .
because frankly , each project has its own marshmallow .
the challenge offers a common experience , a common language , or grundhaltung , to build the right prototype .
and this is the value of this experience , this simple exercise .
and those of you who are interested in , can visit the marshmallowchallenge.com .
it &apos;s a blog where you can see how to build the marshmallows .
there &apos;s a schritt-für-schritt-anleitung there .
you find crazy examples from all the world , like people optimize and raffinieren .
there &apos;s also a weltrekorde .
and the most important lesson , i think , is the construction that is actually a verbindender sport .
it requires that we all set up our senses , and that we use our thinking , how our feelings and our own , in the challenge that we are facing .
and sometimes a little prototype of this experience is all about , what it takes , is to bring us from a uh-oh &quot; -- to a &quot; ta-da &quot; moment .
and that can make a big difference .
thank you .
we &apos;re going to be like this , a machine .
a big machine , a cool machine machine , and this is a time machine .
and everyone in this room has to go in .
and you can go into the past , you can go into the future ; you can &apos;t stay in here and now .
and i wonder what they would choose because i often asked my friends that i &apos;ve asked this question , and they wanted to go into the past .
i don &apos;t know . they wanted to go back to the time before there were cars or twitter or &quot; america , &quot; or &quot; america . &quot;
i don &apos;t know .
i &apos;m convinced you &apos;re kind of drawn to the nostalgie , to be drawn to wunschdenken .
and i understand that .
i &apos;m not part of this group , i have to say .
i don &apos;t want to go into the past , and that &apos;s not because i &apos;m a abenteurer .
it &apos;s because that opportunities that don &apos;t go back on this planet , they go ahead .
so i want to go into this machine , and i want to go into the future .
this is the greatest time that it ever existed on this planet , no matter what scale you are : health , wealth , mobility , opportunities , sinkende krankheitsraten .
there was never a time like this .
my ur-großeltern died all of them as they were 60 .
my grandparents were able to get this number of 70. to 70. .
my parents are 80 at the fersen .
so there &apos;s a nine at the beginning of my todeszahl .
but it &apos;s not even people like us , because this is a bigger thing than that .
a child who &apos;s born today in new delhi can expect to live as long as the richest man in the world 100 years ago .
think about it . this is an incredible fact .
and why is this ?
smallpox : smallpox killed billions of people on this planet .
they &apos;ve made the demographics of earth in a way , as it has no war ever done .
they &apos;re gone . they &apos;re disappeared .
we bezwungen them . puff .
in the rich world , diseases , the millions of us are still threatened by a generation , hardly yet .
diphterie , röteln , kinderlähmung ...
does anybody know what that &apos;s ?
vaccines , modern medicine , our ability to feed billions of people are successes of scientific method .
and from my perspective , the scientific method is to try and try to see if it works , it changes if it doesn &apos;t do , one of the greatest achievements of humanity .
so that &apos;s the good news .
and unfortunately , that &apos;s the whole good news , because there are some other problems , and they were often mentioned .
and one of them is that despite all of our achievements , a billion people on this planet will go to bed every day .
and that number is going to increase , and it &apos;s increasing very quickly , and that &apos;s a shame .
and not only that , we used our imagination to verwüsten this world .
drinking water , urbares land , rainforests , oil , gas : they disappear , and that &apos;s soon , and if we don &apos;t go out of this mess , we &apos;re going to disappear .
so the question is : can we do that ? i think .
i think it &apos;s clear that we can produce food that will feed billions of people without the land that they live in .
i think we can power this world with energy that doesn &apos;t destroyed them at the same time .
i really believe that , and no , that &apos;s not a wunschdenken .
but this keeps me awake -- one of the things that fall awake me at night , we &apos;ve never need scientific progress as well as now .
and we were never able to make it reasonable , it &apos;s how we can now .
we are at the threshold , amazing events on many areas , and yet i really think that we need hundreds to go back to the enlightenment of the enlightenment , to find a time where we &apos;ve fought progress in which we have more fronten on these things , more than now .
people are hüllen in their faith , and it &apos;s so deeply that you can &apos;t free them .
it &apos;s not even the truth that it gets free .
and listen , everybody has a right to their opinion ; even a right to think of the progress of progress .
but you know , what you &apos;re not right ?
they don &apos;t have a right to their own facts . &apos; tschuldigung , they don &apos;t .
and i took a while to figure out that .
about a decade ago , i wrote an article about impfungen for &quot; the new yorker , &quot; a little article .
and i was amazed to be stoßen , to resistance to the end of what the most effective health activity of humanity &apos;s most effective health care system .
i didn &apos;t know what i was supposed to do , so i just did what i always do , i wrote an article and i was on .
and soon i wrote an article about a gentechnisch , food .
the same thing , only bigger .
people were playing nuts .
so i wrote an article about this , and i couldn &apos;t understand why people thought that would be &quot; frankenfood , &quot; why they believed that molecules was a certain kind of random kind of herumzuschieben , a übergriff kind of herumzuschieben .
but you know , i do what i do . i wrote the article , i kept doing .
i mean , i &apos;m a journalist .
we type , we reach , we &apos;re going to eat , that &apos;s okay .
but these article were worried about me , and i couldn &apos;t figure out why , and finally , i found it .
and that &apos;s because these fanatiker who were nuts , i didn &apos;t have any fanatiker at all .
these were umsichtige people , people who were educated people , people who are people .
they were just like the people in this room .
and that got me so mess .
but then i thought , you know , we &apos;re honest .
we &apos;re at a point where we don &apos;t have the same ratio for progress .
we &apos;re talking about zwiespältig .
we &apos;re talking about ironisch with little anführungszeichen : &quot; progress . &quot;
okay , there &apos;s reasons for that , and i think we know what causes it is .
we have trust in institutions , authority , and sometimes in science lost in the science , and there &apos;s no reason that it &apos;s not going to be that way .
you can just call a few names , and people are going to understand .
chernobyl , bhopal , the challenger , vioxx , mass destruction , the us-präsidentschaftswahl 2000 .
i mean , you know , you can choose your own list .
there are questions and problems with people who we believed they were always right . so they &apos;re skeptical .
ask questions , ask for the evidence , desire for you .
take nothing for granted .
but now , it comes : if you get the evidence , you have to take this evidence , and we &apos;re not good at it .
and i can say that we &apos;re now living in an epidemic of fear , as i never haven &apos;t seen before , and hopefully never see again .
about 12 years ago , a story was published , a terrible story that was autismus-epidemie with the masern , mumps , röteln vaccine .
very frightening .
there were a lot of the studies that were done to see if that was true .
now , in many studies , we should be done ; that &apos;s a serious issue .
the data came in .
the data came in from the united states , from england , from sweden , from canada , and they were all the same , no correlation , no connection , no connection .
it doesn &apos;t make any difference . it doesn &apos;t make any difference because we believe in the way we believe , we believe what we see in what we see , what causes us to feel real .
we don &apos;t believe in a bündel documents of a regierungsangstellten that gives us data , and i understand that , i think we all do .
but you know what ?
the result of that was devastating .
katastrophal because of this fact : the united states is one of the only countries in the world that &apos;s going down for the masern .
this is skandalös , and we should be ashamed .
it &apos;s terrible .
what happens is that we could do that .
well , i understand that . i &apos;m doing that .
because anybody here are masern ?
did one in the audience ever die of a person &apos;s audience ?
it doesn &apos;t happen very often .
in this country , not , but it &apos;s always the 160.000 time in the world for the last year .
this is a lot of death through masern , 20 per hour .
but because this is not happening here , we can put it in , and people like jenny mccarthy can walk around and botschaften and analphabetismus of platforms like the name and larry king live live .
and you can do that because they connect the cause and correlation .
they don &apos;t understand that these things seem to be equal , but almost never the same thing .
and this is something we need to learn , and it &apos;s very fast .
this guy was a hero , jonas salk .
he befreite us from one of the worst &apos;s worst of humanity .
no fear , no qualen , kinderlähmung , puff .
the guy in the middle doesn &apos;t really like that .
he &apos;s called paul offit .
he &apos;s just developed a rotavirus-impfstoff with a couple of other people .
it can save the lives of 400- , five children per year in the developing world .
pretty good , isn &apos;t it ?
well , this is good , except for paul , and the way paul is talking and talk about vaccines , and says that people should just stop jammern .
and that &apos;s what he actually says .
so paul is a terrorist .
if paul talks in a public school , he can &apos;t tell the bewaffnete wächter .
he gets calls at home because people like to tell him that they know where his children are going to school .
and why ? because paul did a vaccine .
i don &apos;t need to say that , but vaccines are essential .
and then you take them on , and the diseases go back , terrible diseases , and that &apos;s happening .
we now have a masern in this country .
and that &apos;s going to get worse , and pretty soon , children will die of it , because that &apos;s just one question of numbers .
and they &apos;re not only going to die of them .
what about kinderlähmung ? let &apos;s take that . why not ?
a kommilitonin of mine wrote me a couple of weeks ago , and i said i &apos;m a little bit of schrill .
nobody ever said before .
she wouldn &apos;t get her child to impfen against kinderlähmung . no way .
fine .
why ? because we don &apos;t have a kinderlähmung . and you know what ?
we had no kinderlähmung in this country yesterday .
today , i don &apos;t know , maybe tomorrow would have gone in lagos in a plane and he &apos;s just going to los angeles , at the moment , is about ohio .
and in a few hours , he goes to a car , and he comes to long beach , and he &apos;s going to visit one of these fantastichen ted-dinner tonight .
and he doesn &apos;t know that he &apos;s infected with a lähmenden disease , and we don &apos;t know that , because the world works .
this is the planet that we live in . don &apos;t pretend to be that it &apos;s not .
we love to lie in lying . we love that .
have you all in this morning , take all your vitamine ?
echinacea , a little antioxidantium that helps you to go .
i know they &apos;ve done that because half of americans make it every day .
they take the stuff , and they take alternative cure , and it doesn &apos;t make any difference , how often we find out that they &apos;re useless .
the data is all the time .
they &apos;re making their urine . more they almost never do .
that &apos;s okay , you like to pay 28 billion dollars for dark in the dark .
i &apos;m going to be very happy .
dark urine . dark .
why do we do that ? why do we make it ?
well , i think i understand -- we hate the pharmaindustrie industry .
we hate a strong government . we don &apos;t have trust in the system .
and we shouldn &apos;t . our healthcare system is our mies .
it &apos;s cruel to millions of people .
it &apos;s absolutely amazing cold and seelentötend ourselves that can afford .
so we &apos;re going to go ahead , and where are we going ?
we &apos;re walking into the poor of the placebo-industrie .
this is great . i love the placebo-industrie .
but you know , this is really a serious issue because this stuff is crap , and we &apos;re spending billions of dollars .
and i have all kinds of little requisiten here .
none of these -- gingko , betrug , echinacea , betrug , i don &apos;t even know what that is , but we &apos;re spending billions of dollars in it , it &apos;s betrug .
and you know what ? if i say that , people will say to me and say , &quot; what do you care about ? let &apos;s do the people what you want .
that &apos;s how they feel good . &quot;
and you know what ? they &apos;re wrong .
because it doesn &apos;t matter if it &apos;s the gesundheitsminister , who says , &quot; hmm , i &apos;m going to take the evidence of my experts on mammography , &quot; or any irgendein krebs-quacksalber who wants to treat his patients with kaffe-einläufen .
if you &apos;re going to go on this path , where believe and magic is belege , they can get to a place where they don &apos;t want to be .
they get to thabo mbeki in south africa .
he brought 400,000 to these people because he was that red beete , knoblauch and zitronenöl are much more effective than antiretroviral drugs , which we know can &apos;t stop the course of aids .
hundreds of thousands of unnötiger deaths in a country , worse than any other one of these disease .
don &apos;t tell me that these things don &apos;t have consequences .
they have them . they always have them .
well , the hirnloseste epidemic that we &apos;re in is this absurde struggle between the befürwortern gentechnisch foods and the bio-elite .
this is a idiotische debate . it has to stop .
it &apos;s a debate about words , about metaphor .
that &apos;s ideology , not science .
all we eat , every reiskorn , every branch , every branch , was changing by the people .
you know , there was no mandarinen in the garden .
there was no cantaloupe-melonen .
there was no weihnachtsbäume . we did this .
we &apos;ve done it over the last year .
and some of it has worked and it &apos;s not .
we &apos;re losgeworden , which doesn &apos;t work .
now we can make it more , and of course , there &apos;s risks . but we can do something like vitamin a a in rice , and that stuff can help millions of people , millions of people , to increase their lives .
they don &apos;t want to do that ?
i have to say , i don &apos;t understand .
we &apos;re going to be lehnen , gentechnisch food .
why do we do that ?
now , what i &apos;m always hearing is : lots of chemicals , pesticides , hormones , monokultur , we don &apos;t want to have a huge fields of one thing , that &apos;s wrong .
we don &apos;t want to patent companies .
we don &apos;t want to have companies own seeds .
and you know , what my answer to all that ?
yes , they &apos;re right . we fix that .
it &apos;s true , we have a huge amount of nahrungsproblem , but that &apos;s not science .
it has nothing to do with science .
it &apos;s right , morality , patentkram .
you know that science is not a company .
it &apos;s not a country .
it &apos;s not even an idea ; it &apos;s a process .
it &apos;s a process , and sometimes it works and sometimes not work , but the idea that we should not allow science to do their work because we &apos;re afraid of a real dead end , and it holds millions of people from the aufblühen .
you know , in the next 50 years , we will have 70 percent more food than right now than the moment . 70 percent .
this investment in africa for the last 30 years .
shame . shame .
you need this , and we don &apos;t give them .
and why ? what was a gentechnisch changed .
we don &apos;t want to encourage people to eat this verrottete stuff like maniok .
it &apos;s something that &apos;s a half billion people .
it &apos;s like a kartoffel .
it &apos;s just a bündel of calories . it &apos;s mies .
it has no nutrients , it doesn &apos;t have a protein , and scientists are building all this in it .
and then people could eat it and wouldn &apos;t be blind .
they wouldn &apos;t starvation , and you know what ?
that would be nice . it wouldn &apos;t be chez , but it would be nice .
and all i can say is : why do we fight ?
i mean , ask ourselves : why do we fight ?
because we don &apos;t want genes to do ?
it &apos;s not about genes . it &apos;s not about chemicals .
it &apos;s not about our ridiculous passion for hormones , our beharren for larger food , better food , food food .
it &apos;s not about rice krispies , it &apos;s about getting people alive , and it &apos;s going to be highest time to understand what that means .
because you know what ?
if we don &apos;t do that , if we &apos;re going to do so far , we &apos;re guilty about something that we do , i think , is not guilty of the most , high-tech kolonialismus .
there &apos;s no other description for what &apos;s happening here .
it &apos;s selfish , it &apos;s ugly , it &apos;s not worthy , and we need to be really out of that .
so , after this incredible funny conversation you might say , &quot; do you want to go and go in that ridiculous machine time and go into the future ? &quot;
anyway , i want to . i want to .
at the moment , you are in the present , but we have an incredible opportunity .
we can put this machine machine on all of what we want .
we can hinbewegen them where we want them to go , and we will move them where we want .
we have to take these conversations , and we need to think , but if we go into the machine machine and go into the future , we &apos;re going to be happy to have this done .
i know we can , and as far as it is in my case , this is something that the world needs now .
thank you .
thank you .
for some time , i &apos;m interested in the placebo-effekt , and it might seem strange that a magician was interested in this , because they look at it as i think , as i was , as i was , as a delusion that will be real , if someone else believes enough . &quot;
in other words , zuckerpillen have shown a very messbare effect , and it &apos;s only because the person thinks what &apos;s happening with their happens , whether a pharmazeutische or a kind of ... in the schmerzmanagement , for example , if the patient thinks only enough to believe , a messbare effect in the body that you call the placebo-effekt .
a deception is being real real , because somebody knows it .
so we also want to understand each other , i want to show you a basic , simple magic trick .
and i &apos;m going to show you how it works . this is a trick that &apos;s at least since the 1950s for the 1950s in every single child .
i even learned him from the cub scout magic of the pfadfinder .
i &apos;ll take it for you and then explain it .
and then i &apos;ll explain why i explain it .
so , look what happens .
the knife you can investigate , my hand you can look at .
i &apos;m just going to hold the knife in my hand .
i &apos;m going to push my back .
and to make sure that nothing disappears in my life or comes out of it , i just will just put my wrist right here .
you can see that there &apos;s no time going to move anything , as long as i &apos;m here , nothing in my ärmel or going out .
and the goal is just to do it .
i &apos;m going to open my hand , and hopefully if everything goes , the knife will hold durch by my bloßen .
it &apos;s actually stuck in its place that i can shake it without the knife to fall .
nothing goes in my ärmel or comes out , no trickserei . and you can study anything .
ta-da !
now , this is a trick that i often beibringe little kids that are interested in magic , because you can learn a lot about deception when you look closely , even though it &apos;s a very simple trick .
probably many of you are familiar with this trick .
it works that way .
i hold the knife in my hand .
i say that i umschließe my wrist to make sure that nothing in my life is going to be disappears or comes out , and that &apos;s a lie .
the reason i festhalte my wrist is that it is really the secret of the illusion .
and so , in the moment , where i wegdrehe my hand from you , so you &apos;re seeing them from the back , this finger , my zeigefinger , just from where he was , in a position that he &apos;s so ausgestreckt .
great trick ?
there &apos;s someone who &apos;s not a childhood .
so , it &apos;s here . right .
and when i umdrehe , the finger changes his position .
and now , you could talk about it , why you don &apos;t realize that there &apos;s only three fingers to see : because the mind and the way it &apos;s processed information , it doesn &apos;t matter , one , two , three , but you can see it as a group .
but that &apos;s actually not really about this . and then i open my hand .
of course , it &apos;s going to be festgehalten , but not by the magnetismus of my body , but by a trick , through my zeigefinger , which is now there .
and if i close my hand , the same thing happens by me , verborgen by this movement that the finger is zurückbewegt .
i take this hand away . and here &apos;s the knife .
this trick you can demonstrate your friends and neighbors . thank you .
now , what has this to do with the placebo-effekt ?
one year or something , i read a study that really had my own mind .
i &apos;m not a doctor or researchers , and that &apos;s why i was an amazing thing .
and it turns out that if you offer a placebo in a white pill , in the form of a aspirintablette , it &apos;s just a round white pill that has a certain amount of effect .
but if you &apos;re going to make the shape that you give it to the placebo , for example , to change the one smaller pill , and color those blue and shape a letter , it &apos;s actually measurable more effective .
and that , although none of these are pharmazeutische -- they &apos;re just zuckerpillen .
but a white pill is not as good as a blue pill .
what ? that really got me out .
it turns out that it &apos;s not all that it &apos;s .
if you take a little bit more powerful than any tabletten , it &apos;s more effective than any form .
a colored kapsel that &apos;s yellow at one end and the other red , is better than a white .
the dosierung is also a role .
a pill twice a day is not as good as three pills -- i can &apos;t remember the exact statistics . i &apos;m sorry .
the key thing is , ...
... that the dosierungen is also a role .
and the shape plays a role .
and if you want to take the ultimate placebo-effekt , you have to grab a needle .
right ? one syringe with a wirkungslosen -- a couple of milliliter of a wirkungslosen substance that you &apos;re going to be able to get into a patient .
it creates a very strong image in the head . that &apos;s a lot stronger than a white pill .
this chart is really -- i &apos;m going to show you another time when we have a projektor .
so the fact is that the white pill doesn &apos;t work as well as the blue pill that doesn &apos;t work as well as a kapsel that doesn &apos;t work as well as the needle .
and none of it has any really pharmazeutische property -- it &apos;s just our faith that makes a stronger effect .
i wanted to know if i could use this idea for a magic trick .
i suppose something that &apos;s obviously a deception , and let it look real .
we know from that study that you have to grab a needle when it &apos;s going to go to the thing .
this is a 18 inches of long hutnadel . it &apos;s very , very spitz . and i &apos;m going to start a little bit of a sterilisieren .
this is really my meat . it &apos;s not damians gezüchtetes meat .
this is my skin . this is not a special special thing .
i &apos;m going to stick that needle in my skin and go through it , until you &apos;re austritt on the other side .
if you &apos;re going to get worse -- if you fall off the ohnmacht -- i have shown that a couple of friends last night in the hotel room , and some people i didn &apos;t know , and i &apos;ve become a woman almost ohnmächtig .
so i propose , if you &apos;re going to get off quickly , you &apos;ll look for the next 30 seconds , or you know what , i &apos;m going to make the first one hand in the back .
you can see it right , but you can also wegsehen if you want .
so , it &apos;s like this , right here , where my meat is , on the bottom of my arm , i &apos;m just going to make a little einstich .
i &apos;m really sorry . does it crazy ?
and just a little bit of my skin and on the other side , it &apos;s coming back .
now we &apos;re actually in the same context that we had in the messertrick .
about .
but now you can &apos;t count my fingers ?
so i &apos;m going to show you . that &apos;s one , two , three , five , five .
now , you know .
i know what people think when you see that .
they say , &quot; okay , it &apos;s not so stupid and durchsticht itself , just to talk a couple of minutes . &quot;
well , i &apos;ll show you .
what does this look like ? pretty good .
yeah , i know .
and the people behind the back , &quot; okay . i didn &apos;t really see that . &quot;
people in the nebenräumen are coming in .
let me show you from nearby .
this is really my skin . this is not a special special thing .
that &apos;s my meat , and i can herumdrehen the herumdrehen .
sorry . if you &apos;re going to go off , look away , don &apos;t look .
the people at the back , or the people who later see the video later , say , &quot; well , this looks pretty impressive , but if it &apos;s real , he would -- look , here &apos;s a hole and there , if it really was really , would be bluten . &quot;
okay , let me herausquetschen a little bit of blood .
yes , here &apos;s it .
normally i would take the needle now .
i would clean my arm and show you that there are no wunden .
but i think that &apos;s in this framework and with the intention of being a deception , i &apos;m going to just let the needle just go and go on the stage .
we &apos;re going to meet a couple of times in the next few days .
i hope you &apos;ll enjoy it . thank you .
everybody &apos;s talking today about happiness .
i have some people who are counting the number of books that were published with &quot; happiness &quot; in the title of the last five years , and they gave them about 40 , and there were a lot more .
there &apos;s a tremendous wave of interest in happiness among researchers .
there &apos;s a lot of glücks-coaching .
everybody would like to make people happier .
but despite all these tide of work , there are several cognitive fallen that are almost impossible to think about happiness .
and my talk today is mostly about these cognitive fallen .
and that &apos;s true of laien , who think about their own happiness , and it &apos;s true for scientists who think about happiness because it turns out that we &apos;re as mess as any other .
the first one of these , is a widerstreben , complexity .
it turns out that the word happiness is simply not useful word because we apply it to many different things .
i think there &apos;s a certain meaning that we could just limit it , but in the big and whole , this is something we need to be aufgeben , and we will take the complicated view of what well-being is .
the second case is a verwechslung of experience and memory : essentially , you &apos;re between happy in your life and happy about your life or happy with your life .
and these are two very different concepts , and they &apos;re both zusammengeworfen in the notion of happiness .
and the third is the konzentrations-illusion , and that &apos;s the unfortunate fact that we can &apos;t think about a fact that affects well-being without the meaning of its meaning .
i mean , this is a real cognitive case .
there &apos;s no way to get it right .
now i would like to start with one example , who had a frage-und-antwort-sitzung one , after one of my lectures , who was reported a story . &#91; unclear &#93; he said he had heard a symphony , and it was absolutely wonderful music , and at the end of the recording was a fürchterliches kreischendes sound .
and then he added , really , really , really , really emotional , that &apos;s ruined all the experience .
but it didn &apos;t have it .
what it ruined was the memories of the experience .
he had had the experience .
he had had 20 minutes of herrlicher music .
they don &apos;t count because he was a memory of memory ; memory was ruined , and memory was all he had for keeping .
what really tells us that we think about ourselves and other people might think about two kinds of self .
there &apos;s a erlebendes self that lives in the present and knows the present , capable of experience the past , but it &apos;s basically just the present .
it &apos;s the erlebende self , the doctor &apos;s doctor -- you know , when the doctor asks , &quot; does it hurt if i &apos;m here ? &quot;
and then there &apos;s a erinnerndes self , and the erinnernde itself is that , the mitzählt and the history of our life , and it &apos;s one that is dasjenige to the doctor by asking the question , &quot; how did you feel about the last time ? &quot;
or , &quot; how did your journey to be a albanien ? &quot; or something like that .
these are two very different units , the erlebende itself and the erinnernde itself , and the two to be verwechseln is part of the durcheinanders of happiness .
now , the erinnernde itself is a storyteller .
and this really starts with a basic reaction to our memories -- it starts instantly .
we &apos;re not just telling stories when we &apos;re doing stories .
our memory tells us stories , which means what we &apos;re allowed to keep from our erlebnissen is a story .
and let &apos;s start with an example .
there &apos;s an old study .
these are real patients who are doing a painful procedure .
i &apos;m not going to go into details . it &apos;s not a little bit painful today , but it was painful when this study was done in the 1990s .
they were asked to report a 60 of their pain .
and here are two patients . they &apos;re their records .
and they &apos;re asked , &quot; who , who has suffered more ? &quot;
and this is a very simple question .
patient b has clearly suffered more . his darmspiegelung was longer , and every minute of pain , the patient had patient b , and more .
but now there &apos;s a different question , &quot; how did these patients think they were suffering ? &quot;
and here &apos;s a surprise .
and the surprise is that patient a much worse erinnrung in the darmspiegelung had a patient to say , &quot; the patient . &quot;
the stories of the darmspiegelungen were different , and because a very important part of the story is how it ends up .
and none of these stories is very erbaulich or great -- but one of them is that clear .
but one of them is clear worse than the other .
and the worse , the worse , was the way that the pain was at the end of the peak , it &apos;s a bad story .
how do we know that ?
because we asked these people after their darmspiegelung , and also much later , &quot; how bad was the whole thing all about this ? &quot;
and she was much worse for a to a b in the erinnrung .
now , this is a direct conflict between the erlebenden itself and the erinnernden itself .
from the point of erlebenden , b is clearly a bad time .
now , what you could do with the patient , and we actually did clinical experiments , and it &apos;s been done , and it works , you could actually verlängern the darmspiegelung of the patient in a way that you just put it in the tube without too much .
that will lead the patient &apos;s suffering , but only a little bit less than before .
and if you do that for a few minutes , you have a sense of the erlebende self of the patient &apos;s schlechter , and you have a sense of the erinnernde self of the patient &apos;s own , a much better story about your experience .
what is a story of what is a story ?
and that &apos;s true of the stories that provides memory and it &apos;s true for the stories that we invent .
and what a story is , is a umbrüche , significant moments and end .
end up are very , very important , and in this case , dominierte .
now the erlebende itself lives lives on the whole .
it has moments of the erlebens , one after the other .
and you ask : what happens to these moments ?
and the answer is really simple . they &apos;re always lost .
i mean , most of our lives -- and i have the idea of -- you know , the psychological present is true as about three seconds , which means , in a life , there &apos;s about 600 million of them , in a month , there &apos;s about 600,000 . most of them don &apos;t leave any trace .
most of you are completely ignored by the erinnernden itself .
and yet , you get the idea that you should count that what &apos;s happening in these moments of the erlebens is our lives .
it &apos;s the limited resource that we use while we &apos;re in the world .
and as we consume them , it &apos;s important to be important , but that &apos;s not the story that behält itself for us .
so we have the erinnernde itself and the erlebende itself , and they &apos;re really quite different .
the biggest difference between them is the deal of time .
from the sicht of the erlebenden itself , if you have a holiday and the second week is just as good as the first one , the zweiwöchige vacation is twice as good as the einwöchige vacation .
this is not how it works for the erinnernde itself .
for the erinnernde itself , a zweiwöchiger vacation is not much better than the einwöchige vacation , because there &apos;s no new memories .
they didn &apos;t change the story .
and in this way , time is the critical variable that is different from a erinnerndes self itself , and time has very little influence on this story .
now , the erinnernde itself makes more than to remember and tell stories .
it &apos;s actually that that make decisions , because if you have a patient , you have two darmspiegelungen at two different surgeons and decide which to choose , then the one who has memory that &apos;s less bad , and that &apos;s the surgeon who will be chosen .
the erlebende itself has no voice in this choice .
we actually don &apos;t choose between what we &apos;re going to choose . we choose between memories of experiences .
and even if we think about the future , we don &apos;t usually think about our future as a experiences .
we think about our future , after a vorausgesehene memories .
and basically you can look at this , you know , as a tyrannei of the erinnernden itself , and you can think of the erinnernde itself as one , which sort of schleppt the erlebende itself of experiences that doesn &apos;t need the erlebende itself .
i have the impression that if we make a holiday , that &apos;s very often , the case , that means we &apos;re doing a holiday on the service of the erinnernden itself .
and that &apos;s a little bit hard to justify , i think .
i mean , how much do we get from our memories ?
this is one of the explanations that is given to the dominance of the erinnernden itself .
and when i think about it , i think about a holiday that we did a couple of years ago in antarctica , which was clearly the best vacation i &apos;d ever had , and i think relatively often in the relationship of how often i think about other things .
and i probably have my memories of this dreiwöchige journey , i would say about 25 minutes in the last four years .
now , if i had opened the file with the 600 images that i &apos;d spent an hour .
now , this is three weeks , and that &apos;s a eineinhalb and a half hours .
there seems to be a unstimmigkeit .
well , i might be a little extreme , you know , like little appetite , i have to go on the zehren of memories , but even if you make more of it , there &apos;s a real question . why do we give memories that much weight on the weight of the weight we &apos;re doing ?
so i want you to think about a thought thought thought .
imagine your next holiday you know , at the end of the urlaubs , all of your images are going to be vernichtet , and you get a amnestisches drug that you will remember nothing .
well would you choose the same vacation ?
and if you would choose a different holiday , there &apos;s a conflict between the two ways of self and you have to think about how you decide that conflict , and it &apos;s really not obvious at all , because if you think of the sense of time , you get an answer . and if you think of your mind , you might get a different answer .
why we pick the urlaube we choose is a problem that we have with a choice between the two types of self .
now , the two ways of self is actually two words from happiness .
there are actually two concepts of happiness that we can use , one per self .
so you can ask , how happy is the erlebende ?
and then you would ask , how happy are the moments of the life of the erlebenden itself ?
and they &apos;re all -- happiness for moments is a fairly complicated process .
what are the emotions that are being measured ?
and by the way , we &apos;re able to be able to get a pretty good idea of the happiness of the erlebenden itself over time .
if you &apos;re asking the happiness of the erinnernden self , it &apos;s a very different thing .
it &apos;s not about how happy a person lives .
it &apos;s about how happy or happy person is when this person thinks about their lives .
very different term .
everybody who doesn &apos;t really different these terms is not different from the happiness of happiness , and i &apos;m one of the most researchers about well-being that have been in the study of happiness long as long as that kind of art. .
the distinction between happiness itself and happiness of the erinnernden itself has been recognized in the last few years , and now you &apos;re trying to get to measure the two of these two .
the world organization has a worldwide survey where more than half a million people have been asked about what they think about their lives and their experience . and there were other efforts in the direction .
so , in the last few years , we started learning about happiness in both ways .
and the main lesson we think we &apos;ve learned is that they are really different .
you can know how happy someone is with your life , and that doesn &apos;t really teach you how happy he lives and vice versa .
just to give you a sense of correlation , correlation is about .5 .
what that means is that if you &apos;re going to meet someone and you would say , oh , his father is a zwei-meter-mann , how much would you know about his size ?
well , you would know something about its size , but there &apos;s a lot of uncertainty .
they have so much uncertainty .
if i tell you that someone is as eight at a scale of 10 , they have a lot of uncertainty about how happy he is with his erlebenden self .
so correlation is low .
we know something about what &apos;s the happiness of the happiness .
we know that money is very important , goals are very important .
we know that happiness is mostly being satisfied with people we like to spend time with people we like .
there are other pleasure , but that &apos;s a lot of great .
so if you &apos;re lucky enough to maximize the two types of self , you will be doing very different things at the end .
the conclusion that i &apos;ve said here is that we &apos;re really not supposed to think of happiness than a ersatz for well-being .
it &apos;s a completely different term .
well , very briefly , another reason we can &apos;t think about happiness is that we don &apos;t pay attention to the same things when we think about life and we actually live .
so if you ask the simple question , how happy people are in california , they &apos;re not going to get the correct answer .
if you ask this question , you think that people in california have to be happier if you , say , in ohio .
and what happens is that if you think about life in california , you think about the difference between california and other places , and that difference is , we say , in the climate .
well , it turns out that climate is not very important for the erlebende self , and it &apos;s not even very important for the nachdenkliche self , which is deciding how happy people are .
but now , because the nachdenkliche itself is responsible , you can end up -- some people could go at the end of california .
and it &apos;s kind of interesting to track what happens to people who are moved to california to hope , happier .
now , your erlebendes self will not be happier .
we know that .
but one thing will happen . you think they &apos;re happier , because if you think about it , you &apos;ll remember how terrible the weather is in ohio , and you will feel that you &apos;ve made the right decision .
it &apos;s very difficult to think about well-being , and i hope i &apos;ve given you a sense of how hard it is .
thank you .
thank you . i have a question .
thank you .
now , when we were talking about a couple of weeks ago , they told me that there was a pretty interesting result that came out of this particular survey .
is this something that you can share with us , because you have a couple of minutes left ?
daniel kahneman : sure .
i think the most interesting thing we found in the most recent survey is a number we didn &apos;t think about .
we found that in terms of happiness , the happiness itself .
when we looked at how feelings vary with income .
and it turns out that under a income of 60,000 dollars a year , for americans , and this is a very large stichprobe of americans , about 600,000 , but it &apos;s a big representative of stichprobe , under a income of 15,000 dollars in the year .
60,000 .
dk : 60,000 .
60,000 dollars a year are unhappy , and they &apos;re getting more less likely to get the poorer they are .
we get a completely flat line .
i mean , i rarely seen so flat lines .
what happens is obviously that money doesn &apos;t have a erlebnis-glück , but lack of money is a very miserable , and we can measure that misery very , very clear .
in the sense of the other self , the erinnernden itself , you get a different story .
the more money you make the more you make .
it &apos;s not true for emotion .
but danny , in the entire american effort , it &apos;s about life , freedom , the pursuit of happiness .
if people were taking this befund seriously , i mean , it seems to be all the head , all we believe in terms of steuerpolitik and so on .
is there a chance that politicians that the country is generally taking a befund , like serious , and make it based on politics ?
dk : you know , i think there are recognition for the role of the glücksforschung in politics .
the recognition will be slow in the united states , no question , but in the united kingdom , you just happen , and in other countries , you &apos;re just going .
people are aware that they should think happiness should be thinking when they think about politics .
it &apos;s going to take a while , and people will argue whether they want to explore erlebnis-glück or want to explore lebens-bewertung , so we need to lead this discussion pretty soon .
as you can increase happiness , you can get very different , how you think and whether you think about the erinnernde yourself or whether you think about the erlebende itself .
it &apos;s going to affect politics , i think , in the next few years .
in the united states , you &apos;re strengt to measure the erlebnis-glück of the population .
that &apos;s going to be , i think , in the next one or two decades , some of the national statistics .
well , it seems to me , it &apos;s going to be , or should be at least the most exciting political debate to be about the next few years .
thank you for the invention of economics .
thank you , danny kahneman .
i &apos;m jane mcgonigal . i design video games .
i &apos;ve been building online-spiele for 10 years now , and my goal for the next decade is to make it easy to save the world in reality , as you &apos;re going to save in online-spielen .
i have a plan for this . i want to convince more people , including all of them , to spend more time with playing and play games .
we &apos;re currently spending three billion hours a week with online-spielen .
some of you might think , &quot; this is a whole bunch of time for games . &quot;
maybe something too much time when you think about how many problems we have in the real world of solving .
actually , my research at the institute of the future , i think , is exactly the opposite .
three billion hours a week are not nearly enough to solve the most important problems of the world .
in fact , i &apos;m convinced that if we want to survive the next century on this planet , we need to increase those times dramatically .
i calculated that the needed time to have a 21 amount of time is a week .
this is probably something that &apos;s going to happen to be something , so i can &apos;t do it , if we &apos;re problems with problems like hunger , poverty , climate change , global conflict and obesity , i think we need to try to play games online for at least 21 billion hours a week to end up to the end of the next decade .
no , i &apos;m really serious .
why ? this picture is pretty exactly why i think games are so vital for survival of human species in the future . seriously .
this is a porträt of the photographer phil toledano .
he wanted to capture the feelings of play . so he &apos;s got a camera on the players .
this is one of the classical terms of the play .
if you &apos;re not a player , maybe some of the most likely are in this picture .
you &apos;re probably seeing this sense of urgency , something fear , but also , very äußerste , really , to solve a really difficult problem .
if you &apos;re also playing , you &apos;ll see some of the nuancen eyes , the oben eyes and the mouth are a sign of optimism . the augenbrauen are surprising .
this is a player who &apos;s on the edge of something called epischen .
oh , you know this . ok . so , we &apos;re here some players .
a epischer victory is a result that is so very positive that you didn &apos;t know that it was possible at all .
it was almost beyond imagination .
and when you get it , you &apos;re shocked that you actually are capable of something . that &apos;s a epischer victory .
this player is a very short victory of a epischen victory .
and this is what we have to see at millions of faces of problemlösern all over the world when we take the barriers of the next century , and the face of the face of all the widrigkeiten are on the edge of a epischen sieges .
well , unfortunately , we &apos;re more likely to see this face in real life , when we face difficult problems .
i call it a bad thing in life , and it &apos;s actually my face , look ? yes . ok .
i &apos;m like i &apos;m in life , i &apos;m bad at -gesicht .
this is a graffiti in my former home of berkeley , california , where i was studying in my ph.d. , why we &apos;re better in games than in real life .
this is a problem that many players have .
we think that we &apos;re not as good at reality as in games .
and i don &apos;t just mean less successful , even though that &apos;s what it &apos;s about .
we &apos;re reaching in spielwelten anymore . i mean good at the context of motivation , doing something more bedeutsames , inspired to collaboration .
when we &apos;re in a spielwelt , i think many of us are turning into our best version , any time , and immediately , are going to try to solve the problem , as long as necessary , to try it again .
and in reality , if we fail , when we hit obstacles , we &apos;re often feeling different .
we feel overwhelmed . we feel ourselves . we feel threatened , perhaps depressed , frustrated or zynisch .
we never have these feelings when we play games , they don &apos;t just have them .
and that &apos;s what i wanted to study as a student .
why is it impossible to think , you could not just reach everything ?
how can we transmit these feelings from playing in the reality ?
so i looked at games like world of warcraft that offers the ideal environment to the collective problem problem .
and i &apos;ve found some things that are going to make the most powerful way in online-welten that are possible .
so first , when you get in one of these online-spiele , especially in the world of warcraft , there are a lot of different characters that are willing to be willing to be a weltrettende mission , and it immediately .
but not just any mission , but a mission that fits perfect at your current level in the game , right ?
so they can do that .
you never get a task you can &apos;t solve .
but always on the edge of their capabilities , so they have to be , but there are no unemployment in the world of warcraft .
you don &apos;t sit around , and you &apos;re doing däumchen . there &apos;s always a very important thing to do .
and there are plenty of employees .
where you go , hundreds of thousands of people who work with them to finish their mission mission .
we don &apos;t have that in real life , that feeling that there &apos;s a fingerschnipsen lot of people ready to stand up .
and also , there &apos;s this story of this , this inspiring story , why we are there and what we have to do .
then we get this whole positive feedback .
they have a bestimmt &quot; level of the strength &quot; or &quot; + 1 intelligence . &quot;
this constant feedback is not true in real life .
when i &apos;m going to leave this stage , i don &apos;t have to talk to the + , and i think about a crazy idea , + idee idea .
i &apos;m not getting this feedback in real life .
so the problem of kooperations-online-welten like world of warcraft is that it &apos;s so befriedigend , at the edge of a epischen sieges , that we prefer to spend our entire time in these spielwelten .
they &apos;re just better than reality .
and today , all the world of warcraft-spieler has spent 5,93 million years to solve the virtual problems of azeroth .
it &apos;s not necessarily a bad thing .
it might sound übel .
but to see it in context , 5,93 million years ago , our first primatenvorfahren started to walk .
so the first aufrechte primate .
okay , so if we talk about how much time we spend on playing with games , it &apos;s just meaning to make sense when you &apos;re having time in terms of human development in the scale of human development , which is extraordinary .
but also , it &apos;s appropriate , because it turns out that we &apos;re using all this time on play , actually , to change the way we &apos;re in the position .
we &apos;re developing at collaborative thinking , herzlichen .
that &apos;s the truth . i think it &apos;s a bit of that .
and look at this interesting statistics , who recently was published by a researcher at carnegie mellon university , the average boy , who are now verbringt in a country with a huge spielkultur verbringt in a country with online-spielen , with online-spielen to the 21st .
so , 10,000 hours is a very interesting number , for two reasons .
first , for kids in the united states , 10.080 hours are the exact gesamtzeit of the exact gesamtzeit that they spend in school , by five grade to graduate school , if you never miss .
so we have a full parallelbildungsweg of the young people , and the young people are just learning , which means to be a good player , like everything they learn in school .
and perhaps some of you have the new book from malcolm gladwell , &quot; überflieger . &quot;
so you know his theory of success , the theory of the success of 10,000 hours .
it &apos;s based on the great research of the kognitivwissenschaft that , if we spend 10,000 hours of a degree of mühsamen to the 21st of the 21st , we will be at least in master .
we &apos;re going to be so good at what the most significant people in the world are doing .
so what we have here is a full generation of young people who are meister-spieler .
so the big question is , &quot; what are the players meisterhaft good ? &quot;
because if we could find that , we &apos;d never have any kind of gewesenes human potential .
so many people in the world right now , we spend at least one hour per day with online-spielen .
these are our meister-spieler . 500 million people who are extraordinarily good in &quot; something . &quot;
and over the next decade we have another billion player that are extraordinary in whatever .
if you haven &apos;t heard it yet .
the spieleindustrie developed konsolen , saving energy and work on mobilfunknetzen , instead of breitband-internet , so that player around the world , in india , china , brazil , brazil .
you expect an extra billion player over the next decade .
so we have a total billion player .
so i started thinking about what it is , what these games are to make us .
here are the four things i found . first of all , dringlichkeits-optimismus .
ok , imagine that what extreme selbstmotivierung .
dringlichkeits-optimismus is the desire to do something , immediately to make a hürde , along with the belief that we have a begründete hope for success .
and always , always believe that a epischer victory is possible , and that it &apos;s always worth trying to try and it &apos;s a moment .
you &apos;re not sitting around .
player are masters in the spiders poet of social nets .
there &apos;s a lot of interesting research that we have to show that we like people , after we &apos;ve been playing with them , even if they beat us off .
the reason it is that there is a lot of trust to play with someone .
we trust that someone has to spend on us that the rules are going to be eingehalten that we &apos;re going to have the same goal and remain the same thing .
so the zusammenspielen enables the growing of the bindungen , trust and one .
and as a result , we &apos;re building stronger social relations .
glückselige productivity . fantastic !
you know , there &apos;s one reason why the durchschnitts-word of warcraft-spieler plays 22 hours a week , as a teilzeitjob .
the reason is that if we &apos;re playing , we &apos;re actually happier to work hard than if we can relax or nothing .
we know that we are as human beings , we work , when we do hard , significant work .
and player are always willing to work hard if they get the right task .
and ultimately , it &apos;s a epische meaning .
player love to be part of the awe of gebietender missionen &apos;s missionen .
this is a hintergrundinformation that &apos;s back to the right light , and you &apos;re all known to all wikipedia , the greatest wiki of the world .
the second world &apos;s second , 80.000 einträgen is the world of warcraft .
five million people use it every month .
they &apos;ve been zusammengetragen more information about world of warcraft in the internet than any other subject in every other world &apos;s worth of the world .
they &apos;re creating a epische story .
they &apos;re creating an epische source of knowledge of the world of warcraft .
ok , so , these are four clips that lead to a single outcome . players are super-mächtige , hopeful individuals .
it &apos;s people who believe that they can change the world as a single .
and the only problem is you think you can change the virtual worlds , but not the real .
that &apos;s the problem i &apos;m trying to solve .
edward castronova is a volkswissenschaftler .
his work is great . he studied why people spend so much time , energy and money in online-welten .
and he says , &quot; we &apos;re going to be a zeugen of not less than a massenemigration in virtual worlds and online-spielumgebungen . &quot;
and this is an economist . so it &apos;s logical .
and he says ...
not as i -- i &apos;m playing games , i &apos;m a little bit more .
so he says that actually makes sense , because player can reach in more than to the real life .
they can make stronger social ties than real life , and they get more feedback and reward reward than in real life .
so he says it &apos;s currently totally logical that player are actually spending more time in the virtual world than real .
i just agree with it , that &apos;s logical .
but it definitely is not a optimalsituation .
we need to start to turn the real world into a game .
my inspiration comes from an event that 2.500 years .
there are these ancient cube , from schafsknöcheln . you know ?
in front of these amazing spielecontrollern , there were schafsknöchel .
and that was sort of the first of people developed spielgeräte .
and if you &apos;re familiar with the old greek greek historikers herodotus , you may know this story . the story about how and why games are invented .
according to herodotus , games were games , a more genauer würfelspiele , in the kingdom of lydien during a famine .
they were supposed to be such great famine that the king of lydien decided to become a crazy idea .
people were suffering . people fought .
it was an extreme situation . you needed an extreme solution .
so they invented , according to herodotus , the würfelspiel and vereinbarten a national strategy . they would eat a day . the next day you would play .
and they would be so much in the würfelspiel , because games are so fascinating and the uns of us with befriedigender , glückseliger productivity , that they would forget that there was nothing to eat .
and then the next day you would play , and the next day you would eat .
and according to herodotus , they were going to survive that for 18 years by eating one day and played the next day .
so , i think we &apos;re playing games today .
we &apos;re playing games to get out of the suffering of the real world .
we &apos;re going to play games to avoid everything that doesn &apos;t work in the real world , everything that &apos;s not really is really about happiness , and we &apos;re getting what we need from play .
but it doesn &apos;t have to be the end .
this is the exciting thing .
according to 18 years , the famine was not better after 18 years , so the king , a last würfelspiel anzusetzen .
they shared the kingdom in two .
they played a würfelspiel and the sieger was allowed to be aufbrechen to a epischen adventure .
they went out and went to the search for a new home , and they just had so many people to go back to the way that food was alive and looked for the rest of an area where they could flourish .
this sounds crazy , or is it ?
but what &apos;s latest dna-beweise is that the etrusker that comes up with the very römische empire , the same dna as the old lydier .
so scientists , recently , came to the notion that herodotus &apos;s &quot; crazy story actually true . &quot;
and geologists found evidence of a global abkühlung , which took almost 20 years to explain the famine .
so this crazy story could be true .
you may have actually saved your people by playing games , by having a 18 of games for 18 years and then have these eingebung and so much about each other , that they were going to have saved the entire civilization .
so , we can .
we &apos;ve been playing in 1994 .
this was the first strategiespiel in real time of the world of warcraft-serie . that was 16 years ago .
they played for 18 years , we &apos;ve been playing in the world for 16 years .
i &apos;m saying we &apos;re ready for our own episches game .
so , they sent half of their civilization to find a new world , so i take my 21 billion spielstunden a week .
we should be übereinkommen that half of us spend an hour every day , until we &apos;ve solved the problems of the real world .
i know you &apos;re going to ask , &quot; how do we solve the world &apos;s real world ? &quot; and that question i &apos;ve been devoted to my work in the last few years at the institute of the future .
we have this banner in our office in palo , it &apos;s just drückt how we should understand the future .
we don &apos;t want to try to say the future before .
what we want to do is to create the future .
we want to introduce the best outcome , and then empower people to make this notion of the reality .
we &apos;re going to imagine the epische siege and giving people the opportunity to reach them .
i &apos;m going to show you a very short piece of games that i designed to try to get people to make the most powerful of the future in their own future .
this is &quot; the world without oil . &quot;
the game is from 2007 .
it &apos;s a online-spiel that you have to get through a ölknappheit .
the ölknappheit is invented , and we have enough online-inhalte to make it realistic , and then they &apos;re going to be able to live in real time , and then they get nachrichten-filme in real time , which is not how food affects is , like transport , whether there &apos;s a aufstände , and they need to figure out how to make their real life , if it
we tested this game with the 1.700 players in 2007 , and we &apos;ve been accompanied by the last three years since .
and i can tell you it was a change experience .
no one wants to change their lives because it &apos;s good for the environment or because we should .
but if you &apos;re in a epischen adventure , and i said , &quot; we &apos;re going to go from oil . &quot;
this is a fascinating adventure you can do .
find how they might survive . most of our players have beibehalten their habits .
so we have a bigger , more important goal than just ölknappheit .
we have the game &quot; superstruct &quot; at the institute of the future .
and the point of view is that the humans only have 23 years on the planet for 23 years .
this is a supercomputer called &quot; global aussterbungs- sensibilisierungs-system . &quot;
the call to player , to be , we almost have gestaltet the jerry-bruckheimer of -film .
you know jerry bruckheimer-filme , where there &apos;s the dream-team , you have the astronauts , the scientists , the ex-sträfling , and only together you can save the world .
but in our game , instead of just five people , we say , everyone &apos;s in the dream-team , and it &apos;s our job to create the future of energy , food , health , security and the future of social justice .
8,000 players played the game for eight weeks .
they found 500 incredibly incredible creative solutions that they can read when they &apos;re &quot; superstruct . &quot;
and the last game we take on the third march . it &apos;s a game that &apos;s been working with the world bank .
if you finish the game , you get from the world bank , the award from social umgestalter , in 2010 .
we &apos;re working with universities in the most sub-saharan africa and we &apos;re going to be able to learn a social umgestalten .
we have a comic book . we have &quot; level level &quot; for regionales , wissensvernetzung , sustainability , vision and ingenuity .
i &apos;d like to invite you all of the game with young people all over the world , all in the world , especially in entwicklungsgebieten , to imagine their own social enterprise to save the world .
i &apos;ll end up to the end .
i want to ask you .
what do you think , what &apos;s going on ?
we have all these fantastic players , we have games that show us what we can do , but we haven &apos;t yet saved the world .
well , i hope that you agree with me that player are human resources that we can use in real life , and that games have a big meaning for change .
we have all these superkräfte , glückselige productivity , the ability to connect close social networks , dringlichkeits-optimismus and the desire for epischer meaning .
i really hope that we play together significant games to survive on this planet another century .
and i hope you &apos;ll be designing and play with me like this .
when i vorausschaue in the next decade , i &apos;m sure i &apos;m sure that we can create every single future , and that we can play all kinds of games .
so i say , let &apos;s start the weltverändernden games .
thank you .
i would like to tell you something that was a artikels wired for me a couple months ago .
i &apos;ve always griffbereit my synonym-wörterbuch , but i was done with the process of the process , and i realized that i &apos;d never been in my life , which is really what the word &quot; disability &quot; really means .
i &apos;ll read you the point .
&quot; behindert , &quot; adjektiv , hilflos , zerstört , verstümmelt , verstümmelt , verstümmelt , zugerichtet , lahm , abgetrennt , geschwächt , impotent , gelähmt , gelähmt , altersschwach , altersschwach , aus , erledigt , erledigt , kaputt , kaputt , siehe , and also verletzt .
antonyme : healthy , strong , powerful .
i had a list of a friend who read and i had to laugh , and i had to laugh , it was so ridiculous , but i just came up until &quot; zugerichtet , &quot; and i had to stop reading and first of all that überfallartigen wortflut and that with the verbundenden emotional shock .
of course , this was an ausgefranstes old synonym-wörterbuch , and i just thought that the issue has to be pretty old .
but in fact , it was a copy of the early &apos; 80s when i started with elementary school , and started building my sense of my own family building and forms , also , to other children and the rest of the world around me .
and god is thank i didn &apos;t use a synonym-wörterbuch .
i would take this point seriously , i was born in a world that would perceive as a person who could make life positive in a sense of life , but today i &apos;m going to have a chance of opportunity .
so i immediately had to ask the online-ausgabe of 2009 , and i expected to find a ansprechenderen .
here &apos;s the aktualisierte version of this eintrags .
it &apos;s not a lot better .
in particular , the last two words , i &apos;m going to do , is &quot; near antonyms &quot; &quot; and &quot; healthy . &quot;
but it &apos;s not just the words .
it &apos;s about what we think about people who are describing with these words .
it &apos;s about the values that are in these words , and how we construct these values .
our language affects our thinking and how we see the world and the people around us .
many more altertümliche societies , including the greeks and the römer , really believed that the aussprache of a fluchs has a great force because the aussprache can also be manifestieren .
so what do we actually want to manifestieren -- a person who &apos;s a disabled person or a powerful person ?
just to call a human being achtlos as a child , could be enough , einzuschränken them and vorstellungen them .
wouldn &apos;t it be nice to open up doors ?
a human being opened for me , my kinderarzt at the a.i. institute at wilmington was in delaware .
he &apos;s called dr. pizzutillo . a italo-amerikaner whose name you can think , most americans could not tell them , he was called dr. p. .
and dr. p. wore a very colorful flies and was just working for the work with kids .
i found the time i spent in this hospital , just great -- to my physiotherapie .
i had to repeat an einzelne übungen bändern bändern -- in different colors -- that &apos;s what you know about my bein-muskeln . and i have these tape hate more than anything . i hate them . i &apos;ve got them . i hate them .
and imagine i was actually verhandelt as a fünfjähriges child with dr. p. , and so trying to stop that practice , natürllich without success .
and one day , he &apos;s watching me at one of my practice -- these practices were just ermüdend and gnadenlos -- and he said to me , &quot; wow , aimee , you &apos;re so strong , powerful and young girls , you &apos;re going to be able to tear one one day .
and if you can make it , i &apos;ll give you a hundred dollars . &quot;
and this was just a simple trick by dr. p. , so i didn &apos;t want to do the practice that i didn &apos;t want to do , with the chance that the reichste girl girl could be in the second floor , but he actually made me to see my daily übungs-horror with new eyes , and so it became a new and an experience .
and i &apos;m asking myself to how much his vision of me as a strong and powerful young girl had shaped my sense of self , and i could imagine seeing nature from nature , powerful and atlethischen human being .
this is just one example of many , like adults in the machtpositionen , the imagination of a child .
but as the bereits examples of the synonym-wörterbüchern show us , our language doesn &apos;t matter to us room to imagine what we all wish to be able to do , to allow every single one to see ourselves as powerful people .
our language hinkt , the social changes that was caused in many cases , by technological change .
and of course , at the medical point of view , you can say , &quot; my legs , kniegelenke , kniegelenke , kniegelenke , &quot; it &apos;s going to allow people to use all of their possibilities and to develop their natural destiny , to develop natural fate , not to speak of social networking , people are creating their own way , and by definition , and orientieren
so , perhaps , this technological change is because it &apos;s always a different truth , because every human being can give a little bit of a besonderess and very powerful and that the human ability to adapt , our biggest plus .
the human skill , it &apos;s an interesting story , because people always ask me to tell me about widrigkeiten umgehe and i &apos;m going to say something like this : that sentence never gepasst me , and i always felt very uncomfortable to answer people &apos;s questions , and i think i understand why .
this phrase of the deal with widrigkeiten lives that success or happiness depends on the challenge of the challenge , without being able to be more powerful with it , because if my life could be so successful , because i could move the possible fall of a life with a prosthetic , or as well as people can perceive me with my disability .
but the truth is that we change ourselves . of course we are about the challenge , whether they are physical , emotional or even both .
and i &apos;m saying that that &apos;s good .
widrigkeiten are not a obstacle that we need to have to be umkurven to get better with our lives .
widrigkeiten is just in our lives .
and i tend to see the widrigkeiten as my shadow .
sometimes i realize that he &apos;s very present , sometimes it &apos;s hardly to see , but it &apos;s all the time to me .
and i &apos;m going to have no effect on the effect of that , or the schwere of a human being .
there are widrigkeiten and challenges , and they &apos;re just alllzu , and each person is going to be different , but the question is not whether we come to widrigkeiten or not , but how we get to it .
so we &apos;re not just responsible for the people we love to preserve the schicksalsschlägen , but they &apos;re preparing for it to be good for it .
and we don &apos;t really turn our kids down to the feeling that they can &apos;t adapt .
you have to be able to separate two things : to be the medical fact , to be an amputiert , and for the other people , i think , is a disabled or not .
and to be honest , the only real and bleibende disability that i had to have to sit apart is that the world is constantly , that can describe me with these words .
in our desire to protect the people who are at the heart of the heart and to communicate the cold , hard truth about their medical prediction , or even a prediction to the quality of life that you expect , we need to be careful that we don &apos;t have the point for someone to be disabled .
maybe the current concept is just to look at what &apos;s broken , and how we fix it , for each one , a larger disability than the pathologie .
if we don &apos;t treat people , and not to perceive all the forces and possibilities , we can also create the natural struggle that you might have to lead , a more disease .
we degradieren a human society that has value for our society .
so we need to look beyond the patologie and focus on all the area of human possibilities .
but what &apos;s the most important thing is that there is between the perception of our unzulänglichkeiten and our great erfindergeist .
we should not abwerten those herausfordernden times or verleugnen , we shouldn &apos;t try to avoid them , nor should we go out of the carpet , but it &apos;s about to see the most widrigkeiten opportunities .
i think it &apos;s really more about to realize that we don &apos;t need to get widrigkeiten , but we &apos;re open to it , to embrace it , to take them on the schopf , to use a kampf-ausdruck and maybe even dance to dance .
and perhaps we can make it a natural widrigkeiten , to see a natural , stimmiges and useful and feel so that it &apos;s not so much belastet .
this year , we celebrate the 200 , birthday &apos;s birthday , and he wrote about evolution 150 years ago , darwin , in my eyes , hingewiesen in my eyes , in a very real way .
i would be so umschreiben : not the most powerful of the way that we can , and also not the intelligenteste of its own way , but the one that changes changes at the best .
conflict comes from conflict .
not just from darwin &apos;s work , we know that the ability of human beings to survive and aufzublühen , the struggle of human mind is determined to change through conflict .
so again , change and adaptation , the greatest skill of humans .
and maybe we know what we &apos;re going to be in is the wood we &apos;re going to be in .
potentially , that &apos;s the sense of widrigkeiten , a sense of the ichs , a sense of our own power .
we can give ourselves to ourselves .
we can give a new meaning to be a new meaning that goes beyond severe times .
maybe we can see widrigkeiten as change .
widrigkeiten are for a change that we haven &apos;t adapted to .
i think the biggest damage we &apos;ve been doing ourselves is to believe that we should be normal .
let &apos;s face it -- who is normal ?
there &apos;s no normal .
it &apos;s the usual . it &apos;s the typical , but not the normal . and would you know that poor gray person really want to know if they really have ?
i think it &apos;s not a bit more .
it would be great if we can make this paradigm of normalität against the other and the strength to even more dangerous to make it , and so we can release the forces of very many children , and invite them to bring their very special and valuable skills to society .
and what &apos;s found is that we have people who have always been a gefordert of our society , to be useful and to contribute .
there &apos;s evidence that the neanderthal , 60,000 years ago , 60,000 people and people with heavy physical injuries have been carried , and that might be because the lebenserfahrung in the überlebenskampf of these people was valuable for society .
they don &apos;t have these people as broken and useless ; they were treated as special and valuable .
a few years ago , i went to the city i grew up in a lebensmittelmarkt in the nordosten &apos; in the northeast of pennsylvania , and i stood there in front of a scheffel tomato .
it was summer , and i had shorts .
and i hear like a guy behind me , &quot; well , if this is not aimee &apos;s mullins . &quot;
and i turn around and see this older man . i had no idea who he is .
and i said , &quot; excuse , sir , we know ourselves ? i can &apos;t remember you . &quot;
and he said , &quot; well , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know ,
when i first saw her , i was pulled her from her mother &apos;s belly . &quot;
oh , that &apos;s the way .
and of course , it &apos;s made click .
this was dr. kean , a man i knew only from narratives of my mother &apos;s mother , because i , of course , was very typical , to my birthday two weeks too late .
the doctor for pränatale medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical imaging .
and because i was born without wadenbeine , and my feet were gerichtet , and i was just a few toes on this and a pair of toes on the other hand , and he had to get the schlechten , that foreign had to bring the bad news .
he said to me , &quot; i had to say your parents that you never walk , and never be as beweglich as other kids or you never could have a living life , and since then they just lie me lying . &quot;
and what i found was that he had collected zeitungsausschnitte of my whole childhood , whether i &apos;d been in a buchstabier-wettbewerb in the second grade , whether i had siege the pfadfindern on the parade zu , whether i had a scholarship or one of my sportlichen , and he used these clips to teach his students , medizin-studenten medical school and medical medical school .
and he called this part of his kurses , the x factor , the potential of the human effort .
you can &apos;t emphasize enough how critical of this factor of the quality of life can be a human quality .
and dr. kean told he said , &quot; i &apos;ve learned that kids , if they don &apos;t get something else to say something else , and even if you get a little support , if you &apos;re überlässt children , children can reach very much . &quot;
you see , dr. kean has changed his thinking .
he understood that the medical diagnosis , and how someone could deal with it , two different things .
and i have changed my thinking over time when they were asked me at age 15 years old , if i had my prosthetic gegen legs , and bones , i would have no second .
i wanted to be normal at the time .
if you ask me this today , i &apos;m not sure .
and this is what happens because i &apos;ve experienced something with my legs , and not despite that experiences .
and perhaps that change could happen , because i &apos;ve been faced with so many people who opened me doors instead of people who were going to be a little bit of my mind , or i wanted to give me an idea .
you see , it really takes a human being showing you how you can manifestieren your forces , and you &apos;re through .
if you can make someone activate your own , internal forces -- the human mind is so empfangsbereit -- if you can do that , and for someone in a single moment , open a door , you &apos;re a very good teacher for those people .
they &apos;re bringing them to open doors .
the real meaning of the worts &quot; educate &quot; wurzelt in the word &quot; educe . &quot;
it means that something is that in one , the potential is to get the potential .
again , what is the potential to do ?
in the &apos; 60s , the u.k. was done in britain , and then gymnasien were transformed into gesamtschulen .
they call this &quot; streaming trials &quot; in the u.s. , we call it &quot; tracking . &quot;
the students are divided to grades .
and the one is a student schwerer harder , and the better teachers are so much .
they then gave over a dreimonatigen period with a &quot; good &quot; the note , &quot; very good . &quot; they were told you were asse , that they were very clever , and after those three months , they were written in einser .
and of course , it &apos;s going to break you the heart , that the other way around the einser-schülern , they were told , they &apos;re just enough .
and then , after the three months , it was also .
but only those who were still in school -- except for the students who had been geschmissen .
and the key thing that was that was that the teacher were not eingeweiht .
the teacher didn &apos;t know that something was changed .
they were simply said that the einser-schüler and they &apos;re the high school students with the grade , and they &apos;re also taught them to get them to treat them .
the only real disability is a gebrochener mind , a mind that has broken up , has no hope , and he doesn &apos;t find any more schön. , and it &apos;s missing our natural neugier. , and our angeborene capacity of imagination .
if we can support the human mind , to continue to hope , to hope themselves , and other people around themselves , to find beautiful , and to be phantasievoll , we &apos;re really going to be able to use our forces .
if a mind has these qualities , we can create a new reality and new daseinsformen .
i want to be written by a persischen poet named hafiz , who was written by a poet poet in the 14th century , and the poem is called &quot; god who knows only four words . &quot; &quot; every child knows god , not god god , but god who knows only four words , he always says , &quot; come , dance with me . &quot;
come , dance with me . thank you .
how would you want better than you are right now ?
suppose i said , by few changes of your genes , a better memory might have -- more precise , more deeply and faster .
or want to be more fitter , stronger , more power .
do you want to be more attractive and more confident ?
how would it be longer to live in good health ?
or maybe you &apos;re one of those who always sehnten to be more creativity .
what would you like to most ?
what would you like to have , if you could only have one ?
creativity .
how many people would choose creativity ?
raise your hands . let me see .
a few . probably about as many as many people here are .
that &apos;s very good .
how many would you decide to a good memory ?
a few more .
how about fitness ?
a couple of them .
what about longevity ?
ah , the majority . the lsehe i like to be , as a doctor .
if you could only have one of them , it would be a very different world .
is this all about a einbildung ?
or is it possible to be possible ?
evolution is a andauerndes subject on the ted conference , but today i want to give you a doctor &apos;s view .
the great genetiker in the 20th century , t.g. dobzhansky , who was also a kommunikant in the russian church church , wrote a paper called &quot; nothing in biology makes no sense of evolution . &quot;
now , if you &apos;re one of those who accept the proof of biological evolution , this would be a very good time to take your personal kommunikationsgerät -- i &apos;ll give you the permission -- and you might have a look at kathryn schultz &apos;s book that &apos;s wrong , because nothing else will make any sense of you .
but if you accept biological evolution , remember , it &apos;s just about the past , or is it also about the future ?
is it for other people or apply to us ?
this is another glimpse of the tree of life .
in this picture , i put a bush as a center of the verzweigungen in all directions , because if you look at the edges of the tree of life , all the existing spezien of the spitzen of these branches have succeeded in evolutionary terms : they survived ; it &apos;s demonstriert its environment .
the human part of this busches , far at the end , is , of course , what we &apos;re interested in most of .
we &apos;re zweigen from a common ancestor to modern chimpanzees , about six or eight million years ago .
in this period , maybe 20 or 25 different spezien of hominiden .
some of them came and left .
we &apos;ve been here for about 130.000 years .
it seems like we &apos;re right to be very remote from the other parts of life , but actually the most part , the basic mechanisms are pretty much right .
is it clear that we can take advantage and make the mechanisms of a common bacterium to produce the protein of the human brain , which is used to treat the diabetiker ?
this is not like humaninsulin ; this is the same protein that &apos;s actually chemisch ununterscheidbar from what comes from the bauchspeicheldrüse .
and while we &apos;re talking about bacteria , we realize that each of us in our gut is more bacteria than it leads cells to the rest of our bodies ?
maybe 10 times as many .
i mean , think , if you ask me , in a antonio , wonder , what are you thinking about the bacteria ?
our gut is a wonderful gastfreundlichen environment for these bacteria .
it &apos;s warm , it &apos;s dark , it &apos;s feucht , it &apos;s very comfortable .
and you &apos;re going to be all nutrients that you could only want to be in a ihrerseits without effort .
it &apos;s really a easier way of bacteria , with gelegentlichen unterbrechungen , jeodch &apos;s gezwungen .
but otherwise , they are a wonderful environment for these bacteria , as they are important for their lives .
they help the verdauung nutrients , and they protect them against certain diseases .
but what will happen in the future ?
are we in a kind of evolutionäres balance in form a species ?
or are we determined to be something different -- something that might be adapted to the environment ?
now , let &apos;s take a step back in the back of the big bang in 14 billion years ago -- the earth , about four billion years ago -- the first signs of creatures , perhaps three to four billion years ago -- the first mehr-zelligen organisms , maybe as much as 800 or a billion years -- and then the human species , which are actually shapes in
in this huge unvollendeten symphony of the universe , life is just a short bemessen ; the animal kingdom , like a single single single , and the human life , a small notenverzierung .
that was us .
this is also the unterhaltungswert of this speech , so i hope that d has dropped it .
now , when i was a neuling , i had my first biologiekurse .
i was fascinated by the elegance and beauty of biology .
i fell in love with the power of evolution , and i found something very basic : in most of the living of life in einzelligen organisms , every cell , and all the genetic information that will be on in both tochterzellen .
but at the time , as a mehrzelligen organisms , things began to change .
sexual reproduction is going to the picture .
and very important , with the introduction of sexual reproduction , the genome will be , the rest of the body will be entbehrlich .
in fact , you could say that the unausweichlichkeit of our body in the evolution of the same moment as sexual reproduction is in the same moment .
now i have to say , if i was a college-student , i thought , okay , sex / death , sex / death , sex / sex -- it seemed pretty reasonable at the time , but with every year , it had come to my more .
i &apos;ve come to understand the feelings of george burns , who was in las vegas , who was vorführte his show in the &apos; 90s .
and one night , there &apos;s a klopfen on his hotelzimmertür .
he opens the door .
it &apos;s a beautiful spärlich bekleidetes showgirl .
she looks at him and says , &quot; i &apos;m here for super-sex . &quot;
&quot; this is wonderful , &quot; says george , &quot; i &apos;m going to take the soup . &quot;
i came to the realization as a doctor that i was trying to be a goal in the goal of evolution -- not necessarily a widersprüchlich , just different .
i tried to preserve the body .
i wanted to keep ourselves healthy .
i wanted to get health to a disease .
i wanted to lead that we could lead a long and healthy life .
evolution is all about the weitergabe of the genome for the next generation , anpassung and survival generation .
from a evolutionary point of view , they are , and i developed how booster rockets developed to send the genetic fracht into the next stage of orbit , to get into the ocean .
i think we all would understand the mood that the woody of all of the expression of the expression of the expression , when he said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to get immortality through my work .
i want to reach it by not going to die . &quot;
evolution doesn &apos;t necessarily mean the longest life .
it doesn &apos;t necessarily necessarily inevitably the biggest , the most powerful , or the fastest , and not even the klügsten .
evolution &apos;s creatures priviligiert the way that are best at their environment .
it &apos;s the only test of survival and success .
and the reason the ocean is there are the bacteria that are thermophil and so that the hot steam will survive , if fish were there , it would have a vacuum , very , very much , and they &apos;ve managed to make a bewohnbare environment .
so what does that mean when we look at the back of what &apos;s happening in evolution , and how we think about the space in evolution , and especially as we vorausschauen into the next stage , i would say there &apos;s a range of possibilities .
the first is that we &apos;re not going to move forward .
we &apos;ve reached a kind of balance .
and the reason that we were in medicine , in medicine , has succeeded , has been a lot of genes that were otherwise rausgewählt , and they were removed from the population .
and second , we have a species that we have , as a species , so we have that we &apos;ve been able to adapt to us , and we &apos;re going to adapt to them .
and by the way , we &apos;re walking and we &apos;re going to vermischen and we &apos;re doing so much that they can &apos;t say that isolation is necessary for evolution to stattzufinden .
a second possibility is that it will be a evolution of traditional way , of course , is auferlegt by nature &apos;s forces .
and the argument , here &apos;s the wheels of the evolution , but they &apos;re unerbittlich .
and so far , as we &apos;re besiedeln , as a species , it becomes isolierung and the changes of the environment that could produce evolution in natural ways .
but there is a third possibility , a verlockende , amazing and terrifying possibility of the possibility .
i call it neo-evolution -- the new development that isn &apos;t just natural , but led by us as a individuen. in the decisions that we &apos;re doing .
well , how could that happen ?
how could it be possible that we do this ?
let &apos;s look at reality that people today , in some cultures , make decisions about their offspring .
they are , in some cultures , the choice to have more men than women .
it &apos;s not necessarily good for society , but it &apos;s what the individual and the family are .
so think if it &apos;s not just possible to choose the gender of your child but to help the body to heal the disease that heal disease and prevent disease .
what if you could do the genetic changes in order to prevent diabetes or alzheimer or reduce the cause of risk or disease ?
would you not want to make these changes in your genes ?
if we &apos;re vorausblicken , these kinds of changes are going to be increasingly possible .
the human genome project started in 1990 , and it took 13 years .
it cost 2,7 billion dollars .
the next year , when it was finished , they could do the same for 20 million dollars in drein to four months .
today , you can take a sequence of the three billion base base base of the human genome at about $ 20,000 and in the room of about a week of komplettieren .
it will not take longer long until the reality will be , that it will be the 1,000 dollars of human genomes , and it will be increasingly available for everyone .
one week ago , the national academy of engineering , for francis arnold and willem stemmer , two scientists that developed the natural process of evolution to work faster and lead to wünschenswerte proteins , in a more efficient way -- welches arnold .
a few years ago , the lasker-preis yamanaka yamanaka verliehen for his research that he took an adult hautzelle , a fibroblasten , and through the manipulation of only four genes , to take them to a pluripotenten stammzelle -- a cell potentially potentially be able to become any cell in your body .
these changes are in the coming .
the same technology that makes the human insulin in bacteria can make viruses that not only protect us from themselves , but also for the immunität against other viruses .
whether you believe it or not , it &apos;s an experimental study in the gang of vaccine that had been grown in the cells of a tabakpflanze .
can you imagine something that &apos;s going to be from tabak ?
this is all reality , and in the future , much more is possible .
so , imagine two other little changes .
you can change the cells in your body , but what if you could change the cells of your own ?
what if you could change the sperm and eizellen or the fresh befruchtete egg , to give their kids a better chance for a more than a life -- beseitigung diabetes , the risk of disease , the risk of cancer ?
who don &apos;t want to get a healthier ?
and then the analytischen technology , the same engine of science can allow the changes to prevent disease , could enable us to adopt , verabschieden super-attribute , hyper-kapazitäten -- the better memory .
why don &apos;t have the schlagfertigkeit of ken jennings hben , especially if you can expand it , with the next generation of watson-maschine ?
why not have the fast muskelfasern of the fast muskelfasern that they will allow you to run faster and longer ?
why no longer live ?
these are going to be unwiderstehlich .
and when we &apos;re at a point where we can pass it to the next generation , and we can adopt the attribute that we want , we will be transformed by alt-stil evolution to the neo-evolution .
we will have a process that requires probably 100,000 years , and we can komprimieren it for a thousand years -- and maybe even over the next 100 years .
these are decisions with which their grandchildren , or their grandchildren , have to be .
are we using these decisions to form a society that &apos;s better , the more successful , more friendly ?
or will we choose to be able to choose to be a very different different ways that we want for some of us and not for other of us ?
will we form a society of dielangweiliger and uniformierter , or robuster and vielseitiger ?
these are the kinds of questions that we need to be facing .
and the deepest of all , we will ever be able to develop the wisdom and the wisdom of the meistern that we need to make these decisions ?
and in the good ones , like in evil , and used to be thinking , these decisions are going to be about us .
thank you .
i want you to imagine something that gives you a portable robot that gives you your skills or another , the rollstuhlfahrern helps to stand up and go again .
we call these robots in berkeley bionics .
they &apos;re not different than something they put in the morning and gives them extra strength and that their pace will continue to increase the same way , for example , to keep their balance .
this is actually the real human being of human and machine .
but not just that -- it will fall together and connect with the universe and other devices out there .
this is not just a crazy idea .
so to show you that we &apos;re working on , we start talking about the american soldiers , which is about 100 pounds on its back , and it &apos;s the request that you should carry more equipment .
of course , this leads to some major complications -- rückenverletzungen , 30 percent of it -- chronische rückenverletzungen .
so we thought we would take this challenge , and we created a exoskelett that would help with this problem .
so let me introduce you now -- or the human universal universal carrier .
soldier : with the hulc-exoskelett , i can carry 200 pounds of verschiedenartiges terrain for many hours .
and his flexible design enables it to be deeply hocken , to kriechen and highly wendige movements .
it feels what i want to do where i want to go , and then increase my strength and resilience .
we &apos;re as far as we can imagine our industriepartner of this device , this new exoskelett of this year .
so it &apos;s true .
let &apos;s take our look at the rollstuhlfahrer , something i &apos;m particularly passionate about .
there are 68 million people who are in the world &apos;s worth in the world .
that &apos;s about one percent of the population .
and that &apos;s actually a conservative estimate .
we &apos;re often talking about very young people with spinal cord spinal cord , who are in the blütezeit of their lives -- &apos; 20s , &apos; 30s , &apos; 30s -- and the wheelchair is the only option .
but it &apos;s also about the population of aging whose number are vervielfacht .
and so the only option -- if it &apos;s about a hirnschlag , or for other complications -- it &apos;s the wheelchair .
and this is the way , by the way , for 500 years , since the way i have to say , very successful introduction .
so we thought we could start with this , a completely new chapter in mobility .
so let me introduce you to the elegs , which is carried by amanda boxtel , who had a rückenmarksverletzung rückenmarksverletzung in the conclusion of the result that they had no longer been running since 19 years and so far .
thank you .
as i said , amanda carries our elegs .
it has sensors .
his completely non-invasiven sensors on the crutches , the signals that are zurücksenden on our onboard-computer , which is attached to your back .
here &apos;s batteriepackungen , the motorantrieb is on their hüften , as well as they &apos;re doing their kniegelenken , which they move forward in this pretty geschmeidigen and very natural way .
i was 24 years old and in bestform , as a monströser purzelbaum while a skiabfahrt mich me .
at a fraction of a second , i lost every feeling and every movement of my beckens .
not long after that , a doctor took a doctor into my krankenzimmer and he said , &quot; amanda , you will never go again . &quot;
and this was 19 years ago .
he steel with any fünkchen hope for my consciousness .
anpassungsfähige technologies have been ermöglich me since , to go back to the mountain , to climb and even the hands of wheel .
but nothing was invented that would let me go back to this point .
thank you .
as you can see , we have technology , we have the platforms to meet and argue with them .
it &apos;s in our hands , and we have the whole potential here to change life from future generations -- not just for the soldiers , or for amanda here and all the users , but for everyone .
thank you .
at home in new york , i &apos;m the head of the entwicklungsabteilung entwicklungsabteilung organization named named robin .
if i don &apos;t bekämpfe the poverty , i &apos;m bekämpfe as a gehilfe of a feuerwehr-hauptmanns feuerwehr-hauptmanns on a volunteer fire .
well , in our city , in volunteer , volunteers have been supported a hochqualifizierte berufsfeuerwehr , you need to be pretty early on the brandstelle to be able to get mitmischen .
i remember my first fire .
i was the second volunteer on the brandstelle , so i had some good chances .
but it was still a race against the other volunteer to reach the verantwortlichen hauptmann and find out what our tasks would be .
when i found the hauptmann , he had just been in a very serious conversation with the hausbesitzerin , which is certainly a worst days of their lives .
it was in the middle of the night and she stood in the schlafanzug and the barefoot under a screen out there under the strömenden rain while her house was in fire .
the other volunteer who arrived to me -- we call it lex luther -- we got the hauptmann first , and i was asked to go into the house and save the dog of the hausbesitzerin .
the dog ! i was sprachlos .
there was any lawyer or a vermögensverwalter , which is now for the rest of his life that people could tell people that he was walking into a brennendes house to save a living creature , just because he was five seconds faster than me .
well , i was the next one .
the hauptmann winkte me .
he said , &quot; well , you have to go into the house .
they have to go up , and they &apos;re going to be over the fire , and you have to get a couple of shoes . &quot;
i swear it .
now , not exactly what i &apos;d hope , but i went off -- the stairs , the flur , and the flur over , which was actually done by the time that we &apos;re going to have to get the löschen in that room , into the bedroom to get a pair of shoes .
i know what you &apos;re thinking , but i &apos;m not a hero .
i carried my little beute , where i was going to meet my erzfeind and i met my beloved dog .
we put our value out to the hausbesitzerin , where , not surprisingly , his most important little attention than my .
a few weeks later , the feuerwache received a letter to the hausbesitzerin , where she was bedankte for the tapferen einsatz for the tapferen of her house .
one of the most important kindness , someone had taken her even a pair of shoes .
and both in my career and robin and my nebenberuf as a volunteer , i am a zeuge of generosity and kindness at the great scale , but i also see the acts of the charity and the muts of individual .
and you know what i learned ?
they &apos;re all important .
so if i look at umsehe and people who either have achieved a beachtenswerten success or in their way , i want to offer memory : don &apos;t wait .
don &apos;t wait for a difference in the life of another , until you &apos;ve achieved your first million .
if you have something , you give it right now .
you &apos;re going to use a suppenküche , put a park in the neighborhood .
be a mentor .
not every day will offer us a chance to save lives of one person , but every day is the opportunity to change one .
so they &apos;re going on ; save the shoes .
thank you .
bruno guissani : mark , mark , come back .
thank you .
i &apos;m just coming back from a community that knows the secret of the human race .
one place where women lead the zepter , to say sex , &quot; hi , &quot; and the game is determined -- where fun is a serious issue .
and no , it &apos;s not burning or san francisco .
ladies and gentlemen , your verwandtschaft .
this is the world of the wild bonobos in the congo of congo .
bonobos are together with chimpanzees our closest living relative .
that means we have a shared ancestor , an evolutionary grandmother , who lived about six million years ago .
well , chimpanzees are known for their aggressivität .
but unfortunately , we &apos;ve überbetont this aspect of überbetont in the narrative of human evolution .
but bonobos show us the other side of the coin .
as chimpanzees , by large , fear einflößenden , will lead to the bonobo-gesellschaft females .
they really came up with this , because this leads to a very ausgesprochen society , where the fatal violence is not seen .
but unfortunately , bonobos are least known among the primates .
they live in the depths of the kongolesischen , and they &apos;re just hard to use .
congo is a paradox -- a country of extraordinary biodiversity and beauty , but also the heart of darkness -- the scene of a violent struggle , which has been wütet for decades and almost as many lives as the world war i.
it &apos;s not surprising that these destruction are also at the survival of the bonobos .
and fleischhandel and the rückgang of the baumbestandes , you can &apos;t even fill a stadion with the verbliebenen bonobos -- and even there we are not sure to be honest .
and yet , in this country of violence and chaos , you can hear a verborgenes laugh , that the trees are erschüttert .
who are these relatives ?
we know them as &quot; love instead of war , &quot; because they have häufigen , even bisexuellen sex , with wechselnden partners , and rules that are so conflict and social angelenheiten .
i don &apos;t say that , that would be the answer to all humanitarian problems -- because life &apos;s life is more than the kama sutra .
bonobos -- like humans -- love to play their lives .
it &apos;s not just kinderspiele .
for us , and it &apos;s essential to the attachment of relations and the care of tolerance .
and we learn trust and the rules of the game .
and play increases in creativity and resilience , and it &apos;s all about the power of diversity -- diversity of interactions , diversity of behaviors , diversity of compounds .
and when you look at bonobos at the game , you see the evolutionary origins of human lachens , dance and rituals .
play is the kitt that we &apos;re beieinanderhält .
now , i don &apos;t know how you play , but i want to show you some unique footage that are very unique for the wild .
first , a ballspiel auf -- and i don &apos;t think about fussball .
so here we see a young female and male males in a verfolgungsspiel .
look at what it makes you .
this might be the evolutionary origins of : &quot; you &apos;re going to be packt him in the eggs . &quot;
just that i think it &apos;s more likely , it &apos;s not true .
yeah !
so sexspiele are spread both by both both and people .
and this video is really interesting , because it &apos;s really interesting , because it &apos;s really interesting , because it shows the ideenreichtum that you bring new elements to play -- like the hoden -- and also how the game that makes both trust and fördert -- while it &apos;s doing a tremendous fun .
but the game is a formwandler game .
and the game is a formwandler , and it can take a lot of forms that some are more calm , phantasievoll , curious -- maybe to find the surprise again .
and i want to show you this is fuku , a young females , and she &apos;s playing with water .
i think , just like you &apos;re playing , sometimes , we &apos;re loten and the outside of our inner worlds .
and it &apos;s this playful curiosity that makes us work , and interact with it , and the unexpected verknüpfungen that we form are the real nährboden of creativity .
this is just a little vorgeschmack of the insights that bonobos gewähren us into our past and present .
but also , you have a secret for our future , a future where we have to adapt to increasing challenges , greater creativity and druch cooperation .
the secret is that the game is the key to these skills .
in other words , play is our anpassungsjoker .
and to succeed in a very unbeständige world , we need to play .
but will we make the best of our spieltrieb ?
it &apos;s not silly .
it &apos;s essential .
for bonobos and humans , life doesn &apos;t make their lives out of their teeth and their claws .
just if it seems to hardly , it might seem to be the nötigsten game .
and so my primatenkameraden , let &apos;s embrace this gift of evolution and play together , while we &apos;re the creativity of the kameradschaft and the wonder of the wonder .
thank you .
i want you to introduce two pairs , in the middle of 1979 , the same day , right at exactly exactly the same moment , every single baby &apos;s baby -- okay .
so two pairs , each zeugt a baby .
now i don &apos;t want you to use too much time to imagine the zeugung , because if you &apos;re going to imagine the whole time , you &apos;re not listening to me .
imagine that just for a moment .
and in this scenario , they imagine that in a case , the sperma is wearing a y chomosom , which is true of the x chromosome of the eizelle .
and in the other case , the x is a x chromosome that hits x chromosome of the brain .
both are überlebensfähig , both of these light .
we &apos;ll come back to these guys later .
i &apos;ve got two hüte in most of my activities .
i &apos;m a hat , i &apos;m involved with the story of the anatomy .
i &apos;m a studierte student , and in this case , i study how humans with anatomy -- that &apos;s human body , animal body -- like they were umgingen with körperflüssigkeiten , with körperkonzepten , as they thought about bodies .
the other hat i &apos;ve been carrying in my work is the activist , as a patientinnenanwältin -- or , as i say , a ungeduldige lawyer -- from people who are patients from doctors .
in this case , i &apos;ve been working with people who have the körpertypen , the social norms .
so i &apos;ve been working with people who are the siamesische twins , two people in a body .
i &apos;ve been working with people with zwergenwuchs -- so people who were smaller than usual .
and very often , i &apos;ve been working with intersexuellen people whose gender is atypisch -- so people who have not the average male or female körpertypen .
and as a general term , we can use the word intersexualität .
intersexualität comes in lots of different forms .
i just give you a couple of examples of the kinds of geschlechtsvarianten that are not the male or female standard .
in a case , maybe someone with a xy chromosomenbasis , and the sry gene of y chomosoms would be the protogonaden that we all have the fötalen of the stadium of hoden .
and that &apos;s why the hoden on the fötalen is the stage of testosterone .
but because that individual is missing the receptor to see the testosterone , the body doesn &apos;t react to the testosterone .
and this is called androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so much testosterone , but no reaction to it .
as a result , the body evolved to be more known to the typical female .
when the child is born , she looks like a girl .
she &apos;s a girl . she &apos;s raised as a girl .
but it takes most of the time you reach puberty and grow your breast and develop , but not your period , until someone comes to someone that is something different .
and they do a few tests and figure out that they instead of eierstöcken and gebärmutter , in fact , hoden in their own , and that she has a y chromosome .
and it &apos;s important to understand that you might think that person &apos;s actually male , but they &apos;re not really .
women , like men , have something that &apos;s called adrenalindrüsen .
it &apos;s in the back of the back of our body .
and the nebennieren make androgene , which are virilisierende hormones .
most women , like me -- i think a typical woman -- i don &apos;t know my actual chromosomenaufbau , but i think i probably have the typical -- most women like i actually talk to androgene .
we produce androgen and we &apos;re talking to androgene .
the consequence is that someone like me actually has a brain that was exposed to more androgenen than a woman who was born with hoden , and has a androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so gender is really complicated ; intersexuelle are not just in the middle of the spectrum of gender -- in a sense , you can be spread across the whole range .
one example , a few years ago , i got the call from a 19 year-old man who was born when young raised , he had a girlfriend , had sex with his girlfriend , lived as man , and he &apos;d found that he had eierstöcke and a gebärmutter .
he had an extreme form of an angeborenen nebennierenrindenhyperblasie .
he has xx &apos;s chromosome , and in the womb , his nebennieren were so powerful active that they &apos;re essentially creating a male hormonumgebung .
and as a result , his genitalien male männlich have been , his brain was exposed to the most typischeren part of the hormonenspektrums .
and when he was born , he looked like a boy -- no one had any one .
and only when he was 19 years old , he got enough medical problems , actually , because he was inside the innerlich that the physicians found that he was in the inner female .
okay , just a quick example of a variante of intersexualität .
some people with xx chromosomes , develop something that is called ovotestis , which is the eierstockgewebe of hodengewebe umhüllt .
we don &apos;t know exactly why that &apos;s happening .
so gender can occur in many different forms .
the reason children with this kind of body -- whether it &apos;s zwergenwuchs or siamesische twins , whether it &apos;s been intersexuell -- from surgeons often , they &apos;re going to be adapted to the norm , not because that &apos;s the physical health of advantage .
in many cases , these people are completely healthy .
the reason why they &apos;re often doing different kinds of surgical interventions are done in the same way is because they threaten our social categories .
typically our system on the idea is that a certain anatomische ausprägung is einhergeht with a specific identity .
so we have the concept that a woman is to have a female identity ; a black person is to say , angeblich , to have an african anatomy in terms of their own story .
so we have this horrible vereinfachende idea .
and if we &apos;re faced with a body that actually represents something very different , that &apos;s what makes us look at these kategorisierungen .
so we have a lot of romantic ideas in our culture .
and our nation is really based on a very romantic concept of individualismus .
now , you can imagine how amazing it is , when kids are born , that are two people in a body .
where i &apos;ve experienced most of the time in the last time , the südafrikanische läuferin semenya semenya was last year whose gender was asked by the leichatlethik weltmeisterschaft in berlin .
and many journalists called me up with the question , &quot; what are the test you &apos;re going to do , which is a caster female female or male ? &quot;
and i had to explain the journalists that there &apos;s this test .
we know that gender is complicated enough that we have to admit that nature is going to be zieht between male and female , or between male and weiblich and weiblich , we are the tastächlich that we have to do as natural .
so we have a situation , where the further our science , we need to admit to that these categories that we &apos;ve been held for stabile anatomische categories , which are very simple zuordnungen to create permanent identitätskategorien , much more powerful than we &apos;ve accepted .
and it &apos;s not just about gender .
it &apos;s also true in terms of ways that it has a lot more complicated than our terminologie has allowed .
we &apos;re in our betrachtungen , in all kinds of different kinds of things .
we &apos;re going to push for example , for example , that we have at least 95 percent of our dna with chimpanzees .
what should we start with the fact that we &apos;re only different from them in a few different ways ?
while we continue to push our science more and further , we are increasingly moving into a zone of the unbehagens , where we need to recognize that the simplistischen categories we &apos;ve probably had too simple .
we see that in all sorts of different areas of human life .
one of the areas that we see that in our current culture today , in the united states , are the struggle over the beginning and the end of life .
we have hard conversations about what point is going to be a body to humans , so that it has a different kind of the life that &apos;s kind of the moral life .
we have very difficult issues today -- perhaps not as public as in medicine -- about the question when someone is dead .
our ancestors used to never fight the question to fight when someone was dead .
they have just kept a feder in the nose , and when they moved , they haven &apos;t buried them .
if they &apos;re not moving , you have buried it .
but today we &apos;re in a situation where we take people from lebenswichtige organs and they want to put them into other people .
and as a result , we started to get into the struggle with really difficult question when someone is dead , and that &apos;s what makes us a really difficult situation where we don &apos;t have more simple categories like used .
now , you might think that the whole thing of categories someone would really make me happy .
i &apos;m political progressiv , i &apos;m verteidige people with unusual bodies , but i have to admit , i &apos;m nervous .
to grasp that these categories are really much more efficient than we thought , &quot; make me feel .
and it makes me feel angespannt in terms of thinking about the idea .
so to tell you about this anspannung , i first have to take a first time i &apos;m a big fan of the country .
i know they were rassisiten , i know they were sexisten , but they were great .
i think they were so tapfer and strong , and so radical , what they did that i &apos;ve been doing for all the years of ertappe musical 1776 , and it &apos;s not because of music that is absolutely forgotten .
it &apos;s because of what 1776 has happened with the gründungsvätern .
the gründungsväter , from my view , were the original anatomischen activists , and that &apos;s why .
what she was zurückwiesen was a anatomisches concept , and they were using it through another , which was radically and beautiful and 200 years for us .
as you all remember , our gründungsväter lehnten the concept of the monarchy , and the monarchy was based on a very vereinfachten concept of anatomy .
the herrscher of the old world had no concept based on the dna , but they had a concept of the geburtsrechts .
they had a concept of blue blood .
they were the notion that people who had political power to do , because of the vererbten blutlinie of the grandfather , to son , to son and so on .
the gründungsväter wiesen wiesen this idea and they would replace them through a new anatomisches concept , and this concept said that all people were creating in the same .
they nivellierten the spielfeld and decided that anatomisch , the common gemeinsamkeiten , not the differences , and that was very radically .
so they did that part because they were part of a aufklärerischen system in which two things together in common .
democracy grew up , but at the same time , science grew up .
if you look at the history of the human being , it &apos;s clear that many of you were very interested in science , and they were interested in a concept of a naturalistischen world .
they went away from explanations , and they &apos;re wiesen things like a übernatürliches concept of power , back to where the transmission is based on a very vagen basis of geburtsrecht .
they moved to a naturalistischen concept .
and for example , if you look at the unabhängigkeitserklärung , you talk about nature and the god of nature .
they don &apos;t talk about god and nature &apos;s natural god .
they &apos;re talking about nature &apos;s power to tell us who we are .
and as part of it , they were doing a concept that was a concept that was common .
and so they have really wonderful , really wonderful , the future civil rights movement .
they didn &apos;t think about it , but what they did for us was great .
so what happened for years ?
for example , for example , the women who anstrebten the wahlrecht , the concept of the gründungsväter , which says that more people have more important than the anatomische difference , and said , &quot; we have a gebärmutter and eierstöcke , that &apos;s not significant enough that we should have the wahlrecht , the right to fully equal to own property , etc . , etc . &quot;
and women are doing that .
next came the successful civil rights movement , where we saw people like sojourner truth , who were spach , &quot; am i not a woman ? &quot;
we find men in the marschierenden lines of the bürgerechtsbewegung , who say , &quot; i &apos;m a man . &quot;
again , people have different color color , who are berufen to anatomische differences , again , successful .
we see the same thing in the behindertenrechtsbewegung .
and of course , the problem is that , as we start to look at all the common , we need to start to ask why we sustain certain trennungen .
now , you know , i want to maintain certain trennungen , anatomisch , in our culture .
i want to give you a fish , for example , the same rights as a human .
i don &apos;t want to say that we should be completely at the anatomy .
i don &apos;t want to say that the 5-jährige should be the right to give her einverständnis to sex or to marry .
so there are some of the anatomische trennungen that make sense for me , and we think , should keep .
but the challenge is to try to figure out what it &apos;s and why we keep them , and they &apos;re useful .
so let &apos;s come back to those two creatures that were gezeugt at the beginning of the speech .
we have two creatures , both in the middle of 1979 , the same day .
imagine that one of them , maria , three months of verfrüht , was born , so she was born at the one in june 1980 .
heinrich , on the other hand , is born for the geburtstermin , so he &apos;s born in the one march 1980 .
because the fact that maria is born three months of verfrüht , she would take all the possible rechte drei -- the right to have sex sex , which is right to vote to drink .
heinrich has to wait for all these , not because it &apos;s actually a different biological age , only because of the zeitpunktes of its birth .
we &apos;re going to find other merkwürdigkeiten about what their rights are .
heinrich , because you think that it &apos;s male -- although i didn &apos;t tell you that he &apos;s with xy -- because you think that it &apos;s male , it can be moved now , which is not a maria &apos;s going to worry .
maria on the other hand can &apos;t perceive the same thing in all states , the heinrich in all states , and that &apos;s the right to marry .
heinrich can marry a woman in every state , but maria can only marry a woman in a few states .
so we have these dauerhaften anatomischen categories that are problematic and fragwürdig in many ways .
and for me , the question of what we &apos;re going to do is , what our science does such progress in the anatomy that we have to reach that we need to admit that a democracy based on anatomy is auseinanderfallen ?
i don &apos;t want to give up the science , but at the same time , it feels like science is going on its own .
so where do we go ?
it seems like our culture would be a kind of pragmatische stance , &quot; well , we need to move somewhere a line , so we move somewhere . &quot;
but a lot of people get caught in a very strange position .
so for example , texas has decided to get a man to marry that you don &apos;t have a y chromosome , and a woman means that you have a y chromosome .
now in practice , people are not tested for their chromosomes .
but it &apos;s also very bizarre because of the story i told you about the androgenrezeptor-defekt .
if we look at one of the gründungsväter of modern democracy , dr. martin luther king , he offers us in his &quot; i have a dream of a kind of solution . &quot;
he says we shouldn &apos;t be able to judge people , &quot; their color , but after the character of their character , &quot; judge , and it goes on top of anatomy .
and i want to say , &quot; yes , that sounds like a really good idea . &quot;
but how do you do that in practice ?
how do you judge people because of their charaktereigenschaften ?
i also want to point out that i &apos;m not sure that we should be able to give right people in love with people , because i have to admit that i know a series of a golden retriever that probably make some more likely than some people i know .
i want to dazusagen that i probably know some bright labradorhunde , the fähiger are fundiertere , more intelligent and more powerful decisions about their sexual relationships as some of the 40-jährige i know .
so how should we put the question of the character of character ?
it turns out to be really difficult .
and a part of me wonder , what if the content of a personality would be something that would be in the future , in the future , in the future ?
really , is we really want to go in this direction ?
i &apos;m not sure where we go .
what i know is that it seems really important to think about the idea that the u.s. is a leader of making a thoughts about questions of democracy .
in our effort for democracy , we did the right thing , and i think we would be doing well in the future .
we don &apos;t have the situation , as it is in iran , where a man who is sexually drawn to other men , who &apos;s been bestraft with death , unless it &apos;s ready to be willing to put a geschlechtsumwandlung in which he can stay alive .
we don &apos;t exist in the states of this kind .
i &apos;m glad to say we don &apos;t have these states -- a surgeon who i was talking about a few years ago , who had a pair of siamesische twins and trennen them , partly to make a name .
but when i was telefonierte him , and he asked , why he did these interventions -- it was highly riskante surgeries -- he was his answer that in his country , these kids would be treated very bad , and therefore he had to do it .
i said , &quot; well , you &apos;ve moved a political asyl to erwägung instead of a operation to separate them ? &quot;
the united states offer incredible ways to allow people to be the ones that they are without , without changing the state of the state .
so i think we need to be leaders .
well , just to finish , i want to notice that i &apos;ve talked a lot about the fathers .
and i want to think about the possibility of how democracy might look , or looked like we had more involved .
and i want to say something that is a radical thing , and i think there might be different kinds of insight that are herrühren by various kinds of anatomy , insbesonders when people apply a gruppendenken .
since years , because i was interested in intersexualität , i also interested in research in the field of research .
and one of the things i really found interesting is the difference between men and women in ways of thinking about how they think and operate in the world .
what we &apos;ve found out of kulturübergreifenden studies is that women , the average -- not every , but on average -- more likely to be complex social relationships and the care of people who are vulnerable to the group , very much attention .
and so , if we think about it , we have an interesting situation before .
and years ago , when i was a graduate school , one of my favorite research , who knew my interest in feminism -- i looked at me as a feminist , so i &apos;m going to -- a really , really , really , really curious question .
he said , &quot; tell me what &apos;s most about the most female . &quot;
and i thought , &quot; well , that &apos;s the dümmste question i &apos;ve ever heard .
feminism is about gender issues about gender , so it &apos;s not a female .
but the more i thought about his question , to be more thought , i thought it could be something weibliches in the feminismus .
that &apos;s called it , it could give something , the average , which is what women brains are different from male , which makes us aufmerksamer for social relations and to make the aufmerksamer for the schutzbedürftige .
so where the gründungsväter is extremely bedacht to find out how individuals could be protected from the state is possible that when we einbrächten more mothers in this concept , we more just bekämmen a concept of bekämmen , not just how to protect , but how to make each other .
and maybe it &apos;s the where we have to go in the future , if we have democracy about anatomy -- less about the individual bodies , to think about identity , and think about relationships .
so that when we try to make a perfektere connection , we think about what we can do for each other .
thank you .
i &apos;m a jessi , and this is my suitcase .
but before i show you what i have in it , i &apos;m going to make a very public confession , and that is , i &apos;m obsessed with outfits .
i love it , to every chance to find a different kind of farbenfrohes , crazy outfit , and take over and to take care of the last time .
but i don &apos;t buy anything new .
i get all my clothes from a second hand on flohmärkten and in second-hand-shops .
ooh , thank you .
second-hand-shopping allows me to reduce the impact of my environmental environment , and also my geldbörse .
i meet all kinds of great people , my dollars for normally a good purpose ; i look pretty unique ; and it makes shopping shopping to my very personal personal .
i mean , what am i going to find today ?
is it going to be my size ?
am i like to like the color ?
will it cost less than 20 dollars ?
if all the answers are yes , i feel like i won .
i come back to my suitcase , and i &apos;ll tell you what i &apos;ve been doing for this exciting week here at ted .
i mean , what does someone with so many outfits ?
so i &apos;m going to show you exactly what i brought .
i brought seven to the unterhosen , and that &apos;s all .
unterhosen for just one week are all i &apos;ve done in my suitcase .
i &apos;ve been making sure that i would have anything else i would have to wear , if i &apos;d come up to palm springs .
and since you &apos;re not heard of me as the woman who &apos;s herumläuft here at ted in your unterwäsche -- i mean , i found a couple of things .
and i want to show you my favorite day for this week .
sounds that good ?
while i do that , i &apos;m also going to leave some of the lessons that i believe or not , from these abenteuern , they &apos;ve learned nothing new .
let &apos;s start with sunday .
i call this the strahlenden tiger .
you don &apos;t have to spend a lot of money to look good .
you can almost always look great for less than 50 dollars .
this whole outfit , including the coat , i was gekostet , and it was the most expensive piece that i was carried in this whole week .
monday : color is something that is powerful .
it &apos;s almost more accurate impossible to be bad gelaunt if you &apos;re wearing hellrote pants .
if you &apos;re happy , you will move other happy people .
tuesday : anpassung is going to be completely überbewertet .
i spent a lot of time my life trying to try and adapt to myself .
be just who they are .
if you surrounded with the right people , you &apos;re not just going to understand it , you &apos;ll also estimate it .
wednesday : embrace your inner child .
sometimes people say me , i looked like i &apos;m playing up , or i remember her siebenjährige .
i &apos;d like to smile and say , &quot; thank you . &quot;
donnerstag : selbstvertrauen is the key .
if you think you &apos;re looking at something well , it &apos;s almost safe .
and if you think they don &apos;t look good , you probably probably have a right .
i grew up with a mother who taught me a day for day .
but only when i became 30 , i really understood what that means .
and i &apos;ll just summarize it for you .
if you believe that you &apos;re inside and the outside a wonderful person , there &apos;s nothing you can &apos;t wear .
so there &apos;s no excuse for somebody here in this audience .
we should be able to rocken everything we want .
thank you .
friday : a universal truth -- five words : golden pailleten .
and finally , saturday : a personal , unique , personal style , is a great way to tell the world a little bit about one , without having to say a word .
it always been proven to me , and over this week , people came up to me just because of what i carried . and i had great conversations .
obviously , it &apos;s not going to fit in my tiny suitcase .
so before i go home to brooklyn , i &apos;m going to donate this all .
because the lesson i try to learn about this week is that it &apos;s okay to let it go .
i don &apos;t have to be emotionally in the very emotional anhaften , because the road is always going to be a different kind of crazy , farbenfrohes , strahlendes , strahlendes outfit that i just love with a little love and search .
thank you very much .
thank you .
good day , everybody together .
i have something i want to show you .
think of this as a bildpunkt , as flying flying .
that &apos;s what we call in our lab , wahrnehmbares design .
let me tell you a little bit about it .
now , if you take this picture -- i &apos;m originally italian , and every boy in italy grows up with this picture in his room , but the reason i &apos;m showing you this is the formula one in the last decades that happened something very interesting .
a while ago , it was like you wanted to win a formula to a race , then they took their budget and put their money on a good driver and a good car .
and if the car and the driver were good enough , they won the race .
now , you need , if you want to win a race , actually , like this one -- something that &apos;s really überwacht the car in real time , some thousand sensors , the information from the car , which is just taking information to the system and then process and then use that car to send decisions and get things from information .
this would call them , in ingenieurteams , a echtzeit-kontrollsystem .
and basically , it &apos;s a system that &apos;s made out of two parts -- a spürenden part and a reagierendenteil .
what &apos;s interesting today is the echtzeit-kontrollsysteme of the beginning of life are beginning in our lives .
our cities were equipped in the last few years , with networks and electronics .
they &apos;re going to be in the computer .
and as a computer in free , they start react to other ways and they &apos;re wahrgenommen .
if we herrichten cities , it &apos;s actually a big thing .
by the way , i want to mention that cities are only two percent of the earth &apos;s surface , but 50 percent of the global population are living there .
they &apos;re 75 percent of the energiekonsums -- cause to 80 percent of co2 emissions .
so if we &apos;re doing something to the cities , it &apos;s a big thing .
and beyond the cities , all this sense of the sense and drive it into objects of everyday life .
this is from an exhibition that is a paola antonelli at moma later , in the summer , organized .
it &apos;s called &quot; talk to me . &quot;
well , all of our objects , our environment , are starting to speak back to us .
in a certain sense , it &apos;s almost like any atom that is out there , a sensor and a antreiber .
and this is radically radically radically the interaction that we have out of our environment with our environment .
in a way , it &apos;s almost like the old dream of michelangelo .
you know , as a michelangelo shaped the moses , it means he took the hammer and put it on moses -- actually , can you still see a little spot untendrunter -- and said , &quot; perché non parli ? why don &apos;t you talk ? &quot;
now , today , our environment starts for the first time , to respond to us .
i &apos;m just going to show you just some examples -- again , to perceive and make our environment .
let &apos;s start with the sense .
now the first project i want to introduce is to actually one of the first of our lab .
it was developed a viereinhalb and a half years ago .
and what we did was actually using a new way of network that was used in the world -- this is a mobiltelefonnetz -- and anonyme and aggregierte information from this network that will be collected by the betreiber to understand how the city works .
the summer was a happy summer -- 2006 .
it was when italy won the fußball-weltmeisterschaft .
some of you will remember it was a italy against france , and then at the end of zidane , the kopfstoß .
and no matter , italy has won &apos;t end up .
now , you see what happened on this day , just when watching the activity that happens in the network .
this is the city .
you see in the middle of the kolosseum , the fluß tiber .
and at the morning , the game .
you see the zeitachse .
early afternoon , people here and there , the calls are tätigen and move .
the game starts out -- silence .
france makes a gateway . italy makes a gateway .
halbzeit , people make a short call , go to the bathroom .
second halbzeit . end of the normal .
first verlängerung , second .
zidane , in a moment of kopfstoß .
italy wins . yeah .
now , in this night , all of the center to celebrate .
they saw the big ausschlag .
the next day , everybody went into the center to meet the siegerteam and the prime minister at the same time .
and then they all went down .
you see the picture of the platzes circo massimo , where , since the time , for the time , people go to celebrate -- to have a big party , and you see the ausschlag at the end of the day .
now , this is just one example of how we can feel the city today , in a way that we couldn &apos;t have a few years ago .
another example of feel , for example , this is not about people , but to consume things that we use .
well , today we know all about where our things come from .
this is a map that shows you all the chips , from which a mac computer is made up like they came together .
but we just know little bit about where things go .
so we actually designed a couple of little markers in this project to track the garbage while it goes through the system .
so we started with some volunteers who helped us , a little more than a year in seattle , helped to tag the things that they &apos;re wegwarfen -- different kinds of things , as you can see -- things that you &apos;re going to throw out .
then we have the little chips , the little brands , the garbage , and we started to track it .
here are the results that we &apos;ve just got .
seattle ...
after a week .
we realized that information , we realized that there &apos;s a lot of ineffizienzen in the system .
we can do the same things that we can do with less energy .
the data was not available before .
but that &apos;s what &apos;s going to happen a lot of unnützer transporte and more complicated things .
the other thing is that we believe that if we see every day , the cup we throw away , not simply disappears , is still going on the planet somewhere .
and the plastic bottle that we still throw away every day .
and if we were to show that people , we can push change behavior .
so that &apos;s the reason that project is .
my colleague at mit , assaf biderman , could tell you much more about the sense of the feeling and the many other wonderful things that you can make with perceive , but i want to talk to the second part that we talked about at the beginning , and that &apos;s the environmental environment of our environment .
and the first project is something that we did a few years ago in zaragoza , spain .
it started with a question of the bürgermeisters that came to us and said that spain and südeuropa have a beautiful tradition of the public places that use water as part of the architecture .
and the question was , how could you connect technology , new technology ?
and one of the ideas that were being ermittelt at mit was , imagine these schläuche , and ventile , magnetventile , work that are opening and close .
it causes the kind of wasservorhang water wasservorhang .
if these bildpunkte fall fall , they can write on it , they can put patterns , images , text .
and you can get to it , and it &apos;s going to open up to make it durchspringen , as you can see in this picture .
well , we introduced the mayor of belloch .
it really enjoyed him .
and we got a building to design a building at the entrance of the expo .
we called it the digital water .
all the building was made of water .
there are no doors or windows , but when you get closer , it will open and you leave it .
the roof was also covered with water .
and if it &apos;s windig , if you &apos;re going to reduce the stick , you can actually make the roof down .
or you could close the building and become the whole architecture , like in this case , you know , this days , if you herunterfahren the roof , you get images of people who were there and say , &quot; they &apos;ve destroyed the building . &quot;
no , they don &apos;t destroyed the building , it &apos;s just that the architecture almost disappears .
and here &apos;s how the building works .
you see the person who asks what &apos;s happening inside .
and here you see me when i tried to test the sensors that opened the water , not getting nass .
well , i should tell you what one night that happened when all the sensors stopped stopped .
but actually , it was a more fun of this night .
all the children from zaragoza came up to the building , because the way they were playing with the building was very different .
no longer a building that would open up to leave it , but a building that still breaks and holes in the water , you had to jump to jump without getting .
and that was , for us , very exciting , because as architects , engineers , we always think about how people use things that we &apos;re designing .
but the reality is always unexpected .
and this is the beauty of creating things that are used and interact with people .
so here &apos;s a picture of the building with the physical bildpunkten , the bildpunkten of water and the projections .
and this is what we &apos;ve been doing about this project to think about the project that i &apos;m showing you now .
imagine these bildpunkte could actually start to fly .
imagine you could have small helicopter flying through the air , and each of them with a little bildpunkt of light that mit light -- almost like a cloud that can move through the room .
here &apos;s the video .
imagine a helicopter , like you saw earlier , which moves with others , totally in perfect .
you can have this cloud .
you can have a kind of flexiblen screen or display , like this -- a gleichmäßige formation in two dimensions .
or unregelmäßig , but in three dimensions , where the light is , not the position of the bildpunkte .
they can play with different kinds .
imagine the screen could just appear in different kinds of different formaten or sizes , in different ways .
but then it could be just a 3d cloud of bildpunkten that you can and you can walk through and move through the way that you can look at a lot of directions .
you see a real flyfire-steuerung , the herabsinkt of the way that we had a gleichmäßiges v .
if you turn the lights on , it looks like this . so just as we saw it before .
imagine that every single person is being controlled by human beings .
it could have a momentum that could have a momentum that comes from people , from the movements of people or something .
i want to show you one first of one .
we &apos;ve been working with roberto bolle , one of the best balletttänzer of our time -- the étoile at the metropolitan theater in new york and the scala in mailand -- we took his movements in 3d to use them as a impulse for the flyfire .
here you see roberto dancing .
on the left , you see the bildpunkte , the different kinds of different sensations .
it &apos;s a echtzeit-3d-scan and a bewegungsaufnahme .
so you can feel the whole movement .
you can do this all the time .
but then , once we all have the bildpunkte , they can play with it and play with color motion and drehbewegung .
we want to use a kind of a impuls system for the flyfire .
i want to show you the latest project we &apos;re working on .
it &apos;s something we work for the olympics in london for the olympics .
it &apos;s called the cloud -- the cloud .
again , the idea is , imagine that we &apos;re involved with people to do something and changing the environment -- almost something like we call it , wolkenbewegung , as we call it wolkenbewegung , as you move a scheunentor , but with a cloud .
imagine that everybody can give a small donation for a bildpunkt .
i think that &apos;s the remarkable thing that happened for the last few years , the last decades , is that we are changing from a physical world .
it &apos;s all digitalisiert , knowledge , and it makes it available through the internet .
now , for the first time , we can first -- and the campaign , the kampagne , we &apos;ve shown this -- we can change from the digital world , from the selbstorganisierenden forces of the networks of the physical world .
it can be in our case , that we use it to design and create a symbol .
that &apos;s called something that &apos;s built in the city .
but tomorrow , it can make us the challenges -- think about climate change , or co2 emissions -- how can we move from the digital world to physical .
so the idea is that we actually put people in the way that they are together to make things together .
the cloud is again a cloud again , in the same way that a very cloud is a cloud of particles .
and these particles are water , while our cloud is a cloud from bildpunkten .
it &apos;s a physical form in london , but it &apos;s covered in bildpunkten .
they can move inside and make different kinds of experiences .
you can actually look at it from the bottom , the most important moments for olympia 2012 and darüberhinaus , and it &apos;s a kind of connection to community .
so both the physical cloud in the heavens and something that you can go to , like , londons new berggipfel .
you can get in .
and a kind of digital leuchtturm in the night -- but as a allerwichtigstes , a new kind of experience for everyone who wants to go to the top .
thank you .
as an artist , i was very important to the context .
i &apos;m trying to express my work that humans are not separate from nature and that everything is connected .
the first time i was almost 10 years ago , in antarctica , where i saw my first eisberge .
i had ergriff awe .
my heart , raste , i was schwindelig , while i tried to capture what was before me .
the eisberge around me almost ragten 60 meters of the water , and i was only wonder that a schneeflocke was on a different , year after year .
eisberge are born as a kalb of a gletschers or by breaking out of eisschollen .
every iceberg has its own individual personality .
they interact with their environment and their experiences .
some people are going to give up and klammern to the bitteren , while others are not able to stand and zusammenstürzen in a anfall of dramatischer passion .
if you look at a redwood , you think they &apos;re slightly isoliert apart and just apart , just as we see people often .
but the truth is far away from it .
while a eisberg ice ice , i atme its vorzeitliche atmosphere .
while the ice is melting , it &apos;s frei mineralstoffreiches drinking water that &apos;s feeding a lot of life forms .
i &apos;m going to take my footage of this eisberge as i would make portraits of my ancestors , in the conscious mind , that they were in these individual moments of these , and never will be true again .
it &apos;s not a death when it &apos;s melting ; it &apos;s not an end , but a fortführung of your pfades along the life cycle .
part of the ice in the eisbergen that i &apos;m photographiere is very young -- a couple thousand years old .
and part of the ice is more than 100,000 years old .
the last images i &apos;d like to show you , show a eisberg that i photographiert in kekertsuatsiak in greenland .
very rarely you actually witnessed a rollenden .
here &apos;s what you see .
on the left , you see a little boat .
that &apos;s about five feet long .
please look at the shape of the iceberg and where it &apos;s in the wasserlinie .
you can see here , it starts to roll , and the boat has moved to the other side , the man is there .
that &apos;s the average size of a grönland-eisbergs .
it ragt about 120 feet from the water , or 40 meters .
and this video is in real time .
and just like that , the iceberg shows up a different side of his personality .
thank you .
my life is really extraordinary by working on some amazing projects .
but the best thing i &apos;ve ever been working on , it was about this guy .
his name is tempt .
tempt was one of the leading &apos; leading &apos; 80s .
then one day , he came back from walking and said , &quot; paps , my legs . &quot;
and that was the outbreak of the outbreak .
tempt is completely paralyzed today .
he can only use his eyes .
i stood across it .
i have a company that makes design and animation , so , is a complex part of what we admire in the world art and look at .
so we decided to be tony -- tempt -- and to support his thing .
i met with his father and his brother and he said , &quot; we &apos;ll give you this money .
what are you going to do with that ? &quot;
and his brother said , &quot; i can only talk to tony .
i just want to go back to him and i said , &quot; wait , &quot; wait , i didn &apos;t -- i saw stephen hawking , can &apos;t communicate all the people that communicate through these devices ? &quot;
and he said , &quot; no , just if you &apos;re hearing about higher gesellschaftsschicht and a remarkable insurance , you can really do it .
normal people are not available to these devices . &quot;
and i said , &quot; how are you communicating ? &quot;
did anybody see the film &quot; schmetterling and &quot; taucherglocke ?
so they communicate -- so they walk along their fingers .
i staunte , &quot; very archaisch , how can that be ? &quot;
so i came with the need , just auszustellen , and i made a check that i didn &apos;t know the leiseste of how i was supposed to be einlösen .
i &apos;m verpflichtete to the place and i think about his brother and his father -- in the words , &quot; well , my proposition is that this is , &quot; well , my suggestion is that , tony &apos;s going to talk , we &apos;ll get a machine , and we &apos;ll find a way to make his art again .
because it &apos;s a farce that someone who &apos;s carrying all that in their own , it can &apos;t communicate . &quot;
i was talking about a few months later .
i met these guys from grl , graffiti research , and they have a technology that allows them to project a light on any surface and then draw with a laserpointer that registriert only the negative area .
so they &apos;re moving around and they make kunstinstallationen like this .
they say all of the things that are going to be shown up there , follow a life cycle .
it starts with the geschlechtsteilen , then the schimpfwörter , after that , the bush-verleumdungen and the end , people actually make art .
but there was always a life cycle in their presentation .
so i went home and i ate her wife with everything and we thought , &quot; well , second time , if you can use your eyes to control things , then we should find a way that tempt can control a laser so that he can graffiti a laser , that would be awesome . &quot;
this was the beginning of the journey .
and about two years later , about a year later , a lot of organization and lots and lots of things , we &apos;ve done some things .
first , we &apos;ve got the insurance company to do the doors , and actually , for a device , they can get a device that he can communicate with -- a stephen hawking-maschine .
this was incredible .
and he &apos;s really extremely funny -- i call him yoda , because you &apos;re talking to him , or you get an email , and you think , &quot; i &apos;m so unwürdig , this guy is incredible . &quot;
and we &apos;re also eingeflogen seven programmers all over the world -- literally from all the corners of the world -- to us home .
my wife , my children and i went into the garage , and these hackers and programmers and verschwörungstheoretiker and anarchisten have taken our house .
many of our friends thought we were beautiful stupid , and we were zurückkämen and all the images on the walls would be gewichen .
but for about two weeks , we &apos;re programmed , we went to the strandpromenade , in the venice , my children were involved , my dog and we created this .
it &apos;s called eyewriter , and you can see the description .
this is a cheap sonnenbrille that we bought at the strandpromenade of the venice , some kupferdraht and a few things from the hardware store and the elektronikhandel .
we took a ps3-kamera , have a ps3-kamera , and we have a device that &apos;s available to us , and now we can build it themselves , we ask the code for free , the software can download free .
so we created a device that &apos;s completely freely from constraints .
no insurance can be querstellen .
no hospital .
every single person can actually communicate with your eyes , or draw .
thank you .
thank you very much , that was incredible .
so at the end of the two weeks , we went back to tempts ward .
i love this picture because it &apos;s the room of somebody else , and this is his room .
now , there &apos;s all of this rummel in front of the great enthüllung .
and after about a year of planning , two weeks , nudelparties and durchgemachten nächten , tony for the first time , tony &apos;s zeichnete back to seven years .
and this is a very amazing picture because this is his life life support , and he looks beyond his life life .
we &apos;ve dropped his bed so he can see out .
we set up a set of projektor against a wall of the parkplatztes in the hospital .
and he drew again , for the first time , in the beisein of his family and friends -- and you can only imagine what was a sense of the parking lot .
and we had to lustigerweise in the parking lot , and we were being able to be part of the sprüher-szene .
at the end , he sent us an email with the content : &quot; for the first time , i &apos;ve drawn something .
i feel that i was going down under water , and finally , someone gegriffen down and i was going to go off my head so i can breathe . &quot;
is this not overwhelming ?
this is something like our kampfschrei .
it keeps us at the stange and we keep going on .
and we need to improve much more of this device .
it &apos;s an amazing device , but it &apos;s a zaubertafel .
and someone who has such a künstlerisches potential , deserves so much more .
so we &apos;re doing how to make it better , faster and stronger .
since that time , we &apos;ve been receiving all kinds of recognition .
we won a few awards .
remember it &apos;s free , none of us deserves .
it comes all from our own pockets .
so the auszeichnungen were , &quot; oh , that &apos;s fantastic . &quot;
armstrong twitterte about us and then , in december , the time-magazine honor for us as one of the 50 best inventions in 2010 , which was really great .
the coolste is -- and this includes the whole circle -- that it &apos;s that april , the geffen moca in downtown los angeles , will be a exhibition called &quot; the kind of the kind of the streets . &quot;
and there are probably the hardest representative of the straßenkunstszene of the straßenkunstszene , banksy , shepard fairey , caws -- all these guys are going to be there .
tempt will be part of the show , which is pretty abgefahren .
so basically , i &apos;m going to say , if you look at something that is impossible , then you can do it .
everything in this room was impossible -- this stage , this computer , the eyewriter , the eyewriter -- everything that was impossible .
you can do it -- you all here .
i &apos;m not a programmer , and i had never had anything with augenerfassungstechnologie , but i just captured something and surrounded me with amazing people so we could put something on the legs .
and this question should be each of you and that &apos;s every single day where you have something to get the done , and if not now , when ? and if not i , who then ?
thank you .
so i write for kids , and i &apos;m probably most of the most common gelesener of america .
and i always say people , i don &apos;t want to get a scientist .
you can have me as a farmer , or leather , but no one has ever chosen any farmer .
i want to tell you today about circles and offenbarungen .
well , an epiphany is usually something that you find because you &apos;ve dropped it somewhere .
you &apos;re about the block , and it &apos;s going to be a big revelation .
this is a painting of a circle .
one of my friends has made it -- richard bollingbroke .
it &apos;s the kind of complicated circle that i want to tell you today .
my circle started in the &apos; 60s at the high school in stow , ohio where i was the klassenschwuchtel .
i was the one who was beaten in the jungentoilette green and blue , until a teacher saved my life .
they saved my life by using the toilet in the lehrerzimmer .
that &apos;s what they did .
she did it for three years .
and i had to go out of the city .
i had a thumb , i had 85 dollars , and it went down to san francisco in california -- i found a liebhaber -- and then in the &apos; 80s , i found it important to record a work on aids-organisationen .
about three or four years ago , i got a call from this teacher , wife , who said , &quot; i have to see her .
i &apos;m sad that we never learned each other as adults .
can you come to ohio , and please come together with the man i know that they &apos;ve found it in the world .
and i should mention that i &apos;ve got bauspeicheldrüsenkrebs , and i want you to move forward . &quot;
well , the next day we were in cleveland .
we looked at them , we laughed , we were crying , and we knew they had to be a hospiz .
we found one for them , we took them , and we took us around them , and we gave her to her family , because it needed to be .
it was something that we knew to do .
and just as the woman who was learning to me as adults , i was going to know , turned into a box full of asche and put it in my hands .
what happened was that the circle closed , it had become a circle -- and the revelation i was talking about was actually .
the revelation is that death is a part of life .
she saved my life , and my partner and i saved her .
and you know , this part of life needs everything that need the rest of life .
he needs truth and beauty , and i &apos;m so glad that this is so often mentioned .
he needs the same -- he would need love and pleasure . and it &apos;s about us to give these things .
thank you .
imagine a big explosion , while you &apos;re standing up at 1,000 feet .
imagine a plane full of smoke .
imagine a triebwerk , das , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack .
this sounds fear .
well , i had a unique place to this day ; i was sitting on 1d .
i was the only one who could speak with the flugbegleitern .
so i looked at her , and they said , &quot; no problem , we &apos;ve got a couple of birds . &quot;
the pilot had already gewendet the machine , and we were not so far away .
you could see manhattan .
two minutes later , three things happened at the same time .
the pilot , the machine , is , he would put the machine out of the hudson river .
that &apos;s not the route .
it turns off the triebwerke .
imagine a geräuschloses plane .
and then he said three words -- the words i &apos;ve ever heard .
he says , &quot; bereitmachen for the aufprall . &quot;
i had no longer to talk about the bordpersonal .
i could see it in her eyes , there was horror , life was at the end .
i want to share with you three things that i &apos;ve learned from that day .
i learned that in a moment , everything else is different .
we have these lebensplan , we have these things that we want to do in life , and i thought about all the people i wanted to reach out of a hand , and it didn &apos;t work , all the zäune i wanted to flicken , all the experiences i wanted to do .
while i was thinking about that , a phrase , i was , &quot; i &apos;m collecting bad wine . &quot;
because if the wine is in the far , and the person is there , i open it .
i never want to move more a little bit of life .
and this urgency , this goal , has really changed my life .
the second thing i learned about this day -- and this was when we brücke the george washington bridge , so pretty much around -- i thought , human , there &apos;s one thing i really bereue .
i had a good life .
in my own humanity and with my failures , i strebte , i &apos;d become better , to become better , in everything i &apos;m going to do .
but in my humanity , i have given my ego of my ego .
and i &apos;m bedauerte the time i verschwendet for bedeutungslose things , with people who mean something .
and i thought about the relationship with my wife , to friends , to people .
and after that , when i thought about it , i decided i decided to verbannen negative energy from my life .
it &apos;s not perfect , but it &apos;s much better .
i didn &apos;t have a couple of years old with my wife .
it feels great .
i &apos;m not trying to have a little bit , i &apos;m going to be happy to be happy .
the third thing i learned -- and while the internal clock is beginnnt , &quot; 15 , 14 , 13 , ... &quot;
you can see the water .
i said , &quot; please flieg in the air . &quot;
i don &apos;t want this thing to break in 20 parts , as you know from a dokumentationen .
while we &apos;re abstürzen , i had this feeling , human being dying , not terrifying .
almost as we prepare for our lives for it .
but it was really sad .
i didn &apos;t want to go ; i love my life .
and these sadness really formierte in a thought , which is that i just wish for one thing .
i wish i could grow up my kids .
about a month after that , i went to a show of my daughter -- erstklässler , not much more künstlerisches talent .
... not yet .
and i &apos;m feiere , i &apos;m crying like a little child .
and in the world , everything made a sense of a sense .
i realized then , by the time , i connected the dots to the things that it &apos;s just about being a great father .
more than anything , everything else , is my single goal in life , a good father .
i was given the wonder that i didn &apos;t die of that day .
i got another gift , which is to see in the future , and come back and different .
my call to everybody who &apos;s flying today , is : imagine the same thing on your flight -- please -- but imagine it , and how would you change ?
what would you do to aufschieben that because you think they were always there ?
how would you change your relationships and the negative energy in it ?
and more than anything else , are you the best parents that you can only be ?
thank you .
the idea behind the stuxnet computer-wurm is pretty simple .
we don &apos;t want iran to build the bomb .
the most important post for development nuclear weapons is the uran-anreicherungs-einrichtung of natanz .
the gray boxes you see here , these are echtzeit-kontrollsysteme .
if we &apos;re able to kompromittieren the systems that control the drehzahlen and the air , then we can actually cause a lot of problems with the zentrifuge .
these gray boxes don &apos;t walk with windows-software ; they &apos;re based on a completely different technology .
but if we can make it a effective windows-virus on a laptop einnistet , which is used by a wartungsingenieur , to turn this gray box , we &apos;re in business .
and that &apos;s the planning behind the stuxnet .
so we &apos;re starting with a windows-dropper .
the nutzdaten are transferiert into the gray box , beschädigen the zentrifuge and the iranian kernenergie-programm verzögert verzögert .
this is a kinderspiel , or ?
i want to tell you how we found that .
when we began to stuxnet our research six months ago , it was completely unknown , which was the meaning and purpose of this .
the only thing we knew is very , very complicated , which is the most complex part , the most part , he made by unzähligen zero- .
and it seemed to be a little bit vorzuhaben , with these gray boxes , these echtzeit- kontrollsystemen .
the erregte of our attention , and we started a labor- project where we infected our environment with stuxnet , and we looked at that .
and then something weird happened .
stuxnet &apos;s verhielt , like a laborratte , who doesn &apos;t like our cheese , she didn &apos;t like it -- schnüffelte , but didn &apos;t want to eat it .
that made no sense in my eyes .
and after we &apos;ve been experimenting with different kinds of cheese , i went to that this is an gezielter attack .
we &apos;re looking at a specific goal .
the dropper streift aktiv on the gray box , when a particular configuration is discovered , even if the special program that &apos;s going to get to the target is to get it out .
and if not , nothing does nothing .
so , i really got my interest , and we started working with it , almost around the clock , because i thought , well , we don &apos;t know what the goal is .
it might say , for example , we can be an us- american power station , or a chemieanlage in germany .
so we should be better to find out what the goal is .
so extrahierten and dekompilierten the code code , and we found that he &apos;s aufstrukturiert in two digital sprengköpfe -- a smaller and a bigger .
and we also realized they were very professional , by people who were obviously available to all of their insider- information .
they knew all bits and bytes that had to attack them .
probably they even knew the schuhgröße of the maschinenbedieners .
so they knew everything .
and if you &apos;ve already noticed that the dropper of stuxnet complex and high-tech , let me tell you , the nutzdaten are a science for themselves .
it &apos;s much more than anything we &apos;ve ever seen .
here you see a clip from this angriffs- code .
we &apos;re talking about -- about 15,000 lines code .
it looks pretty much like altmodische assemblersprache .
and i want to tell you how we were able to get smart in this code .
so , after the first thing we were looking for , we were systemfunktions- , because we know what that cause .
and then we went to timern and datenstrukturen and tried to connect these with the real world -- with potential targets in the real world .
so we needed theories about these goals that we could demonstrate or prove .
to make these theories , we call ourselves that it &apos;s definitely about hochgradige sabotage , it &apos;s got to be a hochwertiges goal , and it &apos;s very likely to be in iran because there are most infections .
well , in this area , there &apos;s not several thousand goals .
basically , it &apos;s going to go out to the buschehr nuclear power system and the urananreicherungsanlage of natanz .
so i said to my assistant , &quot; bring me a list of all the experts for zentrifugen and power plants from our kundenstamm . &quot;
and i called them and they zapfte their knowledge to compare their expertise with what we found in code and found in the data .
and that worked very well .
so , it was possible to get the little digital sprengkopf with the rotorsteuerung .
the rotor is this moving part of the zentrifuge , this black object that you see .
and if you &apos;re manipulated the speed of this rotors , you &apos;re actually able to crack the rotor , and eventually , to get the zentrifuge explode .
what we found is that the goal of the attack actually was to be slow and unheimlich , obviously in the trying to try to be verzweifeln , so that they &apos;re not able to get to the back of it .
the great digital sprengkopf -- we got a insight by looking at very specific data and datenstrukturen .
so for example , the number of 164 is very out of this code , you can &apos;t miss it .
i started durchzuarbeiten scientific literature on how these zentrifugen are built in natanz , and found that they &apos;re strukturiert in what they &apos;re doing , and each kaskade contains 164 .
so it made sense , it fit together .
and it &apos;s got better .
these zentrifugen in iran are divided into 15 so-called levels .
and guess what we found in the angriffscode ?
it &apos;s almost identical structure .
so again , that fit really well .
and this gave us a big confidence for this that we were looking at .
now , don &apos;t get me wrong , that wasn &apos;t just like that .
these results have been achieved by several weeks of work .
and often we just ran into a sackgasse and we had to collect ourselves .
but we found that both of the digital are actually in reality is to take the same goal , but from different directions .
the little sprengkopf takes a kaskade , and überdreht the rotoren and slow them and the big sprengkopf tritt with six kaskaden in interactions and manipulated them .
so , in the large and large , we &apos;re very confident that we actually have what the goal is .
it &apos;s natanz , and it &apos;s just natanz .
so we don &apos;t have to worry that other goals are made by stuxnet .
here &apos;s something really cool stuff that we &apos;ve discovered -- it &apos;s really gehauen me .
there &apos;s the gray box down there , and the top is that you see the zentrifugen .
now , what makes this thing is that it abfängt the eingehenden values of sensors -- so for example of drucksensoren and vibrationssensoren -- and it &apos;s stellt code that &apos;s still going on , with the falschen of the eingehenden data .
and actually , this falschen eingehenden data has already taken before .
so it &apos;s just like hollywoodfilmen , where the überwachungskamera is fed with vorher videoaufnahmen .
that &apos;s cool , isn &apos;t it ?
now , the idea of this is not just that maschinenbediener maschinenbediener in the kontrollraum .
in fact , it &apos;s much more dangerous and more vulnerable .
the idea is to überlisten a digital sicherheitssystem .
we need digital sicherheitssysteme where a human maschinenbediener can &apos;t respond fast enough .
so in a power station , for example , if the big dampfturbine is going to be fast , you have to open up in the millisekunden .
of course , this can &apos;t be done by a human maschinenführer .
so , at this point , we need digital sicherheitssysteme .
and when the risk is , then really bad things happen .
the power station can explode .
and neither the maschinenführer , nor the sicherheitssystem will notice .
this is scary .
but it gets worse .
and what i &apos;m saying now is very important .
think about it . this attack is generisch .
he &apos;s got nothing to do with zentrifugen , with urananreicherung .
so he would work for example -- in a power station or a automobilfabrik .
it &apos;s generisch .
and you don &apos;t have to -- as the angreifer -- you don &apos;t have to put the nutzdaten on a usb- stick , as we saw in the stuxnet .
you could use ordinary wurm- technology to spread .
you have to spread it as far as possible .
and if you do that , you end up with a cyber- massenvernichtungswaffe .
that &apos;s the consequence we need to ask .
so unfortunately , the biggest number of goals for those attacks are not in the middle east .
they &apos;re in the united states , in europe and japan .
so all these green areas , these are the most important environments .
we need to ask ourselves , and we &apos;re going to get better at us .
thank you .
i have a question .
ralph , it was very much reported that people think the mossad is the hauptorganisation behind .
is that your opinion ?
okay , you want to really know that ?
yeah . okay .
i think the mossad is involved , but the driving force is not israel .
so the driving force is the most cyber- force .
there &apos;s only one , and this is the united states -- fortunately , fortunately .
because otherwise our problem would even be even bigger .
thank you for having a heidenangst eingejagt . thank you .
i spent the last few years where i think in situations that normally are very difficult and at the same time , kind of dangerous .
i went to prison -- hard .
i worked in a kohlebergwerk -- dangerous .
i filmed in kriegsgebieten -- difficult and dangerous .
and i spent 30 days trying to eat nothing like this -- spaßig at the beginning , a little bit difficult in the middle , very dangerous at the end .
i actually , i &apos;ve exposed to the most of my career , to fürchterlichen situations , and all of this is just for trying to study , social , and hopefully , are fesselnd and interesting , and hopefully kind of understand , in a way , to make it fun and accessible to the audience .
so when i knew i was going to come here to look at a tedtalk and see the world of branding and sponsoring , i knew i would make something a little different .
some of you may have heard about that i &apos;ve had a display on ebay a couple of weeks ago .
i was going to get some facebook-nachrichten , some twitter-nachrichten , and i gave people the possibility to erstehen the namensrechte on my tedtalk .
really , some happy people and companies and companies and non-profit , i &apos;m sure that chris anderson got this to never be again -- the namensrechte of the talk you &apos;re just seeing , which is not a title , and not a title , and not a lot of evidence for what the subject was going to be .
so what you &apos;d be here was : my name here : my tedtalk , which you don &apos;t know what the subject will be , and the one to the end up after the content could be able to fly , especially if i &apos;d put their company on their commitment to their commitment .
but , for instance , it &apos;s a very good media opportunity .
you know how many people are watching these tedtalks ?
a whole lot .
this is just the arbeitstitel , by the way .
so despite this warning , i knew anybody would buy the namensrechte .
if you asked me this before a year ago , i wouldn &apos;t have been able to say that with a certainty .
but in the new project i work on , my new film , we &apos;re exploring the world of marketing , advertising .
as i said , i &apos;ve gone in some pretty awful situations in some pretty awful situations , but nothing could prepare for me , nothing could be able to get to anything that was difficult and so dangerous as these guys in a room .
you know , i had the idea of a movie .
what i want to do is a movie about product placement , marketing and advertising , where the whole movie is funded by product placement , marketing and advertising .
and the film is called &quot; the greatest movie ever . &quot;
so what happens in the greatest movie ever , it &apos;s all , from the top up to the end , from the beginning to end , with something that &apos;s like a brands , from the titelsponsor that you &apos;re going to see in the movie , that &apos;s the brand x. .
now this brand , the qualcomm stadion , the staples center .
these people are being connected to the film in the classroom -- forever .
and so the movie is going to look at this whole idea -- that &apos;s what ? in infinity , for forever ?
i &apos;m a redundante person .
that was more to the betonung .
it was &quot; in infinity , for forever . &quot;
but we &apos;re not only going to have the brand x , but we &apos;re going to make sure that we &apos;re going to sell any possible category of the movie .
so we might sell a shoe and it &apos;s going to be the greatest shoe that you ever have .
the greatest car you ever have , from &quot; the greatest movie ever sold &quot; the greatest drink you &apos;ve ever had , a aufmerksamkeit of &quot; the greatest movie ever ever . &quot;
so the idea is , besides showing that brands are part of life , actually , to get them to finance the film ?
and we actually show the whole process of how it works .
the goal of all this film is transparency .
you &apos;re going to see the whole thing in the movie of the movie .
so this is the whole concept , the whole movie , from beginning to end .
and i would be happy to see if ceg would help to do this .
you know , it &apos;s funny , because when i first heard it , it &apos;s the ultimate respect for the audience .
i don &apos;t know how empfänglich people will be .
have a perspective -- i don &apos;t want to use &quot; perspective , &quot; because that &apos;s got a negative konnotation -- but you know how that &apos;s going ?
how much money is needed to realize that ?
1.5 million .
i think it &apos;s hard to meet it , but i think it &apos;s worth a very , very familiar brands , a few really familiar brands .
who knows when the movie comes out , we might see a horde vollidioten .
what do you think , how the answer is ?
the answer is highly likely to be highly likely .
but is it a difficult thing about the film or a hard thing about me ?
jk : both .
so , meaning , not that optimistic .
so , my lord , can you help me ? i need help .
i can help .
okay .
fantastic .
we have to think about what brands .
yeah .
if you look at the people who have to do it .
there are some places that we can turn to .
so , imagine the camera .
i thought , &quot; imagine the camera , &quot; would mean we wanted to lead a hintergrundgespräch .
it turns out that it meant to be , &quot; we want to do nothing with your film . &quot;
and just so disappeared all these companies , one after the other .
no wanted to have something to do with the film .
i was amazed .
they didn &apos;t want to have nothing to do with the project .
and i was confused , because i thought the whole idea was the idea of advertising , the idea of advertising , to present your product as many people as possible , so many people like possible .
especially in the world today , this interface of new and old media and the media media media -- is not the idea of being in this new exciting vermittlungsinstrument , that the masses is going to get this message .
no , that was what i thought .
but you see , the problem was that my idea had a fatalen mistake , and that was the case .
actually , no , it wasn &apos;t the mistakes at all .
that would have been no problem at all .
that would have been okay .
but what that picture is , is a problem .
you see , if you enter transparency in the google-suche , this is -- this is one of the first images that appears .
i really like the kind of sergey sergey . now .
this was the problem : transparency -- frei of deception and tücke , just to find out , and immediately understand ; charakterisiert of sichtbarkeit and access to information , especially in terms of geschäftspraktiken -- the last line is certainly the biggest problem .
you know , we &apos;re listening to a whole bunch of transparency .
our politicians say it , our president says it , even our leaders say it .
but if it comes to the point , it &apos;s going to be done , it changes something .
but why ? well , transparency is fear -- like this strange bear , who still brüllt .
it &apos;s unvorhersagbar -- like this strange landstraße .
and it &apos;s also very risky .
what else is risky ?
a whole dish of cool whip food .
this is very risky .
so when i started talking to the companies and tell them that we wanted to tell this story , they said , &quot; no , we want you to tell a story .
we want you to tell a story , but we just want you to tell our story . &quot;
you see , when i was a kid , and my father caught me in lying -- and there he &apos;s sitting there and he looks at me -- he would say , &quot; my son , there are three versions of each of the story .
there &apos;s your version , there &apos;s my version , and there &apos;s the real version . &quot;
so you can see , with this film , we wanted to tell the real version .
but there was only one company , an authority , to help us -- and it &apos;s only because i &apos;ve known john bond and richard kirshenbaum for years -- i found that i had to do it alone , i had to deal with the mittelsmann and go directly with my team .
so what you suddenly started to understand -- or what i started to understand -- was that when you start talking about these companies , the idea of how your brand is understood , a big problem .
i have friends who make big , giant hollywood-filme , and i have friends who are little independent-filme like me .
and my friends , the big , enormous hollywood-filme , say that the reason their films are so successful , the markenpartnern they have .
and then , say , my friends , they make small independent-filme , &quot; well , how are we going to compete with these big giant hollywood-filmen ? &quot;
and the film is called &quot; the greatest movie ever . &quot;
so , how exactly are we going to see the movie in the movie ?
whenever i make myself on the way , and always when i open the medizinschrank , you &apos;ll see ban deodorant .
and every time i &apos;m watching someone , i can say , &quot; are you fresh enough for this interview ?
are you ? you &apos;re a little nervous .
i want to help you calm down .
so maybe you should be a little bit of a hiervon interview .
and then we offer one of these great düfte .
either &quot; floral fusion &quot; or a &quot; paradise winds , &quot; you &apos;ll have the choice .
we &apos;re going to be equipped for both men and women -- solid , roll-on , or a stick , whatever .
this is the kurzfassung .
now i can all answer your questions and give you an ausfühliche version .
we &apos;re a smaller brand .
as you talked about the smaller movies , we &apos;re a herausforderer brand .
so we don &apos;t have a budget like other brands .
so , making things like this -- you know , reminds people of the ban -- that &apos;s kind of why we &apos;re interested in .
what words would you describe ?
ban is blank .
this is a great question .
woman : überlegene technology .
technology is not the way you should describe something that is someone under the achseln .
we &apos;re talking about bold , fresh .
i think , &quot; fresh &quot; is a great word that these category really makes a difference to something , as opposed to &quot; bekämpft odor and moisture . &quot;
it keeps you fresh .
we can hold them longer -- better fresh fresh , fresh , three times .
these things have a positivere effect .
and this is a millionen-konzern .
what about me ? what about the druchschittstypen ?
i have to talk to the man on the street that are like me , otto-normal-verbraucher .
they &apos;re supposed to tell me something about my brand .
how would you describe your brand ?
hmmm , my brand ?
i don &apos;t know .
i like beautiful clothes .
frau revival hits skaterpunk except for the waschtag .
well , what &apos;s the brand ?
unique .
i think the genre , the style i have , is &quot; dark glamour . &quot;
i like a lot of black colors , a lot of grautöne and so on .
but normally i have a accessoire , like sonnenbrillen , or jewelry and such a stuff .
if dan would be a brand , he probably would be a classic mercedes cabrio .
and man 2 : the brand i &apos;m is , i would say , lässige fly .
woman 2 : part of the part , part of the east , part of brooklyn-mädchen -- i don &apos;t know .
man 3 : i &apos;m the schmusetyp .
i sell schmusetiere across the country , globally .
so i think that &apos;s my brand .
that &apos;s my brand in my little , verzerrten industry .
man 4 : my brand is fedex , because i was ausliefere .
man five : brand gescheiteter alkoholsüchtiger schreiberling .
is this ?
lawyer : i &apos;m a anwaltsmarke .
i &apos;m tom .
well , we can &apos;t all be the tom-marke , but i &apos;m often seeing the interface of dark glamour and lässiger fly .
and what happened is , i needed a experts .
i took someone who could go inside my head , someone who really could help me understand what to call &quot; the markenpersönlichkeit . &quot;
and so i found a company called olson zaltman in pittsburg .
they have companies like nestle , febreze , hallmark , helped to find these markenpersönlichkeit .
if they could do it for the things , they could help me .
you brought your images , right ?
i have this . the first picture is a picture of my family .
just tell me a little bit about how it &apos;s connected with your thoughts and feelings about you .
these are the people who form my world .
tell me about this world .
md : this world is , i think , the world &apos;s world is the world that you live in -- like humans around you , the friends , the family , the way you live life , the work and so .
all these things came and start from a place , and i came to my family in west virginia .
what &apos;s the next thing you want to talk about .
next . this was the most beautiful day of my life .
what context is that what about the thoughts and feelings about you ?
it &apos;s like i &apos;d like to be .
i like things that are different .
i like things that are weird . i like weird things .
tell me about the &quot; why &quot; -phase -- what do you get us ?
what is the machete ? what are the puppenstadium of what they are ?
why is it important , neuzustarten ? what is the red ?
tell me a little bit about this part .
a little bit more about you that are not .
what else &apos;s metamorphosen are they going through ?
... that &apos;s not a fear . what kind of the kind of thing you do ?
eeeeee ! no , thank you .
thank you for your patience .
yeah . well , good .
yeah , i don &apos;t know what to be done .
there was a lot of crazy things going on .
the first thing i saw was this idea that their markenpersönlichekti are two separate separate separate , but ergänzende pages -- the morgan spurlock-marke is a achtsame / verspielte brand .
and the ergänzen is very good .
and i think there &apos;s almost a contradiction .
and i think some companies are just focusing on one strength , instead of both of them .
many companies tend to do this -- and this is the human nature -- to avoid things that you &apos;re not sure , you &apos;re going to be afraid , these elements , and that you will be welcome to these , and you turn them into a positive thing , and that &apos;s a geschickter schachzug .
what other brands are doing ?
the first is a classic , apple .
and you can see it here , target , wii , mini of mini and jetblue .
well , there are verspielte brands and brands brands , these things that come and go , but a verspielte , achtsame brand is a pretty strong thing .
a achtsame , verspielte brand . what is your brand ?
if someone asked them to describe their markenidentität , their markenpersönlichkeit , how would you ?
you &apos;re a up-attribut ? are you something that &apos;s going to get blood in wallungen ?
or are they more a down-attribut ?
are you something that &apos;s a little bit more quiet , more reservierter , more conservative ?
up-attribute are things that are playful , fresh , like the fresh prince , zeitgemäß , abenteuerlich , ausgefallen and lieblich like erol flynn , wendig , agil , magisch , magisch and mystisch like gandalf .
or are they more like a down-attribut ?
are they achtsam and mondän like 007 ?
are they established , traditionally , pflegend , beschützend , compassionate ?
are you reliable , stable , familiär , safe , geborgen , holy , bedacht , and how the dalai lama or yoda ?
and over the course , we had more than 500 companies that were up and down-firmen and the &quot; no &quot; said , because they were not part of the project .
they wanted to do nothing about this film , because they didn &apos;t have control , no control over the finished product .
but then , 17 markenpartner , who were willing to give up these control that would make with someone &apos;s business , and as i think , and the other thing that i &apos;m going to tell us to tell stories that we wouldn &apos;t have could have been able to tell stories -- stories that would never help you support .
they befähigten us to tell the story of the neuromarketing , as we tell the story in this film , that you used to use mris to make the lustzentren of the brain , both for advertising and also movies .
we went to sao paulo , where außenwerbung was banned .
in the entire city , there &apos;s no anzeigentafel , no poster , no flyer , nothing .
and we went in school school where companies are going to their way to verarmte schools , all the way .
the incredible thing for me is that the projects i got most of the feedback or where i had the greatest success , those are where i &apos;m going to interagierte with things .
and that &apos;s what these brands have done .
because they umgingen the mittelsmann , they umgingen the agencies , and they said that the agencies might not really have their interest in their sense .
i &apos;m going to negotiate with the artist directly .
i &apos;m going to work with him and create something completely different , something that people think that makes us think about our view .
and what was that for you ? what it was successful ?
now , since the film was premiere in the film film festival , we can see this .
and according to the burrelles , the premiere was in january , and since then -- and this is not even the whole thing -- there were 900 million aufrufe of this film .
it &apos;s just a zeitraum zeitraum , which is just a zeitraum of two weeks .
this is just online -- no press , no television .
the film was not going to be done .
there &apos;s no one online , again . no streaming .
he &apos;s not yet in other countries .
well , the film has a very big momentum .
and that &apos;s not bad for a project where almost every werbeagentur we talked about , to be their clients , to leave the fingers .
something i think is really , that if you take your chance , take risks that are in those risks .
i think if you keep people from it , you get them closer to failure .
i think , if you train your employees to avoid risks , you &apos;re all prepared to get a profit for the whole company .
i feel that we need to encourage people to take risks .
we need to encourage people to not have fear of having opportunity that you might have .
finally , in the process of progress , we should be welcome to fear .
we should put the bear in the cage .
welcome the fear . welcome the risk .
when i &apos;m a big löffel , we &apos;re going to welcome the risk .
and finally , we should be welcome to transparency .
today , more than ever before , it &apos;s a little bit more honest a lot of us .
and that &apos;s what i said , with honesty and transparency , my total talk , &quot; welcome to transparency , &quot; they were presented with my good friends of emc , who paid $ 7100 for the namensrechte on ebay .
big data for organizations around the world are transformed into great opportunities .
präsentiert , &quot; &quot; welcome transparency . &quot;
thank you very much .
now , morgan , in the name of transparency , this is what &apos;s happening to the $ 7100 ?
this is a great question .
i have a check in my pocket , ausgestellt on the oberorganisation of ted-organisation , the sapling-stiftung -- a check at höhe von to finance my ted-auftritt &apos;s next year .
my name is amit .
i did something else in google , and i regte , to make things with museums and art . my favorite chefin , which is also , i gave me green light .
and it took 18 months .
a lot of spaßiger negotiations and stories , i can tell you , with 17 , very interesting museums from nine countries .
but i &apos;m going to focus on the demo .
there &apos;s a lot of stories about why we &apos;ve done this .
i think my personal view is very simple with this slide and your access .
i grew up in india .
i was a great education -- i didn &apos;t -- i didn &apos;t -- but i had a lot of museums and that artwork is not access .
and then i went to visit these museums , i started learning a lot .
and while i was working for google , i tried to make this desire -- art to make art -- with technology .
so we then started a team , a great team , and we started with this .
i &apos;m going to start with the demonstration , and tell you some interesting things that happened since the launch .
so you can just go to googleartproject.com. .
you can be here in all these museums here .
there &apos;s the uffizi , the moma , the hermitage , the rijks , van gogh .
i even get in one of my favorite ones , the metropolitan museum of art in new york .
you get in two ways -- very simple .
click , and wumms , is in this museum .
it doesn &apos;t matter where they are -- and it &apos;s a bombay , mexico , it doesn &apos;t matter .
you &apos;re going around and amüsiert .
they want to be in the museum ?
open the map , and jump with a click .
in the drin , they &apos;re going to be the end of the gang .
just further . a lot of fun .
look at it .
thank you , but the best part comes .
so i &apos;m a lieblingsbilder , erntearbeiter , erntearbeiter from pieter breugel in the met .
i see this pluszeichen .
if the museum gave us the picture , it click on it .
this is now one of the images .
this is all the metadaten .
those of you who are really interested in art can click here -- but i click it away .
this is one of the images we &apos;ve been able to put in what we call the gigapixel-technologie .
this picture , for example , has about 10 billion bildpunkte , i think .
and a lot of people ask me , &quot; what &apos;s going to get for 10 billion ? &quot;
i &apos;m going to show you now .
you can get very easily in and rauszoomen .
you can see something fun here .
i love this guy ; his expression is unbezahlbar .
but then you really want deep in .
and so i started playing around , and i found that there &apos;s something going on .
and i thought , &quot; wait a minute , that sounds interesting . &quot;
i went close , and i realized that these kids actually did a little bit .
i was doing a little bit , talking with some familiar with some familiar , and actually found that it &apos;s a game called squail , which is a gans gans on the fastnachtsdienstag with a stick .
it &apos;s very popular .
i don &apos;t know why they did it , but i learned something about it .
in fact , to get close to it , you can go to the cracks .
just to give you the überblick , i &apos;m going to see you that you see what you get .
here we were , and this is the painting .
the best one is , but it &apos;s a second .
let &apos;s jump fast to moma , again in new york .
another lieblingsbild of mine , sternennacht .
and so , in the previous example , it was about finding details .
but what if you want to see the pinselstriche ?
and what &apos;s first when you see how van gogh is creating this kind of thing ?
you zoomed in . you can really go .
i &apos;m going to zoom in one of my favorite image of this picture until i really am at the rissen .
this is sternennacht , probably never seen before .
now i &apos;m going to show you my favorite function .
there &apos;s a lot of other , but i don &apos;t have the time .
this is the really cool part , it &apos;s called the world .
each of them , everybody -- are going to be rich or poor , whether they have a great house -- doesn &apos;t matter .
you can go and create your own museum -- from all these images , you can put your own collection .
just , you go in -- and i created this , it &apos;s called the power of zoom -- you can umherzoomen .
that &apos;s the gesandten , in the nationalgallerie .
you can put it all with your friends , and so that conversation starts to what you feel when you look at these meisterwerke .
i think , finally , i think , is the main thing that all the wonderful things that you don &apos;t come from here to google .
you don &apos;t even come out of the museums in my mind .
i shouldn &apos;t want to say that .
they come from the artists .
and that was a experience of humility for me .
i mean , i hope that we &apos;re going to be just gerecht with this digital medium of art , and they &apos;re ordentlich .
and the biggest question that i came to ask me is , &quot; did you have done this to replicate the experience of a museumsbesuchs ? &quot;
the answer is no .
it &apos;s supposed to add the experience .
that &apos;s the point . thank you .
thank you .
this is a representation of your brain . your brain can be divided in two .
this is the one on the left half , which is the logical side , and then the right half that is the intuitive page .
if we had a scale to measure the aptitute of each other hemisphere , we could represent their brain .
for example , this one is that anybody who &apos;s completely logical .
this would be somebody who &apos;s completely intuitive .
now , where would you be able to put your brain on that scale ?
some of us might have chosen for one of these extremes , but i think that most people in the audience , their brain is something like this -- with a high aptitute , which is at the same time in both of these hemisphären .
it &apos;s not as if they &apos;re both of the same or something like that .
you can be logical and intuitive .
and so i look at me as one of the people , in common with most other experimental quantenphysikern , who need a good share of logic to take the complex ideas together .
but at the same time , we need a good share of intuition to actually do experiments .
how do we develop this intuition ? well , we love to play with things .
so we go out and play with it and then look how it react to it , and then we start to develop our intuition .
basically , they do the same .
so one of the intuitionen you developed over the years is probably that a thing can be only in a place .
i mean , it can be strange sounds about thinking that a thing is at the same time in two different places , but they were not born with this idea , they developed it .
i remember watching a child playing on a bodenschwelle .
he was a kleinkind , and not very good at it , and he was constantly falling .
but i bet that it &apos;s teaching him to the bodenschwelle , a very valuable lesson , which is that big things can &apos;t just pass you , and that you &apos;re going to stay in a place .
and this is a great model of the world , so long they &apos;re not a teilchenphysiker .
it would be a very furchtbares model for a teilchenphysiker , because they don &apos;t play with bodenschwellen , but with these little strange particles .
and if you &apos;re playing with your particles , you &apos;re going to find all sorts of weird things -- how they fly straight through walls , or they can be at the same time in two different places .
and so they wrote all these observations , and they called the theory of quantum mechanics .
this was the state of physics , a few years ago , and you took quantum mechanics to describe the little tiny particles .
but you didn &apos;t need them to describe the big everyday objects around us .
that &apos;s not my intuition , and it &apos;s perhaps just because i don &apos;t play with particles .
well , i sometimes play with them , but not very often .
and i &apos;ve never seen them .
i mean , no one ever seen a particle .
but my logical side doesn &apos;t have it .
because if all of these things are made up of particles and all these particles are following the rules of quantum mechanics , then not just do everything that follow the rules of quantum mechanics ?
i don &apos;t see why it &apos;s not going to be like that .
so i would feel better about the whole thing , if we could be sort of showing that alltagsgegenstände also follow the rules of quantum mechanics .
so i did a couple of years ago to do that .
i created one .
this is the first object you can see , which was in the quantenmechanischen superposition .
so what we &apos;re looking at here is a tiny computer chip .
and you can see this green dot there in the middle .
this is the piece of metal that i &apos;m going to talk about .
this is an image of the object .
i &apos;ll just expand it up here . we &apos;re looking at the center right here .
and here &apos;s a really very big picture of this little piece of metal .
so what we &apos;re looking at is a little bit of metal that &apos;s shaped like a sprungbrett and it &apos;s above the edge .
so i made this thing in a similar way to make a computer chip .
i went to a clean room with new siliziumscheiben , and rackerte for 100 hours to all the big devices .
for the last little bit , i had to build my own machine -- to get this kind of a swimming pool and bekommen hole and the thing .
this thing has has the ability to be in the quantenmechanischen superposition , but it takes a little help to do it .
look , let me give you an analogy .
you know how unbehaglich it &apos;s in a full elevator ?
i mean , if i &apos;m in the elevator alone , i &apos;m going to do all kinds of odd things , but then i add other people and i hear all these things because i don &apos;t want to make them with it or , frankly , they &apos;re verschrecke .
so quantum mechanics tells us that unbewegliche objects are just as much .
the mitfahrer for unbewegliche objects are not only people , but also the light that seems to them and the wind , and the heat of them are over and the heat of the room .
and so we knew that if we wanted to see that this piece of metal acts , we had to schmeissen all the mitreisenden .
and we did that .
we turned off the light , put it in a vacuum and saugten the whole air , and it kühlten it up to almost , right now , the piece of metal freely , to behave like it .
so we measured his movement .
we found that it really was really weird .
instead of it &apos;s just quiet , it vibrierte it . the way it was kind of like vibrierte was like this -- like a ausdehnender and together ziehender blasebalg .
in which we gave him a little push , we could make it veranlassen at the same time and not to make it -- something that was allowed to do in quantum mechanics .
so what i &apos;m telling you is what really fantastic .
what does it mean to make an object for the same time and not to make it ?
let &apos;s think about the atoms .
so the first case : all the trillionen of atoms from the same metal is still silent there and the same time are moving together and down .
only to be accurate , stimmen voices .
the rest of the time are delokalisiert .
that means that every atom is at the same time at the same time , at the same time , which is , at the same time , that the whole piece of metal is metal in two different places .
i think that &apos;s really cool .
really , really .
it was worth me for all this year in the green space , because , if you can , the massstabsunterschied between one atom and this piece of metal is about the difference between the piece of metal and you .
so if a single atom can be at the same time at two different places , this piece of metal can be made in two different places , why not you ?
i mean , it &apos;s just what my logical side says .
so , imagine you &apos;re at the same time in several places , what would that feel like ?
how would your consciousness deal with your body in the room ?
there &apos;s another aspect of the story .
when we aufwärmten the light and reinschauten the box , we saw that the piece of metal was always in a piece of metal .
and so i had to develop this new intuition that it looks like all the objects in the elevator are actually just quanten objects that are in a small room together .
you hear a lot of talk about how quantum mechanics says everything is connected to everything .
now , that &apos;s not really right .
there &apos;s more more than it , it &apos;s still deeper .
it &apos;s like these connections , their connections with all the things around them , literally define who they are , and this is the tiefsinnige and strange thing .
thank you .
in 2007 , i decided that we should be rekonzeptualisieren as we think about economic development .
it should be our goal , that if families are thinking about where they live and work , they have given to them , between at least one hand full of different cities that are all in competition to be new bewohner .
we &apos;re far away from this goal right now .
there are billions of people in developing countries that don &apos;t even have a single city to be available to it .
but the amazing thing about cities is that they &apos;re so much more value than it costs to build .
so we could just simply einfach the world with duzenden , maybe even hundreds of new cities .
now this may sound absurd for you , unless you &apos;ve never thought about new cities .
they &apos;re just going to share building homes from the cities .
imagine , half of the people who want to live in apartments , they &apos;ve already done this , but not yet .
you could try to extend the capacity of already existing apartments .
but you know what you &apos;re going to be willing to be about to avoid in these homes and their environment to avoid beschwerden and abzulenken from the ausbau .
so it turns out , as a very hard time , it &apos;s all very hard to have all these kinds of things .
but you could go to a completely new place , building a new building block , and the laws of the laws that would support such a building and not behindern .
so i proposed that governments create new space that offer enough space for a city and gave them a name : charter cities .
later , i found that , about the same time , javier and octavio , for the challenge of reform , they have thought about the challenge of reform .
they knew that every year of 75.000 honduraner verlassen their country to auszuwandern in the united states , and they wanted to know what they could do to make sure that these people can stay in their own country and do exactly the same in the honduras .
and this is what happens when we put a unbesiedelte area of our country &apos;s land , what happens when we just give you a message of our country &apos;s area , which is a part of the american message , and a part of the canadian botschaft- , and when people go to work , under the canadian rules or the united states , can you work there ,
in the summer of 2009 , there was some major verfassungskrise of verfassungskrise .
in the next planmäßigen elections , the pepe lobo in a umschwung , whose program both innovative and also promised the schlichtung .
he asked octavio to be stabschef .
in the meantime , i was actually prepared for a talk at tedglobal .
in improvement , try and through the study of consumers , i tried to reduce this complicated concept of the charter city , to the most elements .
the first point is the importance of laws , laws that determine that you cannot be able to be able to be able to have existing wohnungsbesitzer .
we &apos;re giving the new technologies to pay attention , but for progress , it requires technologies and laws . and it &apos;s usually the laws that we are .
in the fall of 2010 , a friend of guatemala sent out the link to the tedtalk .
and again , it showed him .
they called me .
and they said , &quot; let &apos;s present the head of our country . &quot;
so we met in december in the sitzungssaal of a hotel in miami .
i tried to make a lot of how valuable cities are , just like a lot more valuable than you are .
and i used this chart to show how valuable rohland is in a place like new york , and think that a area is worth thousands of dollars per square meter .
but it was a pretty abstract discussion at a point where there was a pause , and i said , &quot; paul , could we might be able to look at the tedtalk . &quot;
so the tedtalk put in very simple form that a charter city is a place where the beginning of the unbewohntes land is , a gründungsvertrag , which is the laws that are there , and the people who offers the opportunity to live either under those rules or not .
and that &apos;s why i was asked by the president of the honduras who said that we need to make this project , that it &apos;s important , and that this is the way to bring our country .
i was asked to come to tegucigalpa and i was asked to give a talk at the fourth and fifth january .
so i &apos;ve given another with some facts , gefüllten talk that has a chart like this , which has tried to make sure that if you want to make a lot of value in a city , it &apos;s got to be a very big city .
this is a picture of the city , and the sketch represents the new airport that was built in denver .
by the airport alone , a area of 100 quadratkilometern .
so i tried to convince the honduraner of this when you want to build a new city , you have to start with a kind of an area of at least 1,000 quadratkilometern .
this is more than 250 thousand tomorrow .
polite have applaudiert all the applaudiert .
the faces of the audience were very serious and attention .
the head of congress came up on the stage and said , &quot; professor romer , thank you for your talk , but maybe we could look at the tedtalk .
i have this laptop here on my laptop . &quot;
so i sat down , and they played the tedtalk .
and i came to the conclusion that a new city offers new possibilities .
there would be the possibility of living in a city that would be in honduras , rather than hundreds of miles away from the north .
and a new city has also emerging new opportunities for leaders .
the leaders of government in the government were dependent on aid from partnerländern , they could benefit from their partnerländern , which they would be able to support for the laws for this charter and for the durchführung that everybody can trust that the charter is really going to be really durchgesetzt .
and the realization from president lobo , was that the gewissheit of the durchsetzung that i thought about as a way to get foreign investors to get to this city and build the city to build the gleichbedeutend for all parties in the honduras that have been suffering from fear and misstrauen for many years .
we went into an area .
this picture is from this place .
it &apos;s a thousand square miles of a thousand square .
and shortly after , on the 19th january , you &apos;ve voted congress for a change in the constitution to have a verfassungsgemäße policy that &apos;s special entwicklungsgebiete .
in a country that just has a major crisis of crisis , congress was elected for the verfassungsänderung of the verfassungsänderung .
all parties , all the fraktionen of society , supported this .
to be part of the constitution , it has to be approved twice by congress .
in 17th february , it was genehmigt for the second time with a voice .
immediately after that choice , between the 21st and february february , a delegation of about 30 hunduranern of the world , who were most interested in the world , in the business of the städtebaus .
one place is south .
this is a picture of a big , new core center that built wurde- in south america , as the core center .
all you can see in this picture was built within four years after it took four years to get the genehmigungen .
the other place that was very interested in the städtebau is singapore .
it &apos;s already two cities built in china , and the third is in preparation .
so if you &apos;re basically thinking about it , it &apos;s where we are today .
they already have a baugrundstück , and they &apos;re already thinking that area is the second city .
it &apos;s been working on a legal system that managern has been involved , and it &apos;s also been working on a legal system .
a country has already offered to be the supreme court available as court for the entgültige of the dortigen system of the dortigen system .
städtedesigner and -bauer are very interested in .
they actually bring funding to a .
one thing , as you already know , has already been already , there &apos;s a lot of mieter .
there are many of the ones that would like to be in america , especially in a place with a freihandelszone , and there are many people who &apos;d like to live there .
all over the world , there are 700 million people who say they &apos;d like to live permanent in a different place .
one million people left a year and wandern to the united states .
many of them are dads who are forced to leave their families to make a work sometimes , sometimes , single mothers who need to make enough money to be able to eat and afford clothes .
and unfortunately , sometimes , sometimes , kids are trying to find their parents , in some cases , have never seen more than that .
so what is it for an idea to think about this , to build a completely new city ?
or even duzende from these cities , or hundreds of hundreds of the world &apos;s all over the world ?
so what is it for an idea to be that every family has a choice between several cities that are in competition to new citizens ?
this is an idea that &apos;s worth spreading .
my friends from honduras have asked me to say , thank you .
you know how many decisions you do in a typical day ?
you know how many decisions you meet in a typical week ?
i recently made a poll with 2,000 people , and the average number of decisions that angabegemäß is a typical american american americans on a day .
and also , recently , a study of ceos who were watching the ceos for a week .
and these scientists , just the various subjects that they have been documenting with these ceo of these companies , and how much time they make decisions that are related to the issues .
and they found that an average ceo of average business was doing a 139 business in the week .
each of these themes were of many , many smaller decisions .
50 percent of their decisions were in nine minutes or less .
it &apos;s only about 12 percent of your decisions you need to take an hour or more of your time .
think of your own decisions .
you know how many decisions you &apos;re going to meet in the nine minutes of category to the one in the one hour ?
how good , think , are you at the decisions of dealing with you ?
today i want to talk about one of the greatest entscheidungsprobleme of our modern time , the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem .
i want to talk about the problem and some of the kinds of solutions .
now , when i talk about this problem , i &apos;m going to ask you some questions and i want to know your answers .
if i ask you a question , you can pick up , because i &apos;m blind , just the hand if you want to burn some calories .
otherwise , i ask you , if i ask you a question , and your answer is , so my first question for today is : are you ready to hear about the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem ?
thank you .
when i was a abschlussstudent at stanford university , i went to this very , very exklusiven , at least at least , at least , a exklusiv .
it was a store called draeger &apos;s .
this business , it was almost like a vergnügungspark .
they had 250 different kinds of mustard and essig and over 500 different kinds of fruits and vegetables and more than two dozen different kinds of water -- and that was a time when we were actually drinking leitungswasser .
i loved it to this business , but at a time i asked myself , well , how do you get it , you never ?
here is the oil olive .
they had about 75 different kinds of oil oil , including those who were locked in kästen , who came from a thousand years old .
so i decided to visit one day , and i asked the ladder , &quot; works that model , that you really offer people all of these possibilities ? &quot;
and he showed the busladungen of the touristen that came every day and usually had their cameras .
we decided to do an experiment , and we chose marmelade for our experiment .
here &apos;s her marmeladen gang .
they had 348 different kinds of marmelade .
we set up a little verkostungsecke right at the front of the geschäfts .
we have six different taste of geschmacksrichtungen marmelade , or 24 different geschmacksrichtungen marmelade , and we looked at two things : first , i &apos;ll try to try and try to get more people to stand and try and try ?
there are more people who stayed , when it was 24 , about 60 percent , when there were six , about 40 percent .
and then we looked at what people were actually buying a glass of marmelade .
we saw the difference that we saw .
the people who were left with the 24 were only three percent actually kauften a glass .
the people who stayed there were six were six , now , now we saw that 30 percent of them actually bought a glass of marmelade .
well , if you calculate it , people would actually buy six times a glass of marmelade , who they had six to the choices than when they had 24 to choice .
now , to decide not to buy a glass of marmelade , probably good for us -- at least it &apos;s good for our taille -- but it turns out that the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem effect on us also affected very konsequenzreichen decisions .
we don &apos;t decide to decide , even if it &apos;s going against our own interests .
so for the theme of the day , financial services .
i &apos;m going to describe a study that i did with gur huberman , emir kamenica , wei jang , where we were looking at the decisions for rente from almost a million american americans from about 650 plans to the whole united states .
and what we looked at was whether the number of fondsangebote that were possible by a rentensparplan plan , the 401 plan that affects the chance that they &apos;re saved more for tomorrow .
and we found that there was a correlation in fact .
so in these plans , we had about 657 plans that had been offering the people between two to the 59 different fund .
and what we found was that the more people have been offered , that in fact , the participation rate was lower .
if you look at the extremes of the time , the plans that are anboten , you have a teilnahmerate in the &apos; 70s -- still not so much as we want .
in the plans that went to almost 60 fonds , the teilnahmerate now dropped to about the sechzigsten .
now , it turns out that even if you &apos;re involved in the entschliessen , if more choices , you have choices , even it has negative consequences .
so the people who decided to participate in the world is more of the possibilities that they have available , the more they would be able to fight and to vote .
the more possibilities available to them , the more they put their whole money in pure geldmarktkonten .
not an extreme decisions , it &apos;s about the decisions that someone recommend if their future finanzielles well-being matters .
well , in the last 10 years , we &apos;ve observed three major negative consequences in humans that provide the offer of more and more choices .
they &apos;re schieben the decision -- they &apos;re schieben , even if it &apos;s going against their own best interest .
they make more likely -- worse financial and worse , medical decisions .
they &apos;re going to decide for things that you make less content , even if you make it more objective .
the main reason for this is that we might enjoy this huge regale of mayonaise , mustard , essig and marmelade , but we can &apos;t actually draw the compare and the abgrenzungen and then actually can vote for something out of the fantastic service .
so what i want to suggest to you today are four simple techniques -- techniques that we &apos;ve tested in different ways and different types of different types of different types of different types of different types of different types of different types of different types of different types of different types of different types of different types of different types of different types of different ways .
first , just narrow .
you &apos;ve heard it before , but it &apos;s never true as today that less is less .
people are always concerned when i say , &quot; let &apos;s say . &quot;
they always make sure they lose regalfläche .
but in fact , we &apos;re always seeing it more and more , that if you &apos;re willing to narrow , and the unwichtigen are going to go , well , there &apos;s a increase in the sales , and it will cost the cost , &amp; amp ; and there &apos;s a verbesserung improvement .
as a proctor and gamble , the various head and shoulders species of 26 down to 15 was , they had a increase in the increase by 10 percent .
as the golden cat corporation , her 10 corporation ihr , they experienced that the profit to be a 87 percent anstiegen -- a result of the increase in the increase and the reduction of cost .
you know , the average supermakrt today offers them 45.000 products .
it &apos;s a typical walmart that offers you 100,000 products today .
but the neuntgrößte supermarket , who &apos;s today &apos;s neuntgrößte supermarket in the world today , and they &apos;re only providing them for a 1.400 products -- a kind of tomato sauce in a dose .
now in the world of the sparens , i think one of the best examples that came out of the market recently , about how to managt the choices , was something that david laibson has been very strong , it &apos;s a program that &apos;s offered at harvard .
every single harvard staff is automatically put in a lebenszeitfond part .
those who really want to make a choice are offered 20 fund , not 300 or more .
you know , how people often say , &quot; i don &apos;t know how to limit it .
it &apos;s all important possibilities . &quot;
and the first thing i ask the employees is , &quot; tell me how the possibilities are different from each other .
and if your employees can &apos;t auseinanderhalten them , they can &apos;t be their clients . &quot;
now before we started lunch today , i had a conversation with gary .
and gary said he would be willing to spend all of people in this audience to offer a all-inklusive bezahlten on the most beautiful road in the world .
here &apos;s a description of the road .
and i want to read them .
and now i &apos;ll give you a couple seconds to read you and then i ask you to clap , if you &apos;re willing to take up to gary &apos;s .
okay . everybody is willing to take up to gary &apos;s service .
are this all ?
well , let me show you a little bit more of it .
they knew it was a trick , right ?
now , who &apos;s ready for that journey .
i think i &apos;ve heard more hands .
well .
the fact that you &apos;re looking at at the first time , when the first time , had more information than the second time , but i would make it a car that you would find it in the second time .
because the images made it more real for them .
what brings me to the second technology that helps you with the problem of the problem is that it &apos;s the konkretisierung .
it &apos;s about people to understand the difference between possibilities , understanding what consequences are associated with the individual possibilities , and that will be lebhaft and specific .
why are people spending on average 15 to 30 percent if they use a ec-karte or a card card than they &apos;re in cash ?
because it doesn &apos;t really feel money .
and it turns out that if you make it , it creates a little bit more , it &apos;s a very good tool for you to make people save more .
so we have a study that i did with shlomo benartzi and alessandro previtero , we made a study with people at ing -- employees who worked all for ing -- and these people were all in a gathering where they signed their participation for their rentensparplan .
and during that meeting , we were just as belassen as they used to , we just added a little thing .
the little thing we &apos;ve added to have was that we asked people to just think of all positive things that would happen in their lives if they were going to save money .
and so we did this simple thing , there was a increase in participation by 20 percent , and there was a increase in the number of people who were willing to save or a increase in four percent of the amount they were willing to pay for the sparkonto .
the third technology : kategorisierung .
we can deal with more categories than more choices than more choices .
here &apos;s , for example , a study we did in a zeitschriftengang .
it turns out that it &apos;s in the wegmans supermärkten , and below in the region , variiert the number between species of magazines from magazines to 664 magazines .
but you know what ?
if i show you 600 magazines and i &apos;m aufteile them in 10 categories or i &apos;m showing them 400 magazines , and those in 20 categories aufteile , then they believe i gave them more choices and given a better way i had the 400 given to the 400 if i had given them 600 .
because the categories tell me how i can apart them .
here are two different schmuckauslagen .
one is called &quot; jazz , &quot; and the other is called &quot; swing . &quot;
if you think the one &apos;s the left display is swing , and the display on the right is jazz , then you clap into your hands .
okay , there &apos;s a couple .
if you think that the one on the left is jazz and the ones , on the right side , is , you can clap .
okay , a couple more .
well , it turns out they &apos;re right .
the one on the left is jazz and the on the right is swing , but you know what ?
this is a highly unnützes kategorisierungsschema .
the categories have to say the auswähler thing that is not the choice of the choices .
and this problem often , you see , when you look at the long bullet points of this fund .
who are you really want to get out of that ?
my fourth technology : premise for complexity .
it turns out that we can handle more information than we think we &apos;re just going to simplify them .
we need to increase complexity .
i &apos;ll show you an example of what i mean .
let &apos;s take a very , very complicated decision : the buy of a car .
here &apos;s a german autohersteller , which offers you the opportunity to completely konfigurieren your car .
they have to make a 62 make different decisions to design their car completely .
now these decisions are different in the number of choices that make them a decision .
autofarben , außenfarbe of the car -- i have 56 possibilities .
motors , the getriebe -- four possibilities .
what i &apos;m doing now is , i change the order that make decisions .
half of the clients will be , of course , of the many possibilities , 56 autofarben to the low possibilities , four .
the other half of the clients are about the low possibilities , four of them , to the 56 autofarben , a lot of possibilities .
what do i look at ?
how are you interested .
if you constantly use the standardauswahl on decision , that means that you &apos;re going to be overwhelmed , the heisste , i lose it .
what you find is that the people who go from the many to the small auswahlmöglichkteiten and always are to vote for the standardauswahl .
we lose them .
let &apos;s move from the little choices to the many , then they remain .
it &apos;s the same information . it &apos;s the same amount of possibilities .
the only thing i did is to change the sequence that this information is present .
when i start with the simple , i &apos;m learning how i &apos;m auswähle .
even though the getriebe is select , nothing about my preferences at the innenausstattung , i &apos;m still going to pick it to me .
it &apos;s also versetzt me in excitement about the big product i &apos;m going to do , and so i &apos;m willing to motivate myself to be interested in this .
let me summarize .
i &apos;ve told you about four techniques that mildern the problem of entscheidungsüberlastung -- -- to let &apos;s the überflüssigen alternatives ; konkretisieren -- make it real ; -- we can get better with more categories , less possibilities , are preparing for complexity .
each of these techniques i &apos;m thinking about to you are helping you the possibility of manage -- good for you , you can use them for yourself , good for the people they offer service .
because i think the key to the best choice is that you &apos;re being chosen for choice .
and the more we are choosing , the better we will be able to make the art of choice .
thank you .
hi . i &apos;m kevin allocca , trends-manager with youtube . i &apos;m looking at youtube-videos .
that &apos;s true .
today we want to talk about how videos are viral , and then why that &apos;s important .
we all want to be stars -- berühmtheiten , singers , comedians -- when i was young , it seemed like an infinite difficult .
but webvideos has enabled that we all , or all of our creative activities , can be wahnsinnig for a part of the culture of our world .
every single one of you could be famous for the internet to next saturday .
but in youtube , more than 48 hours of video is uploaded to a minute .
and again , only a tiny percentage of the viral will be seen thousands and so on the cultural moment .
so how does that work ?
three things : tastemaker , teilnahmecommunities and unexpected .
well , we want to go .
oh my god . oh my god .
oh my god .
woah !
ohhhhh , wowwww !
last year bear vasquez vasquez this video that he shot before his house in the yosemite national park .
in 2010 , it was 23 million times .
this chart shows how it looked like the video last summer , for the first time .
actually , bear didn &apos;t want to make a virales video .
he just wanted to share a rainbow .
because you just make it as you go to the yosemite mountain mountain .
he had uploaded a lot of naturvideos .
and this video was actually already sent to january .
what &apos;s happened here ?
there was jimmy kimmel .
jimmy kimmel sendete the tweet that made the video of the end of the day .
because tastemaker like jimmy kimmel are asking us new and interesting things and show you a big audience .
it &apos;s friday , friday . gotta get down on friday . everybody forward on the weekend , weekend . friday , friday . gettin &apos; on friday . and you didn &apos;t think that we would lead that conversation without talking about this video , i hope .
rebecca blacks &apos;s &quot; friday &quot; is one of the most popular videos of the year .
it was seen nearly 200 million times this year .
this is the chart .
just like &quot; the &quot; double &quot; scheint , it seems to be made out of nothing .
what &apos;s happened in this day ?
well , it was friday , that &apos;s true .
if you want to know , these other tips are also freitage .
but what about this day , that particular friday ?
well , tosh.0 gabelte , many blogs started writing about it .
michael j. nelson nelson of the mystery science theater was one of the first ones that made a joke about this .
what &apos;s important is that a person or a group of tastemakers took a position , divided up with a big audience and beschleunigte the process .
and then this community of people who shared these big insiderwitz and started talking about it and to make it happen .
now there &apos;s 10,000 parodien of &quot; friday &quot; in youtube .
already in the first seven days , there was a parodie for every single day of life .
unlike the einseitigen entertainment of the 20th century , the participation community is our way to become our way to become part of this phenomenon -- either by spreading it or make something new .
nyan cat is animation and music in endlosschleife .
that &apos;s it , very simple .
this year , it was almost 50 million times .
and if you think it &apos;s crazy , you &apos;d have to know that there &apos;s a dreistundenversion that has been seen four million times .
even cats look at this video .
cats look cats , who look at this video .
important , the creativity that &apos;s in the internetkultur of the techies and the geeks .
there were remixe .
someone made an old version of it .
and then it became international .
a whole remix-gemeinde took off the ground that made it from a silly joke to something that we can all participate .
we don &apos;t just find pleasure to something we &apos;re doing .
who would have been able to do this ?
who would have predicted &quot; double &quot; or &quot; rebecca black or &quot; nyan cat ? &quot;
what drehbücher did you have to write about , where that &apos;s kind of drinsteht ?
in a world where every minute is uploaded to two days of video , only really unique and unexpected hervorstechen , like the ones that i mentioned .
i &apos;m not interested in , i was not very interested in a friend , i said to myself this great video , a guy who was going to be a new york york for the ticket .
i got a ticket , because i &apos;m not in the radweg , but often there &apos;s a disability that is not going to drive a anständig on the radweg .
and it was completely surprising and humorvoll , casey niestats was a witzige idea and looked at the point of five million times .
this approach is true of anything that we &apos;re doing creative .
and this is all going to lead to a big question .
what does that mean ?
ohhhh .
what does that mean ?
tastemaker , creative teilnehmergemeinden , completely unexpected , are the characteristics of a new kind of media and culture that everybody has access to the audience , and in the audience , are determined .
as i said , one of the most is greatest stars -- justin bieber -- made his beginning to youtube .
nobody has to give your ideas green light .
and today we are all feeling as a native of our culture culture .
and these are not the characteristics of the old media , and they &apos;re also really making of the media from today , but they will determine the conversation of the future .
thank you .
how can i talk about the connection of women in a vierjährigen girl &apos;s life , and how she &apos;s the amazing strength of this connected to a vierjährigen girl , her mother and her grandmother was sitting five days and her grandmother , and nights long zusammengekauert in a small boat in the chinese sea , a connection that &apos;s going to be verankerte in the life of this
the story is not yet .
it &apos;s a puzzle that &apos;s being put together .
i want to tell you some of the puzzlestückchen .
imagine the first piece : a man who &apos;s burning his lebenswerk .
he &apos;s a poet , a writer , a man whose life was held together by the simple hope of unity and freedom of his home .
think of it as the einmarsch of the kommunisten in saigon , as he has to say , his life was a single waste .
the words , so long , his friends , are now spotteten .
he moved into the silence .
he died , broken through the story .
he &apos;s my grandfather .
i never met him personally .
but our lives are so much more than our memories .
my grandmother never had never forgotten my life .
i had to worry that it was not free , and it was my job to learn that the story was not trying to zerdrücken us , we were going to go .
the next puzzleteil shows how a boat leise in the early morgenrot leise .
my mother may , she was 18 , when her father died -- already in a arrangierten marriage , already with two little girls .
she had her a task for her , the escape of her family and a new life in australia .
it was completely ausgeschlossen that it could fail .
after a vierjährigen and filmreifen saga glitt , a boat still up to the sea as fischerboot .
all adults were aware of the risks .
the biggest fear they had was a piraten , rape and death .
as most adults on the boat , my mother wore a little giftflasche .
at a gefangennahme , i would have my sister and i , then , to drink her and my grandmother .
my first memories are from this boat -- the stetige tuckern of the engine , klatschen by each wave on the front , the vast and empty horizon .
i don &apos;t remember the piraten that came many times , but the todesmut of the men were täuschen on our boat , or at the ausfall of the engine , who didn &apos;t want to be a six hours .
but i remember the lights of the ölplattform off the coast of the coast coast of the coast coast , and the young man who collapsed and died , the end of the journey was too much for him , and the taste of the first apfels that gave me one of the men on the platform .
no apple ever geschmeckt again .
after three months in a refugee camp , we ended in in the melbourne .
and the next puzzlestück is about four women in three generations , building a new life .
we went down in footscray , one of the arbeiterklasse vorort , whose population is made up of immigrantenschichten .
unlike the alteingesessenen mittelklassevororten whose existence was completely unknown to me , there was no anspruchsdenken .
the smell of the ladentüren came from the rest of the world .
and the fetzen broken englischs were ausgetauscht between people who had one thing in common : they started new .
my mother was working on the farmen , then on a fließband line in a autofabrik , six days , double layers .
and they somehow managed to find the time to have english and it-qualifikationen .
we were poor .
every one was given to the dollar and became in more education for english and mathematics , no matter what we had to do with this , and most of the time , the new stuff , they always came from a second hand .
two strümpfe for school , each to cover the holes in the other .
a schuluniform to the knöcheln , because it had to be a six years .
and there were the rare , painful chöre of &quot; schlitzauge &quot; and here , and there &apos;s wandmalereien , &quot; asiaten , go home . &quot;
and where ?
something versteifte in me .
there was a meeting of the reconciliation and a quiet voice said , &quot; i &apos;m going to go out of your way . &quot;
my mother , my sister and i slept in the same bed .
my mother was exhausted every night , but we were telling each other from our day , and we heard the movements of our grandmother in the house .
my mother suffered from the boat .
and it was my job to stay awake every night until their alpträume came to me so i could get it .
they opened a computergeschäft , then a kosmetikerausbildung and then opened a business .
and the women came with her stories about men who don &apos;t ertrugen the change , angry and unflexibel , and sorgenerfüllte children , trapped between two worlds .
loans and donors were looking for .
centers were built .
i lived in parallelwelten .
in one i was the classic asian student , who was asked for the unerbittliche demands of himself .
in the other , i was involved in the unsichere life , the tragic scars of violence , the drogenmissbrauchs and the isolierung .
but so many got help for the years .
and because of this help , i was going to be auserwählt in my last year of the year , as a young child australierin of the year .
and i was katapultiert from one puzzlestück to the next , and the edges didn &apos;t fit together .
tan le , anonyme bewohnerin of footscray , was now tan le , refugee and social activist , who was invited to speak of places that never heard of them , and in the homes that never imagined their existence .
i didn &apos;t know the etikette .
i didn &apos;t know how to use the besteck .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about wine .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about anything .
i wanted to go to the routine and the comfort of life &apos;s life from an unknown vororts -- a grandmother , a mother and two daughters who were abschlossen every day as 20 years , and they were telling each other stories and einschliefen , we still were in the same bed .
i said to my mother , i wouldn &apos;t be able to do that .
she reminded me that i was so old as they were climbing the boat .
no , no one was ever .
&quot; i &apos;m going to do it , &quot; she said . &quot; and not what you &apos;re not . &quot;
so i was talking about jugendarbeitslosigkeit and education , and the vernachlässigung of the marginalisierten and entrechteten .
and the more open i was talking , i should tell .
i met people in all of the lebenslagen , so many of them did what they loved , they lived in the boundaries of the possible .
and even though i had graduated , i realized that i couldn &apos;t go to a career in a row .
there had to be another puzzlestück .
and i realized at the same time that it &apos;s okay to be a außenseiter , a neuankömmling , new in the picture -- and not only fine , but something you must be grateful for , maybe a gift of the boots .
because dazuzugehören can lead so easily to collapse of the horizonte , so easily , that you accepted the assumptions of the environment .
i &apos;ve gone to have enough of my bequemlichkeitsbereich to know that , yes , the world is auseinanderbricht , but not as you were befürchtet .
opportunities that didn &apos;t have been allowed , that was ausdrücklich ermutigt .
there was a energy , a unerbittlichen optimism , a strange mixtur of the humility and the wagnisses .
so i followed my feeling feeling .
i collected a small team of people around me , for the schublade , &quot; a unwiderstehliche challenge .
for a year we didn &apos;t have a cent .
at the end of a day , i cook a huge topf soup that we shared .
we worked until late in the night .
most of our ideas were nuts , but there were some brilliant , and we managed to have the breakthrough .
i met the decision to go to the u.s.
after only one journey there .
my gut feeling .
three months later , i was moved , and the adventure went on .
before i talk about the talk , i &apos;d like to tell you about my grandmother .
she grew up at a time where social norm and local mandarin was the most important person .
life hasn &apos;t changed since centuries .
her father died in a moment after their birth .
her mother moved her alone .
by 17 , she was the second woman of a woman she beat her .
without support of her husband , she worried a sensation by brachte him in court and anklägerin her in her own case , and a bigger sensation than she won .
&quot; not &quot; erwies &quot; erwies .
i was just in a hotel room in sydney when she died . 1,000 miles away in the melbourne .
i looked through the duschtrennwand and looked at them on the other side .
i knew she had come to goodbye .
my mother called me a few minutes after that .
a few days later , we went into a buddhist temple in footscray and sat around her sarg .
we told her stories , and they told her that we were still .
and at midnight , the monk came , and he said he &apos;d have to close the sarg .
my mother asked us to touch their hand .
she asked the monk , &quot; why is your hand so warm and the rest of your hand is so cold ? &quot;
&quot; because you &apos;ve been in this morning , &quot; he said .
&quot; they don &apos;t leave them . &quot;
if there &apos;s a band in our family , it &apos;s going to be verläuft .
and you can see who we were and how life shaped us , we can see that the men who might have come in our lives were us in the quere .
defeat would be too simple .
now i &apos;d like my own children , and i think it &apos;s still the boat .
who would ever wish ?
yes , i &apos;m afraid of privilege , leichtigkeit , before .
can i give you a bug in your life , the courageous every wave of trotzt , the unbeirrte , stetige tuckern of the engine , the long horizon , the weiten , the nichts ?
i don &apos;t know .
but if i could give this and make it safe , i would do it .
also , tans &apos;s mother here in the fourth or five row .
i &apos;m here to share my photography with them .
is it photography at all ?
because of course , this is a picture that you can &apos;t pick up with your camera .
but i started in photography , when i was given my first digital camera , at age 15 .
i put it with my former vorliebe , but it was a little different because the camera was actually doing it in the process .
and when you take a picture of a camera , it end up with the process when you &apos;re in a trigger .
so , for me , photography really seemed to be more about being at the right place at the right time .
i believed everybody could do that .
so i wanted to create something else , something that starts when the trigger is going to be gedrückt .
photos like this : a construction site along a much befahrenen road .
but it has an unexpected twist .
and yet , behaltet , a realistic level .
or photos like this -- dark and farbenfroh , but all of the common goal to keep a realistic level .
if i say reality , i &apos;m going to go .
because , of course , it &apos;s not something you can really capture , but i want to look like it , like , if you could have that , in a photo .
photos you have to think of a brief moment to figure out the trick .
so it &apos;s really about to capture an idea , as a moment .
but what is the trick that makes it realistic look like ?
is it about the details or the colors ?
is it about the light ?
what creates the illusion ?
sometimes the perspective is the illusion .
but ultimately , it &apos;s about how we interpret the world , and how it can be made on a two-dimensional area of the surface .
it &apos;s not about what realistic is , but what we think is realistic .
so i think the basics are very simple .
i see them as a puzzle puzzle , where you can take different pieces and put together to create an alternative reality .
and let me show you a simple example .
we have three perfect vorstellbare objects that we can all relate to in a three-dimensional world .
but in a certain way , they can create something that looks more and more in the brain than whether it could exist .
but at the same time , we know that it &apos;s not possible .
so we &apos;re überlisten our brains , because our brain doesn &apos;t really accepted the fact that it doesn &apos;t really make sense .
and i see the same process in combine of photographs .
it &apos;s really about to combine the different realities .
so the things that make a picture realistic , i think , are the things we don &apos;t think about , the things around us in our lives .
but if we combine photographs , it &apos;s really important to think about it , because otherwise you &apos;re just kind of wrong with it .
so i would say there &apos;s three simple rules to follow to achieve a realistisches outcome .
as you can see , it &apos;s not a three special images .
but then , you can combine something special as this .
so the first rule is that , kombinierte photos should have the same perspective .
number two , kombinierte photos should have the same .
and these two pictures are creating these two demands -- they were shooting out of the same height and the same beleuchtungsart .
and third is about making it possible , where the individual images are beginning and end by connecting them together .
it &apos;s impossible to say how the picture was actually put together .
so by the way you can see color , contrast and contrast to the edge , the individual images , the fotografische , like feldtiefe , entsättigte colors and disorders , we verwischen the boundaries between the different images and we can take a single picture , even though a picture basically can contain hundreds of layers .
here &apos;s another example .
you might think that this is just a landscape and it &apos;s manipulated the bottom part .
this picture is actually completely composed of photographs from different places .
i personally finde. that it &apos;s easier to create a place to find a place , because you don &apos;t have to go to compromise with the ideas in your head .
but it requires a lot of planning .
and when i had this idea in winter , i knew that i needed several months to plan to plan to find the various places for the pieces of the puzzle .
for example , the fish was taken on a anglerausflug .
the bank &apos;s the bank comes from a different place .
the unterwasser-teil comes from a steinbruch .
and yes , i even have the house on the island of red , to make it look like this .
and to reach a realistisches outcome , it &apos;s going to be out of my own .
i always start with a sketch , an idea .
and after that , it &apos;s about the combination of different images .
and here &apos;s a piece of very good planned .
and if you make good footage , the result can be pretty beautiful , and also quite realistic .
so there are all the tools , and the only thing that can be us are in our imagination is our imagination .
thank you .
i &apos;d like to talk to you about why that so many electronic gesundheits-projekte .
and i think the most important point is that we &apos;ve stopped talking to our patients .
and one of the things we introduced in the radboud-universität was to make a haupt-zuhörer .
it &apos;s not particularly scientifically , you can imagine a cup of coffee or tea and ask the patient , families , relatives , &quot; how are you ?
how can we help you ? &quot;
and we think we want to think that this is one of the main problems , why all -- maybe most of the electronic gesundheits-projekte are fehlschlagen , because we stopped listening .
this is my wlan-waage . a very simple thing .
she has a button , and it &apos;s a button .
and every morning i &apos;m going to get it .
and yes , i have a task of how you might recognize .
i &apos;ve been working my job at 95 pounds .
it works very simple : every time i &apos;m going to the scale , you can send my data on google health .
and there you &apos;re going to be able to see from my allgemeinarzt abgerufen , so he can recognize where my gewichtsproblem is , and it &apos;s not just the moment that i need to support or so , but also a look at the past .
there &apos;s something else .
maybe you know , i &apos;ve got over 4,000 follower on twitter .
so every morning i &apos;m going to get on my wlan-waage and people talk to me before i &apos;m in my car , &quot; to lunch , i &apos;m a little bit a little today today , lucien . &quot;
but this is the netteste thing that can happen because this is the gruppenzwang , gruppenzwang to help patients , because that could be used against obesity , or it could be patients smoking .
but it could also be used to get people out of their chairs and get them to play some kind of play , to control their health .
it comes up to the market every week .
it will give this little blutdruck-messgerät that you &apos;re going to have to do an iphone or something like that .
and it will allow people to measure their blood pressure from home to send them to their doctor and share it with others , for something more than 100 dollars .
and at this point , the patients are coming in , and they can &apos;t just take over the control , captain on their own ship , but also help us help health care , as we can also help health , as the kostenexplosion of health , double demand , and so on .
do the ways that are easy to use , and start with this one , to embrace patients .
and they can do it through such a way of doing this , but also through crowdsourcing .
and one of the things that we did , i &apos;d like to share with you through a short video .
we all have navigationssysteme in our cars .
maybe even in our cell phones .
we know exactly where all the machines are around the maastricht .
we know one , where all the stations are .
and clearly , we can find fastfood-ketten .
but where would the next aed to help this patient ?
we have herumgefragt , and no one knew it .
no one knew where the next lebensrettende aed was going to be in this moment .
so what did we do ? we did in the netherlands , in the netherlands .
we &apos;ve set up a website and ask a menschenmasse , &quot; if you see a aed , please share us , you can tell us where he is , &quot; because sometimes he &apos;s closed during the geschäftszeiten , of course .
and over 10,000 aeds have been reported in the netherlands .
the next step was to find apps for this .
and we designed a ipad-app .
we developed an app for layar , extended reality to find these aeds .
and if you &apos;re in a city like maastricht and someone &apos;s going to go down , you can use your iphone , and within the next weeks , your microsoft-handy to find the next aed , which can save lives .
and we &apos;re now going to do not just as a aed4u , as the product is called it , but also as aed4us .
and we want to bring this to a global level .
and we &apos;re asking our colleagues around the world , from other universities , to help us behave like knotenpunkte , to get these aeds around the world .
and if you &apos;re in holiday and you &apos;re going to go to a holiday , it &apos;s your own verwandtschaft or somebody else , you can find a aed .
the other thing we want to ask is that companies all over the world help us at bestätigung these aeds .
these could be kurierdienste , or technicians for example , just to make sure that the gemeldete aed is still in its place .
please help us , and try to improve the health , not only to improve something , but to take your hand .
thank you .
today i &apos;m going to report the unexpected discoveries .
i work in the solartechnologie-branche .
and my little startup wants that we &apos;re going to force us to make us feel more .
... it &apos;s crowdsourcing for me .
here &apos;s a quick video of what we &apos;re doing .
oh . a moment .
it might take it to be geladen .
now -- we can just jump that -- i &apos;m just going to jump the video instead .
no .
that &apos;s not ...
okay .
solartechnologie is ...
oh , my time is already over ?
okay . thank you .
so a few years ago , i started a program to get the stars in technology and design to take a year of break and work in an environment , which is pretty much everything , what they actually hate , we have to work in the government .
the program is called code for america , and it &apos;s a bit like the friedenscorps for computerfreaks .
we choose some of the fellows every year and we &apos;re going to work with stadtverwaltungen .
instead of sending them into the third world , we send them in rathäuser .
and there they developed great apps , working with urban employees .
but what you really do is to show what &apos;s possible today with technology .
so you meet al .
al is a hydrant in the town boston .
here &apos;s what he &apos;s looking for a date , but what he really is looking for is someone who freischaufelt him , when he &apos;s eingeschneit , because he knows he &apos;s not very good at the brandbekämpfung when he &apos;s von by a meter of snow .
how did he come to search for that particular way to look for help ?
we had a team of fellows in boston last year , which is the code for america .
they were there in february , and it has a lot of geschneit in february .
and they realized that the city never schaufelt the fire .
but a certain fellow , a guy named erik michaels-ober , noticed something else , and that was that the people frei the bürgersteige of the bürgersteige , right before .
so he did what everyone would do good engineers , he wrote an app .
it &apos;s a nice little app where you can adopt a fire .
you stimmst it out of ihn if it &apos;s schneit .
if you do that , you can give him a name , and he called the first al .
if you don &apos;t make it , you can take it away .
so there &apos;s a nice little game game .
this is a modest little app .
it &apos;s probably the smallest of 21 apps that the people have written in the last year .
but she does something that doesn &apos;t have any other regierungstechnologie .
they &apos;re going to be very fast .
there &apos;s this guy in the i.t. &apos;s i.t. city , who has seen that he could use these app , not for snow , but to adopt the citizens of the citizens .
it &apos;s very important that these tsunami-sirenen work , but the people steal the batteries .
so he got the citizens to test it .
and then seattle decided to use the app to get the citizens to get the verstopften gullys .
and chicago has just introduced it to the people who freischaufeln the buergersteige when it &apos;s schneit .
we &apos;re now familiar with nine cities who plan to use these app .
and she &apos;s widely widely , organic , of course .
if you know something about regierungstechnologie , you know it &apos;s not going to be that way .
the beschaffung of software has a few years .
we had a team who was working last year in boston , for the three people , a half months .
it was about a way to find out how to find out the parents who are the right public schools for their children .
we later told us that if it was going to go through the normal channels , it would take over two years , and it would cost over two million dollars .
and that &apos;s not yet .
there &apos;s a project right now in the california that &apos;s cost the steuerzahler down to the last two billion dollars , and it doesn &apos;t work .
and there are projects like this on every level of government .
so an app that &apos;s written in a few days and then spreading from selbt is a kind of shot from the front of the government .
it shows how the government could work better -- not more like a private company , how many people think it should be .
and not even like a technik-unternehmen , but rather like the internet itself .
and that means free access , which is open and productive .
and that &apos;s important .
but more important to this app is that you represent a new generation that anpackt the problem of government -- not as the problem of an verknöcherten institution , but as a problem of collective action .
and this is a very good news , because it turns out that we &apos;re very good at collective action with digital technology .
now there &apos;s a big community of people who make the tools that we need to make things effectively in common together .
it &apos;s not just &quot; code for america , &quot; it &apos;s hundreds of people in all over the country who are standing up and write regierungs-apps every day in their own communities .
they didn &apos;t give up the government .
they &apos;re terribly frustrated with her , but they don &apos;t complain about it , they fix it .
and these guys know something that we lost from the eyes .
and this is , if you all of your feelings about politics and the snake in the arbeitsamt and all the other things that we really get upset about , government , in the worten , in the words of tim o , &quot; what we do in common that we can &apos;t do alone . &quot;
today , a lot of people have given up the government .
and if you &apos;re one of those people , i ask you to get it on because things change .
politics doesn &apos;t change ; the government is in change .
and because the government ultimately , the government of us , is going to be their power -- erinner yourself : &quot; we &apos;re the people ? &quot; -- how we think about this , how this change is happening .
i didn &apos;t know very much about government when i started this program .
and how many people , i thought that was the government of government , is mostly people to vote in office .
now after two years , i came to conclusion that it &apos;s all about local communities , for beutelratten .
this is the call-center center for service and information .
you &apos;re usually out of the way you get out of your city , 311 .
if you have ever been able to work in your städtisches , like our fellow scott silverman , as part of the program -- in fact , you all do -- you &apos;re going to see that the people who are calling government to many different problems , including that a beutelratte is in their house .
so scott gets this anfruf .
he &apos;s tippt &quot; beutelratte &quot; into the official database .
and he didn &apos;t really have an idea . he starts with the tierfänger .
and finally , he says , &quot; look , can you just open the doors in your house and play and see , you know , is that livestock ? &quot;
and that worked . applause for scott .
but that wasn &apos;t the end of the beutelratten .
boston wasn &apos;t just a center of the center .
it has an app , a web- and handy-app , called &quot; citizens connect . &quot;
we didn &apos;t written these app .
this is the work that &apos;s very smart people in the office of the new urban mechanics in boston .
one day -- this is a real report -- he came in , &quot; beutelratte in my mülltonne , cannot say if you &apos;re dead .
how do i get them away ? &quot;
but what happens to &quot; citizens connect &quot; is different .
scott &apos;s unterhielt about human being human .
but it &apos;s all the public connect , so everyone can see it .
and in this case , it saw a neighbor .
and the next one we got was , &quot; i went over there , found the mülltonne behind the house .
beutelratte ? yes . alive ?
and he turned the mülltonne on the page . went home .
good night , cute beutelratte . &quot;
pretty simple .
that &apos;s great . this is true of digital the physical .
and it &apos;s also a good example of getting the government in the crowdsourcing .
but it &apos;s also a great example of the government as a platform .
and i don &apos;t mean , i mean , is a technical definition of platform .
i &apos;m more talking about a platform for people to help themselves and help others .
a citizens helped a other citizens , but the government was acting a central role .
they connected these two people .
and you could have them to connect them with government , if they had been needed , but a neighbor is a far better and billigere alternative to government services .
if a neighbor &apos;s helping , we will empower our communities .
we call the tierfänger , it costs a lot of money .
one of the most important things that we need to think is that government is not the same thing as politics .
and most people understand that , but they believe that one is an input from the other .
that our contribution to the system is the system .
how often do we have a political leaders -- and sometimes we have a lot of energy to choose a new political leaders -- and then we &apos;re going to be lehnen , and we expect the government to reflect our values and meet our needs , and then hasn &apos;t changed much ?
that &apos;s because the government is like a weiter and politics are the top of the top .
and what &apos;s below is what we call the bureaucracy .
and we use this word with such contempt .
but it &apos;s this contempt that this thing we own , and for which we pay for something that works against us , something else , and then we entmachten ourselves .
people seem to think , politics is sexy .
if we want this institution to us , we need to make it sexy .
because that &apos;s where the actual regierungsarbeit is happening .
we need to be able to get to the government of the government .
so the occupythesec-bewegung did it .
have you seen these guys ?
it &apos;s a group of besorgter citizens who wrote a very detailed report report , who &apos;s an answer to the sec-memo of the gesetzesvorlage .
this is not political active , that &apos;s bürokratisch active .
now , for those of us who have given up the government , it &apos;s time that we think about the world we want to leave our children .
you have to imagine the enormous challenges you have to imagine .
do we really believe that we can reach what we need to reach without improving an institution that can be all about us ?
a government is absolutely necessary , but it has to be more efficient .
the good news is that technology makes it possible , fundamentally the function of the government in a way that can actually achieve something by the society .
and there &apos;s a generation that grew up the internet internet , and it knows that it &apos;s not that hard to do things together , you have to build the only systems .
now the average age of our fellows is 28 , so i &apos;m , unfortunately , almost a generation than most of them .
this is a generation that grew up with her voice for granted .
they &apos;re not fighting this struggle that we all fight to talk about who can talk to who you are all to speak .
you can use your opinion , at every channel , at every time , and you do it .
so if you &apos;re faced with the problem of government , you don &apos;t care about using your voices .
they use their hands .
they use their hands to write applications that are verbessert the work of government .
and these apps let us use our hands to improve our communities .
this could be a fire freizuschaufeln , unkraut , a mülleimer mülleimer with a beutelratte .
and sure , we would have these fire to be able to freischaufeln all the time , and many people do that .
but these apps are like small digital memories that we &apos;re not just consumers , and we &apos;re not just consumers of government , the taxes are paid and receive the taxes .
we are more than that , we are citizens .
and we &apos;re not going to improve the government until we improve the global economy .
so the question i &apos;m all here : if it &apos;s about the big important things we need to do together , all together , we &apos;re just going to be a lot of voices , or are we going to be a lot of hands ?
thank you .
normally , my role in explaining people are how wonderful the new technologies , which are the rise at the time , and i thought i &apos;m here among my friends , i would tell you what i really think . and also try to look back and understand what &apos;s really going on , with these incredible sprüngen , which is so quickly that we can &apos;t keep up
i &apos;m going to start to show you a single boring slide .
... could you just show the slide .
this is a slide i picked up from my folder .
it &apos;s not about the details of the slide here , but rather than the general form .
this slide shows data from the performance of us about performance of risc processors compared to the performance of a local area .
the interesting thing here is that this slide , like the other others that we often find in our field , a kind of a semi-logarithmischen curve .
in other words , every step here is a potenz of the leistungsskala .
and this is a new way that we need to use this type of skala curves to the technology of technology .
something very strange is happening here .
this is essentially what i &apos;m going to talk about here .
so if you could turn the lights back again .
and something a little bit more interesting because i &apos;m going to draw a little bit about paper .
well , why do we draw graphs in technology on semi-logarithmischen curves ?
the reason i would draw it on a normal curve , where , say , this is the years , the zeitachse of a kind , which is a very beliebiges measure of technology that i want to represent with a graph , which is a graph graph .
and then you look like this .
and that doesn &apos;t tell us much .
so if i want to record a different technology , we &apos;ll say a transporttechnologie , then that would be very unvernünftig in the semi-logarithmischen scale , in a flat line .
but if something like this happens , it changes the qualitativen conditions .
so if the transporttechnologie would be as fast as the mikroprozessor-technologie of the mikroprozessor-technologie , then we could get into a taxi and we would be in tokyo .
but it &apos;s not going to be so fast .
that was never before in the history of technologie-entwicklung , this kind of rekursivem growth , which is the scale that the scale is going to increase all over the years .
the question i &apos;d like to ask you is , if you look at these exponential curves , you can &apos;t go to the forever .
it &apos;s not possible that all the time that it has to continue for forever and forever .
there are two options .
it &apos;s either going to be a classic s-kurve like this , until something completely new , or it will happen .
that &apos;s in about .
well , i &apos;m an optimist , so i think i think something like this is going to happen .
so , really , is that , we &apos;re right now in a transition right now .
we &apos;re here on this line , in a transition from the world &apos;s earth , a new way of world .
so the question i want to ask , and i also think , is also , is the new world going to be ?
what is this new state that the world is slow ?
because the transition seems very , very confusing , when you &apos;re in the middle of it .
when i was a child , the future was somewhere in 2000 , and people often talked about what would happen in 2000 .
now we have a conference where people talk about the future , and we &apos;re finding that the future is still in 2000 .
and we &apos;re not going to go .
so in other words , the future is that every year in the world , i &apos;ve been in this world .
i think the reason is that we realize that there is something that &apos;s happening .
the transition is happening . we can all feel it .
and we know that it &apos;s just not a sense of any sense of trying to look at the future , for 30 years or 50 years , because everything will be so different , that a simple hochrechnung of what we &apos;re doing now not doing meaning .
i want to talk about what this could be , that transition that we &apos;re at right now .
to make this , i &apos;m going to first talk about some other things that really have nothing to do with technology or computers .
because i think in order to really understand this , we need to go back and look at the thing on a longer scale .
and that &apos;s what i want to look at this on the earth &apos;s zeitskala of life .
i think the full makes sense of meaning when you &apos;re divided into some milliarden-schritte .
so let &apos;s go back , and it &apos;s an 2.5 billion years . the earth was a big , steriler steinklumpen with lots of schwebenden chemicals .
now , if you look at the way these chemicals were organized , then that &apos;s a pretty good picture of how they anstellten .
i think there are theories that start with understanding how everything started with rna , but i &apos;m going to tell you a little bit of a little bit about how to tell you that time , that time , kleine herumschwebten , which are different kinds of rezepten for chemicals .
some of these öltröpfchen are in a special combination of chemicals that allowed them to integrate other chemicals from the outside and grow it .
all of those were the ones , aufzuteilen .
these little öltröpfchen were the primitivste zellenform .
but , these are not the öltröpfchen that i &apos;m not about living in today , because every single one of them was a small , zufälliges recipe of chemicals .
and every time it divided , the inside of the darin verteilt chemicals .
so every one , a little bit different .
in fact , the tröpfchen grew , which one of the growth of optimalere chemistry had faster than others and integrated more and more chemicals from the outside and they shared it faster .
so this is a very important way to survive longer and they &apos;re going to be vermehrten in grösserem .
so this is just a very simple chemical form of life , but it &apos;s interesting when these tröpfchen learned a trick of abstraction .
in any ways we don &apos;t understand , this is the ability to have to have the ability to have information .
they &apos;ve learned to store the recipe of the cell as information , and it &apos;s in a certain chemical shape that we call dna .
in other words , they found a way of finding a way that allowed them to be made of niederzuschreiben what they were made , so that that information could be stored and copied .
the amazing thing is that this kind of information is to store information about the time of 2.5 billion years where you were born , right .
actually , the recipe for us is , which is our genes , from the same code and the same .
and every creatures that &apos;s used exactly the same letters and the same code .
we &apos;re as far as we can write only for the vergnügungszweck , ourselves in this code .
and i have 100 mikrogramm of a white pulvers that i &apos;m trying to keep in airports from sicherheitspersonal .
and it &apos;s in this -- what i &apos;ve done is i took this code -- the code is made of normal letters that we use to the symbolisieren -- and i wrote my visitenkarte on a piece of dna and i verstärkt it 10 .
so if someone wants a hundred million copies of my visitenkarte , i have enough for everyone in this room and even for everyone in the world , and it &apos;s right here .
if i had been a egoist , then i would have written them on a virus and put it in the room .
so what is the next step ?
the niederschreiben of the dna was an interesting step .
and the veranlagten of these cells -- that made them happy for another billion years .
but then another , very interesting step , where things were completely different , and that was to communicate these cells and share information so that communities of cells were born .
i don &apos;t know if you knew that , but bacteria can actually exchange their dna .
that &apos;s why , for example , that &apos;s growing up to antibiotics .
some bacteria have figured out how to get away from penicillin , and they have written this information to other bacteria into the dna , and now we have a lot of bacteria that are resistant to the penicillin because the bacteria communicate each other .
and this communication allowed the reasons of communities that were in a very , very sense , in the same boat ; they were synergetisch .
so they either survive , or they went together , which meant that if a community has succeeded , all the individuals of the community were being repeated more often and bevorzugt by the evolution .
the übergangsstelle is now where these communities are so close to zusammenrückten that they decided to write the recipe for the entire community to put in a zeichenkette .
and the next interesting stage was about another billion years .
at this point , we have mehrzellige communities , communities of many verschiedlichen zellentypen , which are together as individual organism .
in fact , we &apos;re also a community like that .
we have many cells that are not being put on themselves .
your skin cells are useless without heart cells , muscle cells , brain cells and so on .
so these communities started weiterzuentwickeln , so the level that was happening in the way that evolution was going , no longer was the individual cell , but the whole zellengemeinschaft of what we call organism .
the next step is now within these communities .
the zellengemeinschaften started to get information back .
and they developed special structures that did nothing else to process as information within the organism .
and these are the neural structures .
so the neurons are the informationsverarbeitungsapparat that they &apos;ve built these zellengemeinschaften .
they started to train specialists within the community , special structures , which were responsible for learning , understanding and the festhalten of information .
and this was the brain and the nervous system of these communities .
this gave them an evolutionary advantage .
because at that point of an individual -- learning is within the period of life of a single organism , instead of that evolutionary period .
so one organism could learn to eat a particular way , because they were sick and made it sick , the last time he ate it .
so this could be done within the lifetime of a single organism , whereas that were thousands of years ago because these information had to be learned from the individuals who died because of these frucht , because these were still there .
so the nervous system has the evolutionsprozess of these special informationsstrukturen because the evolution could be able to take a place in a individual .
it could be in a zeitlichen lernrahmens .
what happened after that , the individual organisms found a way to communicate each other .
once , as an example , the raffinierteste version of this kommunikationsart is the human language .
it &apos;s a fairly amazing invention when you think about it .
i have a very complicated , unordentliche and verwirrte idea in my head .
i &apos;m sitting here , and i &apos;m basically making grunzende sounds of mine , in the hope of creating a similar verwirrte idea in your head that has a certain kind of a resemblance to my original idea .
so we take a little bit complicated , turn it into sound , a sequence of sound , and produce something very complicated in the heads of others .
so this allows us to work again as a unified organism .
and what we actually did , we , is humanity , we started to have a abstract .
we &apos;re going to durchgehen the same steps that mehrzellerorganismen have gone through -- the abstraction of our methods are to present data .
for example , the invention of language was a little step in this direction .
telefonie , computers , videobänder , cd-roms and so on , are all our spezialisierten mechanisms that we built in our community to handle that information .
and it &apos;s connecting us all together to something that is much bigger , and also capable of developing faster than we have been so far .
so today , evolution can be done in the period of microseconds .
you &apos;ve seen tys little evolutionsbeispiel , where he showed a little bit of evolution in the convolution program , right in front of your eyes .
so we have the zeitskalen again to verschnellert .
the first steps of the history i told you about dauerten a billion years per piece .
the next steps , like the nervous system and the brain , dauerten a few hundred million years .
then the nächstens steps , like language and so on , less than a million years .
and these next steps , like electronics , it just seem to be very few decades .
the process is feeding on itself , and it becomes , i think , auto-katalytisch is the word for that -- if something is verstärkt its änderungsgeschwindigkeit .
the more it changes , the faster it changes .
and i think that &apos;s what we see here in this explosionsartigen curve .
we see the process that &apos;s feeding on themselves .
i live in a living from building computers , and i know that i use the mechanism that i use to build computers , not to have done the recently , not done progress in computer technology .
my current activity is about designing objects with such a very high complexity that it &apos;s impossible to design these in the traditional sense .
i don &apos;t know what every single transistor in the verbindungsmaschine is .
it has billions of them .
what i do instead , and what the designers of thinking are doing , is , we think at a certain abstraktionsebene , we &apos;re going to give this machine , and the machine does something that has far beyond our capabilities , better and faster than we could ever make it .
and it &apos;s partly doing it , which is the methods that we don &apos;t even understand right now .
one way that is particularly interesting , and what i &apos;ve been used in the last time is the evolution itself .
and we put a evolutionsprozess machine in the machine that &apos;s going on in the mikrosekunden-bereich machine .
to give an example , in the most extreme cases , we can create a program that developed from random instruktionen .
we say , &quot; computers , generiere , please , please a hundred million random random sequences of instructions .
now , please , these random chosen instructions , run all the programs , and pick the ones who are the next to my vorgaben . &quot;
so in other words , i &apos;m actually saying what i want to do .
let &apos;s say , i want to put numbers , that would be a simple example of what i &apos;ve been used for that .
so , there are programs that can be able to move the most numbers of numbers .
of course , the chance of random elected instruktionen is very small , that you can just sort of sortieren numbers numbers , so you don &apos;t actually have to do the instructions that actually .
but one of those who might be lucky to make two numbers in the right order .
now i say , &quot; computers , take the 10 percent of the gene sequences that i &apos;ve come to the next one . &quot;
and it &apos;s like this , lösche the rest .
now , reproduziere all of the übriggebliebenen that are the numbers of the numbers .
and it &apos;s a way of rekombinierens , analog to reproduction . &quot;
take two programs , and they produce kids through the exchange of their subroutinen , and the children are vererben the properties of the two programs .
so i have a new generation of programs that developed through combinations of programs that have come closer to the vorgaben than others .
tell , &quot; please repeat this process . &quot;
bewerte them .
maybe some mutations , you may have .
and try to try and try to do this again with another generation .
all those generations need to be very few milliseconds .
and so i can go through a evolution of millions of years in the computer within a few minutes , or in a komplizierteren cases a few hours .
finally , i get programs that can be perfect to put numbers .
in fact , these programs are so much more efficient than any program i could have ever written by hand .
and then , if i look at these programs , i can &apos;t tell how they work .
i tried to understand it .
they are verworrene and odd programs .
but they do the job .
i know , and i &apos;m sure that they do the job because they come out of a series of hunderttausenden programs that have done the job .
because her life was on whether they were doing the job .
i put one in a 747 together with a marvin minsky , he ale a map , and he says , &quot; oh look . look at that .
there is , &apos; an airplane is made up of hunderttausenden kleinteilen , which work together to make their own flug make you secure . &apos; does you not zuversichtlicher ? &quot;
we know that a entwicklungsprozess is not a good way to become too complicated .
so we &apos;re starting to rely on computers , for a process which is different from the classical engineering system .
he allows us to make things with a much more higher complexity than it would allow the normal methods to produce .
and yet , we don &apos;t understand the possibility of that .
gewissermassen überflügelt us .
we use these programs to make the computer much faster , so that we can do these processes even faster .
so it creates a rückkopplung .
it &apos;s going faster and faster , and i think that &apos;s why it seems so confusing .
because all these new technologies are feeding themselves today .
we &apos;re going to lift .
we &apos;re at a point , which is , in the back , when einzeller-organismen evolved to mehrzeller-organismen .
so we &apos;re the amöben , and we can &apos;t really make up , which is the hell we &apos;re actually doing .
we &apos;re in the middle of this übergangpunkt .
but i really believe that after us , something comes from .
i think it &apos;s very hochmütig to tell us that we are the kind of product of evolution .
and i think we all are part of the creation of what &apos;s going on next .
now , the lunch is before and i think i &apos;m going to hear i &apos;m going to hear here before i &apos;m going to go back .
my story starts in here in rajasthan , about two years ago .
i was under the sternenhimmel of the desert with sufi-sänger mukhtiar ali .
we talked about that nothing has changed since the time of ancient indian epos .
if we wanted to travel in the back of the time , we &apos;d let the car and schwirrten over the sky .
we &apos;re going to do this with airplanes .
back then , when the great indian kriegerprinz durst durst , he took an bow , took a schoss into the ground and water .
now we &apos;re doing this with bohrern and machines .
we came to conclusion that magic and magic were replaced by machines .
that really made me sad .
i got a little bit of a fear of technology .
i &apos;m afraid that i could lose the ability to enjoy the sonnenuntergang without a camera and without a tweet of my friends .
i found that technology should make magic and not kill .
when i was a little girl , my grandfather gave me his little silberne taschenuhr .
this piece of 50 years old technology became the magischste thing for me .
it became a goldener access to a world of piraten and verunglückter ships and images in my imagination .
i came up with it as a hielten , and we had cameras to dream of it .
they thought they were going to be inspired by this .
and so i went into the world of technology to see how i could use it to make magic rather than kill .
i started to illustrate books by 16 .
when i saw the ipad , i saw it as a device to storytelling , the readers of the world , to connect .
it can know how we think it .
it can know where we are .
it &apos;s taking images and text together , and animation , sounds and touch .
storytelling used to be used to make more sense .
but what do we do with that ?
i just go to khoya , an interactive ipad .
here &apos;s , &quot; put your fingers on every light . &quot;
and so -- here is , &quot; this box is ... &quot; i write my name .
and it &apos;s made me a character in the book .
and again , a letter goes down to me -- and the ipad knows by gps where i live -- that &apos;s really the way to me .
the child in me is really excited about this possibility .
i talked a lot about magic .
i don &apos;t mean the magician and the same , but the magic of childhood , those ideas that we all had as children .
and fireflies in a glass , i always found that very exciting .
so you have to blow the ipad and make it rauslassen .
and the beleuchten beleuchten through the rest of the rest of the book .
another idea that i was fascinated as a child is that a whole galaxy can be in a single murmel .
and so every book and every world i &apos;m going to get a little murmel that i &apos;m carrying here to the magic device in the device .
and this opens up a map .
fantasybücher had always cards , but these cards were static .
this map is expanding and leuchtet and serve to the rest of the book .
it &apos;s also showing you in other places of the book .
i &apos;m going in here .
it &apos;s important for me to make something that is indisch , but also very zeitgemäß .
these are the apsaras .
we all heard of feen and nymphen , but how many people outside india know their indian colleagues , who are apsaras ?
the poor apsaras were stuck in indras kammern , in an old muffigen book .
and we bring them back , in a contemporary history of children .
a story that &apos;s going on with new issues like the umweltkrise .
for the theme of umweltkrise , a big problem for the last 10 years is that kids sit in their rooms , their computers , without out .
but now , with mobile technology , we can take our children into the natural world with their technology .
in an interaction of the book , you &apos;re sent to a search , you have to go out and collecting the camera from the ipads images of the ipads objects .
when i was a child , i had collections of stöckern , rocks , kieseln and muscheln .
somehow , the children don &apos;t make any anymore .
this is kindheitsritual zurückgebracht . you have to go out to make a picture of a flower and mark a picture .
in another chapter , you have to put a piece of baumrinde fotographieren and tag .
so , you actually create a digital collection of photographs that you can then put online .
a child in london shows the picture of a fuchses and says , &quot; oh , i &apos;ve seen a fuchs . &quot;
a child in india says , &quot; i saw a monkey today . &quot;
this creates a kind of social network around a digital collection of photos that you actually recorded .
there &apos;s a variety of ways that we have magic to connect the world and technology .
and the next book we &apos;re planning to use an interaction where you use the video of the satellite and using video augmented reality eine animation that appear on a plant in a plant .
at a point , the screen is füllt .
you have to make the sound of the winds , you can blow it away and read the rest of the book .
we all move to a world where the forces of technology are closer and can be able to get into magic and technology .
we use the energy of the sun .
we bring our kids and closer to the natural world and the magic , fun and love of our childhood through the simple medium of a story .
thank you .
this is really a really extraordinary honor for me .
i spend most of my time with people in untersuchungshaft , prison or todeszellen .
i spend most of my time with the socially schwächsten in the sozialbausiedlungen and places where there &apos;s a lot of hoffnungslosigkeit .
here at ted , to see , to hear , how stimulierend this is , has given me a lot of force .
in the short time here , i realized here : ted has an identity .
you can tell things that have the world &apos;s impact .
and sometimes , when something comes about ted , it gets meaning and force that otherwise would not have .
i say that because i think identity is really important .
we &apos;ve seen some amazing presentations .
i think we &apos;ve learned that the words of a teacher &apos;s words , but that &apos;s the words of a dedicated teacher .
as a doctor , you can do good . as a doctor , you can do more .
and so i want to talk about the power of identity .
i didn &apos;t learn this as a lawyer by the way .
i learned this from my grandmother .
i was a big afroamerikanischen household , a traditional afroamerikanischen household , which was dominated by a matriarchin , and that matriarchin was my grandmother .
she was a taffe , strong woman , she had an effect .
she had the last word in every single word .
it was also the origin of many differences in our family .
she was the daughter of a sklavenfamilie .
their parents were born in the 1840ern in virginia as a slave .
it was born in the 1880 , and the experience of slavery shaped their view very strong .
my grandmother was strong , but she was also liebevoll .
when i met her as a little boy , she came to me and umarmte me .
and she realized that i could barely breathe . then she got me .
one or two hours later , when i met her , she came up to me and said , &quot; bryan , you know , you &apos;re going to feel my embrace ? &quot;
and if i said , &quot; no , &quot; she umarmte me . i said , &quot; i said , &quot; she &apos;d let me alone .
and she was something that was always made that you wanted to be near her .
the only problem with that , they had 10 children .
my mother was the youngest of her 10 children .
sometimes , if i wanted to spend time with her , it was hard to get their attention .
my cousins were walking around all around .
i remember i have to be eight or nine , i woke up one morning and went to the living room . all my cousins were walking around .
my grandmother was at the end of the zimmers and i was staring at me .
first of all , i thought that this was a game .
i looked at her and she was smiling , but she looked very serious .
this was about 15 or 20 minutes , and then she stood up and came over to me , and she took me up in my hand and said , &quot; come , bryan . you and i have to talk . &quot;
i remember it was like it was yesterday .
i &apos;ll never forget it .
she took me out to outside , and i said , &quot; bryan , i &apos;m going to tell you something , but you have to promise that you don &apos;t . &quot;
i said , &quot; i promised , grandmother . &quot;
she said , &quot; ehrenwort ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
and she sat down and looked at me . she said , &quot; i want you to know that i &apos;ve seen you . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you &apos;re something special . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you can do anything you want to do . &quot;
i will never forget that .
and then she said , &quot; you &apos;ve got to promise me three things , bryan . &quot;
i said , &quot; ok , grandma . &quot;
she said , &quot; first , my first versprich , you will always love your mom . &quot;
she said , &quot; your mom is my baby and you have to promise you that you &apos;re always going to take you . &quot;
i mean my mother , so i said , &quot; yes , i &apos;m going to do that . &quot;
and then she said , &quot; next , i &apos;m going to tell you that you &apos;re always going to do the right thing , &quot; even though it &apos;s hard to do , the right thing .
i thought , &quot; yes , i was , grandmother . i promise it . &quot;
finally , she said , &quot; the last thing you &apos;ve got to promise me is &quot; that you will never drink any alcohol . &quot;
well , i was nine years old , and i said , &quot; yes , i promise it . &quot;
i grew up on the land , in the old , rural south , and i have a brother who &apos;s a year older and a year younger sister .
when i was about 14 or 15 , one day my brother came home , and he brought this sixpack beer with a little bit of my sister and me and went to the forest .
we just alberten around the way that we are .
then he took a drink of beer , and he was offered my sister &apos;s sister , and she took them , and then she offered me one .
i said , &quot; no , no , no . it &apos;s all right . just do it . i don &apos;t want to beer . &quot;
my brother said , &quot; well , do you go . today we are doing this , you can do anything we do .
i had what was your sister , and go , trink a beer . &quot;
i said , &quot; i don &apos;t want . just do her . &quot; do you . &quot;
my brother used to me .
he said , &quot; what &apos;s going on with you ? well , trink . &quot;
then he looked at me and he said , &quot; oh no , you don &apos;t always do you nuts for the conversation with grandma ? &quot;
i said , &quot; what are you talking about ? &quot;
he said , &quot; grandmother tells us all the grandchildren that they are special . &quot;
i was devastated .
i &apos;m going to be a little bit about you .
i shouldn &apos;t want to do it .
this is going to be übertragen public .
i &apos;m 52 years old and i &apos;m gestehe that i &apos;ve never drink a drop of alcohol .
i don &apos;t say that because i think it &apos;s tugendhaft . i say that identity is what &apos;s going on .
if we can create the right kind of identity , we can tell people around us that they don &apos;t think about .
we can get them to do things that they thought they couldn &apos;t .
of course , my grandmother would say all her grandchildren , they are something special .
my grandfather was in prison during the prison prison .
my uncle died of alkoholinduzierten diseases .
and she believed that these are the subjects that we need to take care of .
i tried to say something about our justizsystem .
this country is different than 40 years ago .
in the &apos; 70s , 300,000 people were in haftanstalten and in prison .
today , it &apos;s 2.3 million .
the united states has the highest inhaftierungsrate of the world today .
seven million people are released on the ground or bedingter .
i think masseninhaftierungen has fundamentally changed our world .
in socially weak and black parts of the population , despair and hoffnungslosigkeit , because of these changes .
one of three male black between 18 and 30 in prison , in prison , went to prison or mit .
in urban communities all over the country -- from los angeles , from los philadelphia , washington to washington -- are 50 to 60 percent of all black men in prison in prison , in prison , or mit .
our system is not just shaped by questions that have rassenzugehörigkeit , it &apos;s also entstellt by poverty .
we have a justizsystem in this country that would treat much better if you are rich and guilty than poor and innocent .
wealth , not verschulden , it affects the result .
but we seem to be very happy with that .
a politics of fear and anger , we convinced us that these problems are not our problems .
we &apos;ve lost the contact .
i think that &apos;s interesting .
there &apos;s a couple of hochinteressante developments .
my home state , alabama entzieht them permanent the wahlrecht if they &apos;re convicted of strafrechtlich .
here and today in georgia , 34 percent of the male black population are constantly lost their lives .
we prognostizieren that in 10 years , the rate of the aberkennung of the bürgerlichen ehrenrechte will be so high as the verabschiedung of the wahlrechtsgesetzes .
the silence is ohrenbetäubend .
i vertrete children .
many of my clients are very young .
the united states of america are the only country in the world that dreizehnjährige children convicted to death in prison .
in this country , there are lebenslängliche haftstrafen haftstrafen without the bedingte .
we &apos;ve already run a lot of the process .
the only country in the world .
i vertrete people in todeszellen .
the question of death row is an interesting question .
we think because you &apos;ve taught us to do the real question , that the real question is , has a human being to die of a begangenes crime ?
this is a very sensitive question .
but you can think differently about how we see our identity .
the other perspective is not : it deserves someone for a crime , but to be , have we deserves it ?
i think that &apos;s fascinating .
the death penalty in america is defined by error .
in nine people we were executed , one of the things we were left for innocent , who was released from the death row .
an amazing fehlerquote . one of nine innocent .
i think that &apos;s fascinating .
we would never leave someone with an airplane when nine planes , the abheben , the abheben .
but somehow we can make it abzunabeln by this problem .
it &apos;s not our problem .
it &apos;s not our burden .
it &apos;s not our struggle .
i talk a lot about these questions .
i talk about race and the question , whether we &apos;re right to kill .
and it &apos;s exciting because i &apos;m beibringe my students &apos; students . i &apos;m talking about slavery .
i &apos;m talking about terrorism , the time at the end of the rekonstruktion , to the beginning of the world war .
we don &apos;t really know much about this .
but for the afroamerikaner in this country , it was a time of terror .
in many areas , people had to be afraid of lynchmobs .
or bombs .
it was the fear of terror that shaped her life .
and these older people now come to me and say , &quot; mr. , stevenson , you &apos;re talking , you &apos;re saying , you &apos;re saying , you know , you &apos;re saying to say that we have to stop doing it for the first time in our nation with terrorism : after 9 / 11 . &quot;
they say , &quot; no -- tell people that we grew up with it . &quot;
and after the terrorism , of course , the rassentrennung and decades of rassistisch are motivierten unterwerfung and apartheid .
and yet , in our country , there are a dynamic -- we don &apos;t like to talk about our problems .
we don &apos;t like to talk about our history .
and so we don &apos;t really understand what meaning our actions have in the historical context .
we &apos;re constantly stoßen .
we always create new tension and conflict .
it &apos;s hard to talk about race , and i think that &apos;s because we &apos;re not willing to get to the process of truth and reconciliation .
in south africa , people understood that the rassentrennung is not to cross without the willingness to truth and reconciliation .
even after the genocide in rwanda , it was the willingness , but not in that country .
i thought some talks in germany were held in germany .
it was fascinating , because one of the scientists stood after my talk and said , &quot; you know , it &apos;s profoundly , very bizarre , you can hear that . &quot;
he said , &quot; in germany , there is no death penalty .
and of course , it can never give you any more . &quot;
it was very quiet . then a woman said , &quot; with our history , it &apos;s impossible that we ever have to get back to the systematische killing of people .
it would be gewissenlos of us , consciously and specific people . &quot;
i thought about it .
what it would feel like to live in a world where the german state would be hinrichten for people , especially if there were a lot of jews in the jews .
it would be unerträglich .
it would be gewissenlos .
and yet , in this country , in the united states , in the united states , we &apos;re going to be at risk of being convicted , 11 times higher , when the victim is white , when it &apos;s black , 22 times higher , when the angeklagte is black , and the victim knows -- in the same state whose earth is ruhen .
and yet , there &apos;s these mental abkopplung .
i think our identity is threatened .
if we don &apos;t deal with these issues , with these difficult issues , the positive and wonderful things are affected .
we love innovation .
we love technology and creativity .
we love conversation .
but eventually , these realities are überschattet of suffering , abuse , herabsetzung , ausgrenzung .
i seem important to unite both .
because we &apos;re ultimately talking about that we need more hope , more engagement , more commitment to be able to be in a complex world .
for me , that means to make a time to think and talk about the poor , the benachteiligten , who will never be at ted .
but think about a way that has integrated in our own lives .
we all have to believe in the end of the day , we can &apos;t see .
we do that . so we &apos;re so rational that we have very much of our intellect .
innovation , creativity , and development , not only comes from our heads .
they come from ideas , which are driven by the belief in our hearts .
it &apos;s this kopf-herz-verbindung that i think that you &apos;re driving us not just to be open to all the light and begeisternden things , but also for the dark and the problematischen .
vaclav havel , the great tschechische politicians , once said .
&quot; when we fought in eastern oppression , we wanted to be all sorts of things . but what we needed most of the time , hope , a mental orientation , the willingness to be in hoffnungslosen places and witness . &quot;
this mental orientation is the core of what i believe , that the ted-gemeinschaften need to be involved in that .
there &apos;s no abgrenzung to be technology and design that allows us to be human and at all , as long as we don &apos;t have eyes and ears for poverty , ausgrenzung and injustice .
i want to warn you . that kind of identity is a lot of us to ask us much more than we &apos;re not taking care of .
it will touch you deeply .
as a young lawyer , i was a great privilege of meeting pink parks .
and wife parks came back to montgomery , where they traf. these older friends , johnnie carr who had organized the montgomery-busboykott , an incredible afroamerikanerin -- and virginia durr , a white , clifford durr , dr. king vertrat .
so these women are meeting and they were just going to be .
and then , and i called my wife up and said , &quot; bryan , wife park comes into the city . we want to talk .
do you want to hear and listen ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; yeah , i like . &quot;
she said , &quot; and what are you going to do when you &apos;re here ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m going to listen . &quot;
and i went over and i just heard .
it was always so inspiring , so beflügelnd .
one day i was sitting there and i heard this women , and after a couple of hours , wife parks to me around me , &quot; well , bryan , tell me what &apos;s called the &quot; initiative for &quot; same .
what do you try to achieve ? &quot;
i started with my usual talk .
i said , &quot; we &apos;re trying to get to injustice .
wr want people to help be convicted of innocent .
we want to fight bias and diskriminierung on the strafvollzugssystem .
we want to eliminate lebenslängliche haftstrafen without a bedingte strafaussetzung for children .
we want to do something against the death penalty .
we want to lower the number of death row .
we want to be able to end up masseninhaftierungen . &quot;
i thought my usual talk , and after she looked at me and said , &quot; mhmm . mhmm . &quot;
she said , &quot; this is going to be very , very tired . &quot;
and then woman carr carr to me , put a finger on my face and said , &quot; and therefore , they must be very , very tapfer . &quot;
and so i think the ted community should be tapferer .
we need to make ways to make these challenges : these problems , that &apos;s this .
because ultimately our humanity depends on our humanity .
i learned very simple things in my work .
i learned a couple of simple things .
we all are more than the worst thing we &apos;ve ever done .
i think that &apos;s true of every human being on the planet .
if someone is lying , it &apos;s not just a liar .
if someone is taking something that doesn &apos;t hear it , it &apos;s not just a dieb .
even who kills someone , is not just a killer .
and because this is , there &apos;s a basic human dignity that has to respect the law .
i also think that in many parts of this country , and certainly in many parts of the earth , the opposite of poverty is not wealth .
i don &apos;t think that .
i think that in many places , the opposite of poverty is justice .
and finally , i think , though it &apos;s so dramatic , so beautiful and inspiring , and so anregend , we &apos;re not at the end of the technology , not about the things that we &apos;re developing , not at our intellect and mind .
and finally , a society will not be measured how they treat their rich and powerful and the privilegierten , but it &apos;s how they deal with the poor , the verurteilten , the inhaftierten .
because in this context , we begin to grasp the truly amazing things that make us up .
sometimes i lose the balance . a story finally .
sometimes i push too much .
i &apos;m tired of getting tired .
sometimes these ideas are ahead of our thinking , in a very important way .
i vertrete these kids who were convicted of a very hard strafen .
i go to the untersuchungsgefängnis and i see a client who &apos;s 13 or 14 years old and who &apos;s supposed to be a adult court .
and then i ask myself , how could that happen ?
how can a judge turn someone into something that he &apos;s not ?
the judge looks as adults , but i see a child .
one night i stayed up and thought , my god , if a judge can turn us into something else , then he must have zauberkräfte .
well , bryan , the judge has zauberkräfte .
you should be able to wish .
and because it was late , and i couldn &apos;t really think of it , i started working on a antrag .
i had a 14jährigen , poor black boys than a client .
and i started with this antrag . the headline was , &quot; antrag , my poor , 14jährigen black person like a privilegierten white mandanten topmanager . &quot;
in my antrag , i explained that fehlverhalten is the staatsanwaltschaft and the police and the police to account for verfahrensfehler .
there was a crazy line about that in this country , nothing more rechtens is that there &apos;s only a fehlverhalten .
the next morning i woke up and i didn &apos;t know , whether i was supposed to be a crazy antrag or actually writing it .
and i didn &apos;t just write it , but also sent to the dish .
a few months went and i had all forgotten .
but finally , i decided , my god , i have to go into the court and i &apos;m going to give it a crazy case .
i went in the car and i was really overwhelmed -- overwhelmed .
so i went to the court .
and i thought that &apos;s going to be so hard , so painful .
finally , i went out of my car , and i went to the court .
when i was hochging. the staircase for the court there was an elderly , black man , the job in the court .
when he saw me , he came to me and he said , &quot; who are you ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m a lawyer . &quot; he said , &quot; you &apos;re a lawyer ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
he came to me and umarmte me .
then he did put me in the ear .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m so proud of you . &quot;
and i have to say , i was having a force .
it touched something deeply deeply in me , identity , the ability to contribute to each individual , to a perspective of hope .
well , i went on the gerichtssaal .
once the judge saw me .
he said , &quot; mr. stevenson , have you put these crazy ? &quot;
i said , &quot; yes . &quot; and then we started to argue .
more people come in , just because they were angry .
i had written these crazy things .
polizeibeamte came in and stellvertretende staatsanwälte and büroangestellte .
in the handumdrehen , the gerichtssaal of people who were angry , was that we were talking about color , talking about poverty , about inequality .
from my augenwinkel , i looked at the day and go off .
he was seeing over the window and he could hear the whole tohuwabohu .
he went and down .
finally , this older black man came up with a very besorgten gesichtsausruck in the gerichtssaal and sat straight behind me , almost to the verteidigungsbank .
ten minutes later , the judge quit a pause .
during the break , a polizeibeamter came in , which was störte that the janitors was in the gerichtssaal .
this deputy ran over to the older black .
he said , &quot; jimmy , what do you do in the gerichtssaal ? &quot;
the old black man stood up . he looked at me , and he said , &quot; i &apos;m here to say , &quot; i &apos;m here to tell this young man , lose the goal , don &apos;t give it . &quot;
i came to ted because i think many of them have understood that the moral pendel of the universe is far , but that it is zuneigt .
that we are not fully designed as humans as long as we &apos;re not taking care of human rights and grundwerte .
that our lives are connected to the survival of each individual .
that we have our visions of technology and design , by entertainment and creativity , to humanity , pity and justice .
and especially , i want to look at those of you who just see this , just saying , don &apos;t lose the goal out of your eyes . don &apos;t give them .
you have seen this audience , this community , and heard of them , to help them and do something .
what can we do ?
bryan stevenson : well , there are all sorts of possibilities .
if you live in california , there &apos;s a volksentscheid in this spring , where it &apos;s really about doing a effort , something that &apos;s going to flow from the geldstrom umzuleiten , which is going to be flowing into the politics of the punishment .
here , in california , for example , you will be a billion dollars for death row for a billion dollars for death row .
and yet , 46 percent of all the tötungsdelikte don &apos;t end with a verhaftung .
56 percent of all the vergewaltigungsfälle don &apos;t come in court .
here &apos;s the chance to do something .
this referendum is going to suggest that money to invest in more sicherheitskräfte and safety .
i think there are opportunities everywhere .
over the last three decades , the verbrechensrate in america is the tremendous decline .
this is a fact that often put in a context of the increased inhaftierungszahlen .
what would you say to someone that believes ?
well , in fact , the number of the gewaltverbrechen has not changed very much .
most of the masseninhaftierungen in this country didn &apos;t really find really in the classroom of gewaltverbrechen .
it was the fehlgeleitete kreuzzug against drugs .
so the dramatic dramatic numbers are coming in the prisoners .
we have hinreißen from the rhetorik of the punishment .
now we have » -gesetze , which are always going to put people behind bars for a fahrraddiebstahl , for the diebstahl geringfügigen , instead of being able to make them feel the victims .
i think we need to do more to help people who have become victims of a straftat , not less .
and i think our current current will help anybody help .
i think that &apos;s what we need to change .
bryan , they really put a string up here .
they &apos;re a inspiring personality .
thank you for ted . thank you .
i mean , a ladens death is an increased gefahrenrisiko .
sprecher hungersnot : famine in somalia . he speakers three : police police police police .
four : bösartige kartelle . speakers five : dangerous kreuzfahrtschiffe .
six verfall verfall : 65 tote .
tsunamiwarnung sprecher : sprecher 9 .
different speakers : drogenkrieg . massenvernichtungswaffen .
recession . stillstand . egypt . syria .
crisis . death . disaster .
oh my god .
so this is just a few of the clips i &apos;ve collected over the last six months -- it would have the last six days , or the last six years .
in fact , the media prefer to show us negative topics because our minds are very important to these issues .
and there &apos;s a very good reason for that .
every second every day , our senses are actually going to be more information than our brain can be .
and because we &apos;re not more important than our survival , the first stop for all the information is part of our temporallappens , the amygdala .
so the amygdala is our frühwarnsystem , our gefahrendetektor .
it sortiert and durchkämmt all the information that &apos;s looking for any kind of andeutung of the problem of the environment in our environment .
so , when we see the news , we prefer to look for negative news .
and the old adage , &quot; if it &apos;s blutet , the demand is going to be very true .
well , with all our digital devices that are us seven days the week , 24 hours a day , all these negative news , it &apos;s no wonder that we &apos;re a pessimistisch .
it &apos;s not a wonder that everybody thinks it &apos;s always worse .
but maybe that &apos;s not the case .
it might be the reality .
and perhaps the tremendous progress that we &apos;ve done in the last century is so strong that it will be possible for us to create a world of abundance .
well , i don &apos;t say we don &apos;t have big problems -- climate crisis , artensterben , water and energieprobleme -- we &apos;ve already got .
and as humans , we &apos;re much better at that , in the very long term , but ultimately , finally , to get over .
let &apos;s look at what we &apos;ve achieved in the last century so we can predict development .
over the last hundred years , the average life expectancy doubled , which has verdreifacht , has verdreifacht the population of population .
child mortality has a tenth of a tenth .
and that &apos;s what the ernährungs- , elektrizitäts- transport- and communication costs are lower by a vielfaches .
steve pinker showed us that we &apos;re currently living in a very peaceful time of life .
and according to charles kenny , the alphabetisierungsquote rate of 25 percent up in 80 percent have gone up in 80 percent .
we live in a really extraordinary time .
and many people forget about this .
and we increase our expectations of our expectations .
we actually have neu poverty .
remember that a lot of americans who live under poverty poverty , access to electricity , water , toilets , kühlschränken , tv , fernseher , klimaanlagen and cars .
the richest , kapitalisten , the last century , the earth &apos;s imperatoren , would never have such a luxusgüter of luxusgüter .
the foundation of these are technologies and these are growing .
my good friend ray kurzweil has shown us that every tool that will be information technology is , at the curve of moore &apos;s law , is going to double the kurve of the preis-performance-quotient for the entire 12 months .
it costs the mobile phone in your pocket costs about a million times less , and it &apos;s thousands faster than a supercomputer from the &apos; 70s .
now look at this curve .
that &apos;s moore &apos;s law for the last hundred years .
notice two things at this curve .
first , how smooth it &apos;s going -- in good times , war or peace , recession , depression and hochkonjunktur .
this is the result of a lot of computers that build the schnellere computers .
it &apos;s slowed down for none of our big problems .
also , despite your logarithmischen verlaufs on the left , it &apos;s up .
so the growth itself is accelerating .
and on this curve , on the back of moore &apos;s law , we find a range of extraordinary technologies that are available for everyone .
cloud-computing , something that my friends &apos; friends call &quot; infinite-computing , &quot; sensors and networks , robots , 3d 3d that allow the personal production of our planet to our planet , synthetic biology , treibstoffe , impfungen and food , digital medicine , nano-materialien and artificial intelligence .
how many of you have seen the victory of ibms , watson watson at risk ?
it was a big deal .
i &apos;ve been durchforstet the newspapers and looking for the best headlines i could find .
i love this : &quot; watson &apos;s bezwingt of human enemy . &quot;
&quot; risk is not a simple game .
it &apos;s about understanding the nuancen of language .
imagine that these artificial intelligence were available every owner of a mobiltelefones .
four years ago , ray kurzweil , and i &apos;m at ted at ted , called &quot; singularity university . &quot;
we &apos;re bringing our students all these technologies , with special focus on how they can be used to solve the grand challenges of humanity .
and every year we ask the students , businesses , products and services , within a decade , that can be beinflussen by a decade of people &apos;s lives .
think about that a group of students can affect the lives of billions of people today .
30 years ago , this would have been ridiculous .
today we can have done by dozens of companies that have done exactly this .
if i think about creating surplus , i don &apos;t mean a life of luxury for everyone on this planet ; it &apos;s about creating a life full of possibilities .
it &apos;s about creating a knappen goods .
the reason is , the knappheit is kontextbezogen , and technology is a resource force .
here &apos;s an example .
this is the story of napoleon iii. in the middle of the 18th century .
he &apos;s the guy on the left .
he invited the king of siam for dinner .
napoleons soldiers were given silber-besteck , napoleon himself got gold-besteck .
the king of siam , but got aluminium-besteck .
and then , in fact , aluminium was the most valuable metal on the planet , more valuable than gold and platin .
this is why the dome of the washington-monuments &apos;s dome was made .
even though aluminium &apos;s percent of the erdmasse &apos;s percent of the erdmasse &apos;s percent of the erdmasse &apos;s , it &apos;s not as a pure metal .
it &apos;s connected by oxygen and silikate .
but then the technology of the elektrolyse was developed and made aluminiumherstellung so cheap that we use it with our wegwerf-mentalität .
let &apos;s project this analogy for us to the future .
we think today &apos;s energieknappheit .
ladies and gentlemen , we live on a planet of mit more energy than we use a year .
16 terawatt energy prasseln all 88 minutes on the ground .
it &apos;s not about the lack of the problem , the problem is .
and there &apos;s good news .
in this year , you &apos;ve been able to reduce the cost of solar power to 50 percent of the diesel-stroms -- 8.8 rupees in comparison to 17 rupees .
the cost of solar energy has dropped 50 percent last year .
last month , this has published a study that shows that until the end of the decade in the u.s. areas of the u.s. economy , six cents per kwh , compared to 15 cents at national average .
and if we have a energieüberschuss , we will also have water .
let &apos;s talk about wasser-kriege .
remember , as carl sagan , the voyager-raumfahrzeug 1990 , when it was saturn vorbeigezogen , turned back to earth ?
he took a famous photo . how did it mean ?
&quot; a pale blue . &quot;
because we live in a wasserplaneten .
we live on a planet that &apos;s covered in 70 percent of water .
yes , it &apos;s 97,5 percent water , two percent are vereist , and we &apos;re fighting for 0,5 percent of the water on the planet , but there &apos;s hope .
and there are new technologies , not in 10 or 20 years , but now .
it &apos;s new nanotechnologien on the way , nano-materialien .
and from a conversation with dean kaman , one of the innovators of the guy , i want to share with you -- he gave me the permission -- his technolgie , the &quot; slingshot &quot; -- and that many of you may have heard about it . it &apos;s the size of a kühlschranks in the studentenheim .
it can produce a thousand gallons of clean water a day from various sources -- whether it &apos;s water , verschmutztes water , latrine -- and all that for less than two cents a gallon .
the president of coca-cola has just been eingewilligt , a big test-projekt of test-projekt in developing countries .
and if everything goes well , and i &apos;m very confident , coca-cola will apply this technology to 206 countries around the whole planet .
this is technologieunterstützte innovation that &apos;s available today .
and we &apos;ve seen this in mobile phones .
you mean , oh , we &apos;re going to reach the 70 percent of mobile phones in the developing world to end of the end .
just think that a massai-krieger cell phone in the middle of kenya has a better mobil-kommunikation than president reagan has 25 years ago .
and if you look at google on google , you have more access to knowledge and information as president clinton 15 years ago .
they live in a world that has information and communication in abundance , how no one ever could have predicted .
and it &apos;s getting better , the things that you and i &apos;ve spent several thousand dollars -- gps , hd-video and photograph , libraries of books and music , technology to medical medical imaging -- are literally now entmaterialisiert and cheaper in their cell phone .
and the best part is that we &apos;re expected to health .
last month , i had the pleasure of pleasure with the qualcomm-stiftung of the genannten prize that &apos;s called &quot; $ 10 million prize prize x prize . &quot;
we &apos;re asking teams all over the world , all these technologies to connect together in a cell phone so that you can talk to the machine , because it &apos;s equipped with ai , you can test reinhusten or your blutwerte .
and to win , the machine has to be a better diagnosis than a team of hochqualifizierter physicians .
imagine this device . in the middle of a country country , where there are no doctors , but 25 percent of the krankheitslast and 1.3 percent of the staff of health care .
if this device is a rna- or dna-virus , which is not known , it &apos;s calling the gesundheitsbehörde and prevent a pandemic in front of it .
but now the biggest force that will lead us to a world of abundance .
i call it &quot; the next billion . &quot;
the white lines are on the population .
we &apos;ve just passed the 7-milliarden-marke .
and by the way , the biggest absicherung of a population has a better education and diet all over the world .
in 2010 , we were connected to each other , and we were connected to each other over two billion people .
by 2020 , we &apos;re going to increase voraussichtlich from two to five billion .
three billion new minds we never heard before , are going to join the global communication .
what do these people need ?
what are they going to consume ? what are they going to want ?
and instead of a wirtschaftlichem of a lot , i see one of the greatest economic economic history .
these people represent several dollars of dollars that are going to be flowing into the global economy .
and they &apos;re going to be healthier by using the tricoders , and they &apos;re getting better trained by the khan-akademie , and by using the opportunity to use 3d 3d and infinite computing , and so much more productive than ever before .
so what can be three billion growing , healthy , educated , productive members of the menschengemeinde ?
how about a sentence , never before gehörter .
how about the unterdrückten , wherever you are , to give a voice to pay attention to you and make change , for the first time ?
what are these three billion people bring ?
how about beiträgen that we can &apos;t even predict ?
one of the things that i &apos;ve learned by x prize is that small teams that are motivated by passionate and focus on extraordinary things can be done , things that could be able to do great business and governments in the past .
i want to end with a story that really excites me .
there &apos;s a program that some might have known .
it &apos;s a game called the foldit .
it was developed at the university of washington in seattle .
and it &apos;s a game where individuals can take a sequence of amino acids to explore how the protein is going to evolve .
according to the behavior we can predict the structure and function .
and this is very important in the medizinforschung .
so far , this was a problem for supercomputer .
and this game was played by the university of the very , etc .
and it &apos;s hundreds of thousands of people who &apos;ve played the game online .
and it showed that today , the human pattern pattern is better at the proteins that are faltet than the best supercomputer .
and when these people came and looked who the best protein-ordner in the world , this was not a mit-professor , no caltech-student , it was a jemand , manchester , a woman who was an assistentin of the geschäftsleitung in a reha-klinik , and at night the best protein-ordnerin of the world was the best protein-ordnerin of the world .
ladies and gentlemen , what i &apos;m going to have in our future is the fact that we have more power than individuals to ask ourselves the big challenges of our planet .
we have access to tools with an exponential technology .
we have the passion of a diy-innovatoren .
we have the capital of the techno-philanthropen .
and we have three billion new minds that we can work online to make the new challenges , and to do that .
we expect a couple extraordinary decades .
thank you .
i think we need to do something against a verändernswertes piece of medical culture .
and i think it &apos;s a medical doctor , and i &apos;m .
and maybe i &apos;m a long enough in business as i can give it a piece of my own falschen prestiges to allow this to be possible .
but before i &apos;m going to talk to my talk about my talk , let &apos;s start with a little bit of baseball .
hey , why don &apos;t ?
we &apos;re near the saisonende and we &apos;re moving towards the world &apos;s world .
we all love baseball , or we &apos;re going to love baseball ?
baseball is full of great statistics .
and there are hundreds of them .
&quot; moneyball &quot; comes soon and turns out to statistics and use these great baseball team .
i &apos;m going to mention a statistics from which i hope most of you have heard about .
it &apos;s the durchschnittsleistung of the schlägers .
we &apos;re talking about a 300 , when a bat hits 300 .
that means that the player is safe by 10 hits .
that means the ball to the außenfeld , he &apos;s coming , he &apos;s not going to be trapped , and who &apos;s trying to get the ball to the first base , it didn &apos;t get in time and the läufer was safe .
three of the 10th 10 .
you know how to call a 300ter in major &apos;s league baseball ?
well , really good , maybe a all-star .
you know how to call a 400ter ?
that &apos;s someone who &apos;s going to meet four in the rest of the rest .
legendär -- like ted williams legendär -- the last major league baseball player met during a regulären season for 400 times .
and let &apos;s take back back to my world of medicine , where i feel a lot more comfortable , or maybe a little less likely to talk about them .
suppose they have a blinddarmentzündung , and they &apos;re going to be a operateur , whose durchschnittsleistung 400 are in terms of blinddarmentzündungen .
it &apos;s not a way that works , or ?
imagine life in a certain remote area , and you have a beloved menschen people with verstopften herzkranzgefäßen and their hausarzt überweist of this zu to a kardiologen whose durchschnittsleistung in gefäßdarstellung at 200 .
but , you know , you know ?
it &apos;s much better this year . it &apos;s in the aufsteigenden .
and she &apos;s going to beat a 257 .
it &apos;s not a way that works .
but i &apos;m going to ask you a question .
what do you think like the durchschnittsleistung for a kardiologen or a nurse or a orthopäden , a geburtshelfer , a rettungsassistenten ?
1,000 , very good .
the truth is that no one in the entire medicine knows what a good surgeon or doctor or a rettungsassistent should be .
what we do though is that we &apos;re also embedded everyone , including me , to be able to be a very perfect thing .
never make a mistake , nobody does not make any of the details about how to do this .
and that &apos;s the message i put in the medical school .
i was a zwanghaft obsessiver student .
in high school , a mitschüler said that brian goldmann would learn for a bluttest .
and it was like that .
and i learned in my little dachstube in the nurses , in the toronto general hospital , unweit of here .
i learned everything .
in my anatomievorlesung , i learned the origins and ausläufer every muskels , every branch of any heart of every single blood , which von the aorta , obskure and ordinary differentialdiagnosen .
i knew even the differentialdiagnose for renale tubuläre azidose .
and the whole time , i collected more and more .
and i was good , i was schloss with cum laude .
and i left the medizinstudium with the impression that i knew everything i knew , or knew anything , or at least as much as possible as possible , that i had immune to make it von .
and it was working for a time until i met a woman printer .
i was residierte in a lehrkrankenhaus lehrkrankenhaus , in toronto , when i was brought to the notfallabteilung of the hospital .
at that point , i was a kardiologischen layer of zugewiesen .
and it was my assignment as the notfallpersonal kardiologischen advice to look at the notfallpatienten .
and then giving feedback to my oberarzt .
i studied the woman printer , and she was in atemnot .
and when i was listening to her , they made keuchende sounds .
and when i abhörte her breast with the stethoskope , i could hear a knackendes sound on both sides , which told me that she suffered under kongestiver heart failure .
that &apos;s a state in which the heart is failing , instead of pump the entire blood down , and then part of the blood flow in the lung and füllt it , so the kurzatmigkeit came .
and it wasn &apos;t a hard time to diagnosis .
i hired her and i made myself .
i gave her aspirin . i gave her medicine to take the pressure of the heart .
i gave her medicine that we call diuretics , and they were using water , so they ausschied the liquid .
and over a period of a year and a half , two hours , it started to feel better .
i felt really good .
and i made my first mistake ; i sent them home .
actually , i made two mistakes .
i sent them home without speaking to my oberarzt .
i didn &apos;t take the up and i did what i should have , what would have been a call from my oberarzt , so he &apos;d had a chance to make a own picture .
and he knew it , he would have been able to have some extra information to her .
maybe i did a good reason .
i might not want to be the hilfsbedürftige doctor .
i might want to succeed and so that i could take responsibility that i was so was so that i was so that i would be able to get my patients with me without having to contact with him .
my second mistake was worse .
and by sending me home , i &apos;ll send a little voice in my mir , who tried to say , &quot; goldman , no good idea . don &apos;t do that . &quot;
in fact , i was really missing so much about that i was asking the nurse what to take care of , &quot; do you think it &apos;s okay when you go home ? &quot;
and the nurse thought about it , and i said , in faktischer , &quot; yeah , i think it will go well . &quot;
i remember it was yesterday .
so i went out and unterzeichnete the entlassungspapiere and an krankenwagen and rettungsassistenten and bring them home .
and i went back to work .
the rest of the day , i had this nagende feeling in my stomach .
but i was working on .
and at the end of the day i grabbed my stuff , i went to the hospital , and went to parking parking lot to drive home with the car , when i did something that i didn &apos;t .
i went through the notfallabteilung on my way home .
and there was another nurse , not the sister who was watching this after a woman , but one another three words to me and the three words , most of the most notfallärzte i know .
other people are also afraid of this , but the most notfallmedizin is very special because we just see the patients so much .
the three words : remember ?
&quot; remember the patient that you were doing ? &quot;
asked the nurse .
&quot; so she &apos;s back , &quot; she said in that particular tonlage .
so she was back .
she was back and die .
about an hour after that she was sent home , and after that i sent her home , she would go back and called the family , and the rettungsassistenten brought them back to the notfallstation with a blood pressure of 50 , that &apos;s a dangerous schockzustand .
she was barely atmete and was blue .
the notfallpersonal is all moved to all of these strands .
they gave her blutdruckerhöher .
they closed them to the beatmungsmaschine .
i was shocked and to the inner zerrüttet .
and i was going to go through this , because she came to the intensivstation for the stabilisation in the intensive care , and i hoped that she would recover .
and after two , three days , i realized that she never would be erwachen .
she had no behandelbaren gehirnschaden .
their family came together .
and over the course of the next eight or nine days , they found the geschehenen .
the neuten day they go to her -- woman printer , a woman , a mother and grandmother .
you say that you never forget the names of the versterben .
and this was the first time i found this .
and the next few weeks i was going to take my own , and i found the ungesunde shame that exists in our medical culture -- i felt alone , isolated , not the kind of healthy shame that you feel like , because you can &apos;t talk to the colleagues about it .
you all know the healthy shame , if you &apos;re a secret of the best friend &apos;s best , you get caught and you get caught and the best friend you &apos;re faced with and you &apos;re going to get a terrible discussion when you end up with a bad bit , and you &apos;re schwört that you never make a mistake .
if you do wiedergutmachung and never make the mistakes again .
this is the kind of lehrreicher shame .
the most food that i &apos;m talking about is the one that makes you in the heart of the heart .
it &apos;s one that says that doesn &apos;t tell you what you &apos;re doing , it &apos;s bad , you &apos;re bad .
and that was what i felt .
and it wasn &apos;t for the reason of my oberarztes , it was very dear .
he talked to the family , and i &apos;m sure he glättete the wogen and i made sure that i was not going to be a verklagt .
but i asked myself to ask these questions .
why did i not ask the oberarzt ? why do i sendete them ?
and then in my worst moments , how could i make such a stupid mistake ?
why am i going to go into medicine ?
slowly , it &apos;s a little bit of it .
i started feeling better .
and then on a bewölkten day , there was a hole in the clouds and the sun broke , and i might tell myself that i could feel better .
and i was told that if i had my effort to perfection and never again , a mistake that the voice could be verstummen .
and she did .
and i was working on .
and then it happened again .
two years later , i had service in the notfallstation hospital in a kommunalen hospital north toronto , and i went out to begutachtete a 25 year-old man with gereiztem .
it was a lot of it and i was in a hurry .
he used to show this .
i looked at the rachen , and it was a little bit of pink pink .
and i gave him a verschreibung for penicillin and sent it .
and yet , when he went out of the door , he showed his rachen .
two days later , i came to my next notfalldienst and my chefärztin asked me to go to a conversation in her office .
and she said the three words : do you remember ?
&quot; do you remember the patient with the gereizten ? &quot;
it turns out that he &apos;s a streptokokken-infektion .
he had a potentially lebensgefährliche disease called epiglottitis .
you can be the googlen , but it &apos;s not an infection from the rachens , but the top atemwege and the verschluss of the atemwege .
and luckily he didn &apos;t die .
he got intravenöse antibotica and erholte a few days later .
and i went back to the same tortur of shame and selbstzweifel , felt me and went back to work until again and again .
in a notfallschicht , i have a blinddarmentzündung missing .
there &apos;s some things about this , especially if you think that you &apos;re working in a hospital that had only 14 patients per night .
in both cases , i don &apos;t send them home , and there &apos;s no mängel in her treatment either .
i thought he had nierensteine .
i ordnete the x-ray of the kidneys , and as a befund , my colleague , at the patient &apos;s patient , put a verhärtung on the lower right sector , called the operateure .
the other one had strong diarrhea .
i ordnete fluide to rehydrieren him and asked my colleagues to be too much .
and he did , and he was a verhärtung on the right , the lower sector , he called the operateure .
in both cases , operierte and it was fine .
both cases of nagten , i &apos;m going to fraßen me .
and i would be happy to tell you that my worst mistake was just happened in the first five years , which is a lot of my colleagues , but total nonsense .
some of my klöpse happened in the last five years .
alone , beschämt and without support .
here &apos;s the problem : if i don &apos;t finish with my mistakes and talk about them , if i can talk to the silent voice that really did not happen , how can i share it with my colleague ?
how can i teach you my mistakes so they don &apos;t commit the same ?
if i was going into a room -- like right now , i have no idea what you think about me .
when did you hear the last time somebody &apos;s heard about fehlschlag about fehlschlag talking about fehlschlag ?
oh yeah , you go to a cocktail party and you like to hear about any other doctor , but you don &apos;t get somebody who &apos;s going to hear you about your own mistakes .
if i was a room full of colleagues and asking for them to tell you what i told you about , i would not probably reach the end of the second story before it really was uncomfortable to you , anybody would say a joke , you would change the subject and forget the rest .
and actually , if i knew my colleague , a orthopäde orthopäde in my hospital had taken somebody the wrong leg , then believe me , i would have trouble him in the eyes .
that &apos;s the system that we live in .
it &apos;s totally verleugnung of errors .
it &apos;s a system in which there are two basic positions -- the ones who make mistakes and the ones who don &apos;t make them , and those who are einschränkt schlafmangel and the ohne that are using bad results and the good results .
it &apos;s almost an ideologische reaction as antibodies that attack a human .
and there &apos;s the idea that if we &apos;re the ones that make mistakes from medicine that we &apos;re doing in medicine that remains a secure system .
but there are two problems in this .
in my about 20 years of medical medical and journalism , i did a personal medical study of medical error and wrong treatments for one of my first article that i was going to see for the toronto of the toronto , &quot; white coat , black art . &quot;
and what i learned is that mistakes are absolutely unumgänglich .
we &apos;re working in a system that every single day happen in which one of them are either wrong or wrong , in the krankenhausinfektionen , and always and verwüstung or tot .
in this state , about 80,000 kanadier die in umgänglichen errors .
in the united states , the institute of medicine has been beziffert to the number of 100,000 .
both of these are strong untertreibungen , because we don &apos;t look at the problem as exactly as we should .
and it &apos;s the crux .
in a krankenhaussystem system that medical knowledge doubled , we &apos;re not doubling in the three years , we can &apos;t keep up .
schlafmangel is ubiquitous .
we can &apos;t get rid of it .
we own a cognitive error , so that we can take a perfect krankheitsverlauf for a patient with a patient .
then i take the same patient with brustschmerz , make it verschwitzt and geschwätzig and give a slightly alkoholisierten breath , and suddenly , the story of contempt is durchsetzt with contempt .
i don &apos;t take the same course .
i &apos;m not a robot ; i don &apos;t always do things like that .
and my patients are not cars ; they don &apos;t always tell me their symptoms in the same way .
all of these are inevitable , inevitable .
so if you take the system , how i was taught it , and all the fehlerbehafteten gesundheitsexperten , then , at the end , there &apos;s no one left left .
and you know the leier about people who don &apos;t want to talk about their worst cases ?
in my show , &quot; white coat , black art , &quot; i have a habit of saying , &quot; this is my worst mistake , &quot; i would say to everyone from the rettungsassistenten to the chefarzt of the kardiologen , &quot; this is my worst error , blah , blah , blah , blah , &quot; what about her ? &quot; and then i &apos;m showing the microphone
and then their pupillen , they &apos;re hit , and then they look down and they &apos;re hard , and they start telling their stories .
they want to tell their stories . they want to share their stories .
you want to be able to say , &quot; look , don &apos;t make the same mistakes i &apos;m going to . &quot;
what you need is an environment that &apos;s versetzt in the situation .
what you need is a new medical culture .
and it starts with a doctor .
the new definierte doctor is a human , knows about his humanity , accepted it , is not proud of making mistakes , but it sets everything from them to learn from them to be passed on .
they share their experience with others .
it supports when others talk about their mistakes .
and it shows you that it &apos;s not a fehler , not for bloßzustellen , but in a liebevollen , supportive way that all benefit from .
and she works in a medical culture that recognizes that people fill the system with life , and if that &apos;s like that , people also make mistakes at time .
so the system of creating design that make it easier to make people inevitable and it also allows to create power , to create , to create , to create , to be able to address things in which one of the health care , and it &apos;s actually a ansprechen thing that &apos;s belohnt , and that &apos;s especially for people like me , who are going to make
my name is brian goldman .
i &apos;m the new definierte doctor .
i &apos;m a human . i make mistakes .
but i &apos;m bedaure das. but i &apos;m trying to learn best from that to give it others .
i don &apos;t know what you hold of me , but i can live .
let me close with three of my words : i remember .
i &apos;m going to talk about a tiny little idea .
it &apos;s about veränderbare normwerte .
and because you can explain this idea in a minute , i &apos;m going to tell you three stories about to use the time .
the first story about charles darwin , one of my heroes .
you know , he was 1835 here .
you might think it &apos;s jagte , but that &apos;s not true .
it &apos;s actually a fish that he collected .
he described a very common one .
it was a zackenbarsch .
until the &apos; 80s , he was gefischt in a big style .
now , he &apos;s in the red list of the gefährdeter species .
this story , we heard many times from the galapagos or other places , it &apos;s not very special .
yet we still come to the galapagos .
we still think they &apos;re very first .
the broschüren describe it still as a unberührt .
what &apos;s happened here ?
the second story is a different concept , which is verdeutlichen .
because i experienced it when i was in a lagune lagune .
i went there because i grew up in europe and i wanted to work in africa later .
i thought i could integrate myself .
and i got a bad sonnenbrand , and i was convinced that i didn &apos;t really have it .
it was my first sonnenbrand .
you can see the lagune of palmen and some of the mangroven were umsäumt .
there were buntbarsche about 20 inches , schwarzkinnmaulbrüter , a unterart of the buntbarsche .
the fischgründe of these buntbarsche were very ertragreich and the fishermen were living good and they were living in ghana .
when i returned to that , i was going to get back to half the size of the fish .
they &apos;re ausgewachsen maßen .
they had been genetically erdrückt .
it was still fish .
people were still happy .
and the fish , also , was lucky enough to be there .
so it has nothing changed , and yet everything has changed .
my third little story , in my mittäterschaft , in the introduction of schleppnetzfischerei in asia .
in the 1970s -- the beginning of the &apos; 60s -- förderte europe a lot of entwicklungsprojekte .
countries that were already 100,000 fish , the industrial fishing , the industriellen ship , called mutiara .
i went on to that , and we did all the way we were all over the southern südchinesischen ocean and particularly in the javasee .
we had no words for what we started .
i know it was the reason that the ocean was .
90 percent of our fangs were schwämme , other animals that are connected to the cause .
the biggest part of the fish , the little dots there on the trümmern , the trümmerhaufen , were korallenriff-fische .
and basically the reason came up and then became zurückgeworfen .
these images are extraordinary because the transition is going very quickly .
within a year , you have a survey and then starts with the commercial fishing .
the reason is changing . it &apos;s -- in this case -- a hard reason or soft corals , matschiger crap .
this is a dead schildkröte .
they didn &apos;t eat , they threw them away because they were dead .
once we started living .
it wasn &apos;t even ertrunken .
they wanted to kill them , because you could eat it .
in fact , this mountain of the mountain will be angesammelt every time in the fishermen , if you &apos;re in areas that haven &apos;t been even more .
it &apos;s not going to document .
we change the world , but we don &apos;t remember that .
we adapt our normwerte to the new level and we don &apos;t call ourselves in memory , which was there .
if you verallgemeinert it , this is happening .
the y-axis is a couple of good things : biodiversity , number of orca , the green of your country , the wasservorrat .
over time , it changes . it changes because for people , they were all of course .
each generation is looking at the beginning of your conscious life than standard and becomes everything from it .
the difference is a loss of a loss .
but they don &apos;t really take the previous losses .
it can give a sequence of changes .
and at the end , they &apos;re just trying to get the most erbärmlichen remains .
that &apos;s what we &apos;re now most of , is largely our goal .
we want to get things that are disappeared or things that are not more like they were .
you could think that the problem was in people who are certainly living in räuberischen societies , killing animals and only to be aware of a few generations of what they had done .
because obviously , an animal that has been very often , until once it ausstirbt .
so you don &apos;t lose a lot of animals .
you &apos;re always losing rare animals .
and that &apos;s why it doesn &apos;t have a huge loss .
and at the time , we &apos;re focusing on the big animals and in the sea , that &apos;s the big fish .
they &apos;re going to be less because we &apos;re catching them .
there &apos;s little fish left over time , and we think that &apos;s the normwert .
the question is , why people accept it .
well , because you don &apos;t know that it was different .
of course , many people , scientists , will tell that it was really different .
you will confirm it , because the evidence , as you &apos;re in a previous shape , are not as you would like to make the evidence .
there &apos;s an anecdote for example , that the report of a kapitäns soundso , who was watching great fischvorkommen in this area , not being used , or fischereiwissenschaftlern , usually , is not gewertet because he &apos;s not scientifically .
so we have the situation that people don &apos;t know the past , even though we live in the complex societies , because they don &apos;t trust the sources of the past .
this shows the enormous big role that can be a marine reserve .
because we &apos;re basically doing the past in the past .
we &apos;re going to make the past that people can &apos;t understand because the normwerte are changed and they &apos;re very low .
so the people who see a marine reserve and benefit from the insight that it allows you to have to zurücksetzen your normwerte .
what about the people that cannot be possible because they don &apos;t have access -- the people in the middle west for example ?
and here i think , i think art and the film might be able to fill the gap , and the simulation .
this is the simulation of the bay bay .
a long time ago there was grauwale , 500 years ago .
and the farbtöne and -schattierungen , you might remember the &quot; avatar . &quot;
if you think about &quot; avatar , &quot; if you think about why people were being touched by this -- except for the pocahontas-geschichte , why were they so touched by the bilderwelt ?
because it &apos;s something that has been lost in a way .
so my empfehlung , the only one i &apos;m going to give you about cameron , so he &apos;s about &quot; avatar &quot; unter .
thank you .
in the &apos; 80s , in the kommunistischen ostdeutschland , you had to have a schreibmaschine , that &apos;s in the government .
they had to put a sheet of beispieltext out of this schreibmaschine .
the reason for this is the government could go back where a text came from .
they found an article with falschem gedankengut , could detect the creator of this thought .
and we can &apos;t understand how anybody could do something like this , and how much that was going to be einschränken .
in our own countries , we would never do something like this .
but if you &apos;re going to buy a new farblaserdrucker from the leading laserdruckerfabrikanten and print a page , this page bright yellow flecke on each page , in a pattern that is clearly clear to them and rückverfolgen their printer .
this is happening today .
and that &apos;s no one seems to be aufzuregen .
and this was an example , in which our own governments are using technology against us , the citizens .
and this is one of the three hauptquellen of the existing online-problemen that are today .
let &apos;s look at what &apos;s really happening in the world : we can split the attacks into categories .
we have three hauptgruppen .
there are online-kriminelle .
for example , here , this is mr. dimitry golubow from kiew in the ukraine .
and the motive of online-kriminellen are very easy to understand .
these people make money .
they use online-angriffe to make a lot of money , a huge amount of money .
there are several known cases of online-millionären , multimillionären that make their money from attacks .
this is wladimir tsastsin from tartu in eastern .
this is alfred gonzalez .
stephen watt .
björn sundin .
this is the matthew anderson , tariq al-daour and so on and so on .
these people have come up online , but they &apos;ve been acquired by using z.b. , for example , to steal money from our bankkonten while we &apos;re doing our online-banking , or keylogger , who are collected our kredikarteninformationen on the input from the keyboard while we &apos;re shopping over a infected computer online .
the u.s. intelligence agency , two months ago , the swiss konto of mr. sam jain , and this account was 14,9 million dollars as it was frozen .
mr. jain himself is on the freiem , the aufenthaltsort is unknown .
and i &apos;m saying that it &apos;s more likely to be that we will be victims of a online-verbrechens , when a verbrechens verbrechens in the real world .
and it &apos;s very obvious that this is going to be only worse .
in the future , most of the crime are going online .
the second largest angreifergruppe that we can observe today are not motivated by money .
they &apos;re motivated by something else -- a proteste , or , in their audience , or you .
groups like anonymous are moved over the last 12 months and they &apos;ve become one of the most hauptspieler in the field of online-angriffe .
so these are the three hauptangriffsgruppen : criminals who are doing it for money , hacktivisten like anonymous who are doing resistance , but the last group are nations , government that lead the attacks .
there are cases we &apos;re going to face .
it shows what happens when governments are attack their own citizens .
diginotar is a vollmachtszertifikat from the netherlands -- or it was that .
in the last fall , it had to be anmelden , because it had been gehackt .
someone was a eingebrochen and had a system that was gründlich .
and last week in a meeting with dutch regierungsvertretern , i asked one of the senior senior of this group to see if he could make it possible for possible to die because of the diginotar-hacks people .
and his answer was &quot; yes . &quot;
now , how do people die of a hacks like that ?
diginotar is a zertifizierungsstelle .
they sell zertifikate .
what do you do with zertifikaten ?
well , a certificate requires you when you have a website with https , with ssl-verschlüsselten service , for example .
now we all use , or many of us , or , or , is , or a gmail , or one of their competition , and these services are particularly prevalent in totalitären states like iran , where the dissidenten foreign policy like the gmail , because they know that they can trust them as local anbietern and that they &apos;re verschlüsselt on their ssl-verbindungen , so the local
but can you be in a foreign foreign foreign system .
zertifizierungsbehörde hacken and gefälschte zertifikate .
and that &apos;s exactly what happens in the case of diginotar .
what about the arab spring and the things that are happening in egypt for instance ?
well , in egypt , the aufständischen in april , in april , the headquarters in the ägyptischen geheimpolizei , they found a lot of records .
in this records , a folder called &quot; finfisher . &quot;
and in this folder , notes was a deutschland company that was sold to the egyptian government , the egyptian government , they had to capture a few programs , they could capture in very large context -- all communication of egyptian citizens .
they were selling this program for 280.000 dollars to the government government .
the firmenhauptquartier is right here .
so western governments are providing governments to use government hilfsmitteln to help their own citizens .
but western governments help themselves .
for example , in germany , just a couple of weeks ago , called staatstrojaner , that was a trojaner , which was used by german regierungsvertretern to bespitzeln their own citizens .
if you &apos;re going to be verdächtigt in a kriminalfall , then you &apos;re ziemlicher your phone .
but today we &apos;re far beyond .
they tap their connection .
they use tools like the staatstrojaner to bespielen their computer with a trojaner , which allows them to monitor their entire communication , their online-diskussionen , their passwörter .
so if we think about things like this , the obvious answer is , &quot; ok , that sounds bad , but it doesn &apos;t matter to me because i &apos;m a braver citizen . &quot;
i don &apos;t have to worry about it .
i don &apos;t hide anything . &quot;
and that argument makes no sense .
privacy has to be given .
privacy is not about debate .
it &apos;s not a choice between privacy and safety .
it &apos;s a choice between freedom and control .
and while we are today , in 2011 , our governments like trust , yet every one we &apos;re going to be is always abgegeben .
and trust , we trust , trust that we are blind to every future government , a government we might have in 50 years ?
these are the questions that we have to deal with the next 50 years .
it might seem strange , but i &apos;m a big fan of betonblocksteinen .
the first betonblocksteine were made and entstammten of a simple idea : module module with festgelegten measurements .
betonbausteine became very rapidly , the most meistgenutzte baueinheit in the world .
they put us into the situation to build things that were larger than we , buildings , bridges , a rock .
and essentially , the betonbaustein was actually becoming the center of our time .
almost a hundred years later , in 1947 , lego came out of this .
it was called &quot; automatically verbindende rock . &quot;
and within a few years , lego , lego , in every household .
it &apos;s estimated that over 400 billion stones were produced -- or 75 rocks for every person on this planet .
you don &apos;t have to be an engineer to create beautiful houses , beautiful bridges , beautiful buildings .
lego made it possible for everyone .
lego , essentially , has the betonbaustein , the building block of the world , and it &apos;s made a building block for us .
in the meanwhile , in the same year , the bell labs , the next revolution , the next one .
the transistor was a little plastikeinheit that was going to be a world of statischen , aufeinandergestapelten building blocks into a world in which it was all interactive .
as the betonblock , the transistor allows us to build much more larger than build more complex , a rock .
but there &apos;s a hauptunterschied : the transistor was just for experts .
i personally don &apos;t accept the baustein that the building of our time for experts are on experts , and so i decided to change that .
eight years ago , i was at the media lab , and i started exploring this idea of how to put the power of engineers into the hand of artists and designers .
a few years ago , i started developing littlebits .
let me show you how they work .
littlebits are electronic module that have a specific function .
they &apos;re vorgefertigt , light , clay , motor and sensor .
and the best part is that they connect together with magnets .
you can &apos;t put them on the wrong .
the stones are farbcodiert .
green is a single , blue is electricity , pink is input and orange is wires .
so , all you have to do is to connect a blue and a green one , and you can build a lot of bigger kreislaufe .
you put a blue on one green , and you can make light .
you can put a switch in between and you put a little dimmer .
take the switch out to a pulsmodul , which is here , and you put a little blinker .
so put these buzzer on an extra effect , and they made a lärmmaschine .
i &apos;m going to stop that .
and beyond the simple game , littlebits is actually quite powerful .
instead of code , you have to code or löten , allowing them to code with simple intuitive gestures .
so , to slow down the blinken , or slow down , you just turn on this button , and it makes the momentum faster or slow down .
the idea behind littlebits is that it &apos;s a growing library .
we want to bring every single interaction in this world into a gebrauchsfertigen rock .
lights , sound , solarelemente , motors -- everything should be available .
we spread littlebits to kids and they &apos;re playing with them .
and it was an incredible experience .
the most beautiful thing is , how they start to understand the electronics that they are in the everyday living with them and they don &apos;t learn from school .
like a nachtlicht works , or why the doors of the aufzugs offenbleiben , or the ipod react to touch .
we also brought littlebits to designschulen .
so we had designers with no experience at any electronic thing that started playing with littlebits as material .
here we see , with filz , paper and water water , like geordie .
a few weeks ago we brought littlebits to risd and gave them some designers that had no technical experience -- just cardboard , wood and paper -- and they said , &quot; what &apos;s going on . &quot;
here &apos;s an example of a project that they did , a bewegungsgesteuerte konfetti-kanone .
but wait , this is really my lieblings-projekt .
it &apos;s a hummer of the knete that has fear in darkness .
for those nicht-ingenieure , littlebits became a more material , electronics was just another material .
and we want to make this material available for everyone .
so littlebits is open source .
you can go to the website , all the designvorlagen , and make it yourself .
we want the world of the creator , the inventor , the mitwirkenden encourage , because this world that we live in , this interactive world , is that we &apos;ve heard .
so , go ahead and start to invent .
thank you .
