you know , one of the great vernügen in travel , and one of the most popular research is in common with the people who can remember the old days . the past still feel the wind , they touch it from the rain and they taste it in the bitteren leaves of the plants .
just that , you know , that jaguar-schamanen still are still beyond the milky way , or the meaning of the elders &apos; s &apos; s &quot; ältesten &quot; and the other offenbarung of anthropology to mind , is that the world that we live in , not in a absolute sense , but as a model of reality , as a result of a group of certain possibilities of
and of course , we all share the same anpassungsnotwendigkeiten .
we &apos;re all born . we bring children to the world .
we go through initiationsrituale .
we have to deal with the unaufhaltsamen separation of death and so we don &apos;t want to surprise us that we all sing , dancing and art .
but interesting is the unique tonfall of the liedes , the rhythm of dance in every culture .
and it &apos;s not a matter , whether it &apos;s the penan of the forests of borneo , or the warrior in the kaisut-wüste of nordkenia , the curanderos in the anden , or a karawanserei middle of the sahara , this is the colleague i happened to be gereist to the desert before a month ago , or even a yak-hirte on the hängen of the qomolangma , everest
all these people teach us that there are other existenzmöglichkeiten , other ways of thinking , other ways of guidance on earth .
and this is an idea that if you think about it , you can only meet with hope .
together , the world &apos;s unzähligen cultures are creating a web of spirituellem and kulturellem life that &apos;s the earth that &apos;s umhüllt , and for the earth that &apos;s the biological lebensnetz that you know as a biosphere .
you can imagine this cultural cultural model as a ethnosphäre , and it can be the gesamtsumme of all the thoughts and dreams , myths ideas , inspirationen and intuitionen that have been defined by human imagination as the beginning of conscious mind .
the ethnosphäre is the great legacy of humanity .
it &apos;s the symbol of all of the things we are and what we are capable of as an amazing species .
and just as the biosphere was abgetragen , this was happening with the ethnosphäre -- just even more bigger .
no biologist would say that 50 percent or more of all species are long before extinction , because it &apos;s just not true , and yet , this -- the apokalyptischste szenarium of the field of biological diversity -- is almost to what &apos;s known as a optimistischstes szenarium in the region of cultural diversity .
and the key , the most important , the extinction of the languages .
when each of you were born in this room , the earth talked 6,000 languages .
now , a language is not just the sum of the vokabulars , or a series of grammatikregeln .
a language is expression of the human mind .
it &apos;s a way to find the soul of a certain culture to the physical world .
each language is like a altbestehender forest of mind , a turning point , a thought , an ecosystem of an individual possibilities .
and these are 6,000 languages today , as we &apos;re here in monterey , half the ohren in the ears of children .
they &apos;re not taught to be more kleinkindern . this is , if nothing is being done , they &apos;re actually dead .
what could be more than being silent , one of the last of your people who speak to speak , speak to your language , no possibility to pass the wisdom of the ancestors , or to expect the hope of children ?
and yet , this terrible destiny , actually , is actually going to someone anywhere on earth , about every two weeks , because every two weeks , one of the elderly dies , and taking the last silben of an old language with his grave .
and i know that some of you are saying , &quot; well , it &apos;s not better , &quot; if the world is not a better place , if we all would talk a language , &quot; and i say , &quot; well , let &apos;s be more about this language . let &apos;s be kantonesisch .
let &apos;s be kogi . &quot;
and then you would suddenly see what it would be like if you couldn &apos;t speak your own language .
so i &apos;d like to take you today through a journey through the ethnosphäre , a short journey through the ethnosphäre to try to make you understand , which is actually lost .
now there are some of us who are forgotten that i &apos;m saying , if i say , &quot; different possibilities of being , &quot; really different possibilities of being .
take this child of the barasana in the northwest of the amazon , the people who anakonda , believe that they mythologisch the milchfluss from the east in the belly of holy snakes .
this is a people that doesn &apos;t seem to be cognitively between color and green , because the himmelszelt of the forest depend on the forest that people depend on .
they have a strange language , and a heiratsvorschrift called the linguistic exogamie , you have to marry someone who talks a different language .
all of this is wurzelt in the past mythologischen past , and this is the curious of these big houses where the mischehen of the mischehen are spoken to six or seven languages , but it &apos;s never that you can never hear someone who learns language .
you just hear about and to talk .
or one of the most intriguing tribes that i &apos;ve ever lived in the northeast of ecuador , a amazing people who was in 1958 with the first year of peaceful peaceful .
in 1957 , five missionare kontakt were to come out and made a schwerwiegenden mistake .
they took pictures of the air down from the air , which we would take as a friendly gesture , and they forgot that these people from rainforests in their lives have never seen anything more zweidimensionales .
they took these photographs off the forest floor , trying to see the face , or the character , and nothing and schlussfolgerten that this was the business business of the devil , and killed the five missionare with the speer .
but the waorani didn &apos;t just kill a außenstehende .
they &apos;re durchbohrten each other .
54 percent of the deaths happened by durchbohrungen .
we &apos;re going to take the geneaologie eight generations , and we found two cases of a natural death , and when we ausfragten people with a nachdruck , they gave them that one of the people who had become so old that he died because of his age , and we killed it with the speer .
but at the same time , they had a clear knowledge of the forest that was amazing .
their predators could smell the urine of a animal from 40 steps and determine what animal species of these mine owned .
in the early days , i got a really amazing task , when my professor at harvard asked , i could be interested in taking haiti and to infiltrieren the secret societies that were the foundation of stärke and tonton and the poison that was used for making zombies .
to give this sensation to a sense , i had to naturally have something about this remarkable faith in the vodoun knowledge and voodoo is not a kult of the black magic .
in the opposite , it &apos;s a complex kind of metaphysische .
it &apos;s interesting .
if i would ask you , the big world of cultural world , what would you say ?
christianity , islam , buddhismus , judaismus , or whatever .
a continent is going to leave out , because the guess was that there was no religious faith in sub-saharan africa . of course , there was one and a voodoo , just the überbleibsel of these very tiefgehenden religious thought that the tragic diaspora of the sklavereizeit herüberkamen .
but what makes interesting interesting is this living relationship between the living and the dead .
the living people are giving out .
the minds can be heraufbeschwört from the big water , respond to the rhythm of dance to verdrängen the soul of the living , so that the akolyth for a brief light moment will be god .
deshab , the voodooisten likes to say , &quot; you guys are going to church and talk about god .
we dance in the temple , and we become god . &quot;
and because you &apos;re obsessed , you &apos;re going to take it off of the mind . how can you be done ?
look at these amazing demonstrations : voodoo-akolythen in a trancezustand kohle , which is glühende coal kohle , an amazing visualization of the ability of mind to influence the body , that this is aushält when it gets into a state of extreme arousal .
now , from all the people i met , the kogi of sierra nevada de santa marta in nordkolumbien , the most extraordinary .
nachkommen of the old tyrannischen civilization that the karibische karibische of colombia , and in a row of the eroberung , the nation was moving into a isoliertes vulkanisches massiv that &apos;s going to be in the karibischen küstenebene .
in a blutbefleckten continent , these people were the only one who had never been erobert by the spaniern .
until the day , they &apos;re dominated by a ritual regime . the training is a very extraordinary education .
the young akolythen are separated from their families , and in a schattenhaften world of finsternis , in steinhütten at the fuße of the glacier for 18 years , and two periods of each time to be chosen for the nine months of pregnant she spent the lap of the pregnant she spent the lap of her mother &apos;s mother , now her metamorphorisch in the lap of the big
and during that whole time , they will be introduced culturally in the values of their society , values that maintain the claim that their prayers and their prayers , the cosmic cosmic -- or we could say the ecological -- balance .
at the end of this amazing , you &apos;ll find a sonnenaufgang , and at the age of 18 years , you see a sonnenaufgang . and in this kristallklaren moment of the light of the first light , when the sun starts to shine on the front of the amazing beautiful landscape , all of the things you &apos;ve learned in the abstract is , and the priest and
it &apos;s so wonderful . you need to protect it . &quot;
they call the older brothers and say that we are the younger brothers , for the destruction of the world .
now this level of intuition becomes very important .
whenever we think about the eingeborene and landscape , we &apos;re going to either beschwören and the old gerücht of the noblen wild , which is a rassistischer thought to the other , or say , these people are more connected to nature than we are .
so , in the way , they &apos;re not sentimental , nor are they &apos;re geschwächt from the nostalgie .
it doesn &apos;t remains a lot of room in the malariaverseuchten sümpfen of asmat or the cold winden , but they still have shaped a mysterious nimbus of the earth that doesn &apos;t really based on the idea that they &apos;re aware of , but to be a very subtileren intuition , the idea that the earth can only exist , because they &apos;re going to be hineingeatmet into the
now , what does that mean ?
it means that a little child in the anden who grew up in the belief that the mountain is a apu-geist that will be , or their destiny , will be a different person , and a different relationship to this resource or this place , as a little child in the belief that a mountain is a pile of stones that can be abgetragen .
whether he &apos;s a aufenthaltsort of a mind or a bunch of erz , is irrelevant .
the interesting is the metaphor which is defined the relationship between the individual and nature .
i grew up in the forests of britisch columbia and believed that these forests are there to be gerodet .
and this made me to another person , as my friends , among the kwakiutl , who believe that these forests of the aufenthaltsort and the gebogenen and the kannibalischen geister out there who live in the world &apos;s office , they would be geister to join their hamatsa-initiation .
now , if you start to look at the idea that these cultures can create different realities , you can understand some of their extraordinary discoveries , like this plant here .
it &apos;s a picture i was just last april in the northwest of the amazon .
this is ayahuasca , which many of you have heard , the most powerful psychoaktive of the repertoire of the schamanen .
what makes the pharmakologische power of this information , it &apos;s not just the pharmakologische potential of this information , but it &apos;s going to be made out of two different sources , and it &apos;s got these wooden liane that are a series of betakarbolinen , harmin , leicht halluzinogen , and this kletterpflanze is about as if a blue trüber rauch legt her consciousness , but it &apos;s
this plant contains some very strong tryptamine that serotonin , dimethyltryptamin-5 , methoxydimethyltryptamin , is very similar .
if you &apos;ve seen the yanomami , you can see this stuff , this substance that you can create from various species , also methoxydimethyltryptamin .
this powder was a schnupfen , which is like a gewehrlauf , gesäumt by barocken paintings and landing on a sea of electricity .
it &apos;s not going to be verzerrung , but the resolution of reality .
i even have my professor , richard evan shultes , who was the psychedelische ärea of the magischen mushrooms in mexico in the 30iger years , and i said that you couldn &apos;t be einordnen this tryptamine , because in the moment you feel the implications , you &apos;re not there to experience a halluzination .
but the thing about tryptaminen is that they can &apos;t be taken oral , because they &apos;re vorkommendes enzym , and of course , enzym enzym .
they can only be taken in connection with some other chemicals that the mao denaturieren .
now the amazing thing is that the betakarboline that contain in the liane , they are mao-inhibitoren of exactly the way that is necessary to potenzieren the tryptamine .
how can these people out of a flora plants that are not related to these two morphologisch plants that , if in this way , combined , is to create a kind of biochemischer version , so that the whole greater than the sum of its parts ?
we use this great , versuch , trying to try and error that it turns out to be meaningless .
but ask the indians , you say , &quot; the plant is talking to us . &quot;
so , what does that mean ?
this tribe , the cofan , have 17 variations of ayahuasca , which all of you see all in the forest at all the time in the forest that seem like a kind of view .
and then you ask them how to put their taxonomie and they say , &quot; i thought you &apos;re going to understand something about plants .
i mean , don &apos;t you know anything ? &quot; and i said , &quot; no . &quot;
so , it turns out that you can take any of the 17 variation in your vollmond and you sing to one in a different tonlage .
now , this doesn &apos;t get you a ph.d. in harvard , but it &apos;s much more interesting to count than stamina .
now , the problem of the problem is that even those of us who have sympathy for the hard location of the native rights , they &apos;re looking at the very orginiell and farbenfroh , but somehow , as the real world , our world , the world , is going to change the world .
so , in the 20th century , you can &apos;t remember the 20th century , 300 years of not going to be able to recall the war or technological innovation , but rather than an era we were in there , and the massive destruction of the biological and the cultural diversity on the earth are either active and passive , so the problem is not the change .
all cultures have been involved in the dance with new lebenmöglichkeiten .
and the problem is not the technology .
the sioux-indianer were not listening to the sioux , not less to sioux , as they bow and arrow tasks , as americans stopped americans than they were horse and pferdewagen tasks .
not change and technology , the integrity of the ethnosphäre , it &apos;s power . it &apos;s the ugly face of the rule .
and wherever you &apos;re going to be verdrängt in the world , you &apos;re going to be dynamisch , that these cultures are verdrängt by erkennbare forces that are living in the forest of asia asia , from sarawak , a people who &apos;s verschmutzt in the forest , and now , in the flussufer sea , the japanischen frachter scheint , which is willing to fill their schiffsräume with
or if we go into the mountains of tibet , where i &apos;ve been doing a lot of research , you will see the ugly face of the political dominance .
you know , the genocide , the phyische extinction of people , generally , is convicted of the lebensweise , but the destruction of the human lifestyle , not only not being convicted , but celebrated as part of a entwicklungsstrategie .
and you can &apos;t understand the suffering if you haven &apos;t experienced it at unterster level .
i was a young colleagues , 6000 miles from chengdu in to lhasa , and i was just when i came to the lhasa , i saw the face behind the statistics of the people that were listening . 6,000 holy monumente that were turned into schutt and asche .
the father of this young manns was identified as a anhänger of the panchen .
this meant that he was killed in the chinese invasion .
his uncle floh with her holiness in the diaspora who brought people to nepal .
his mother was locked up as a punishment for the crime of wealthy .
he was actually geschmuggelt into prison at age two years to hide under their rockzipfel , because she couldn &apos;t live it without it .
the sister that beging these brave did was brought into a erziehungslager .
one day she came out of an armband maos , and for that übertretung , they had to work for seven years in a heavy camp camp .
the suffering is unerträglich , but the erlösende spirit of people is something that &apos;s a little bit more .
and at the end , we really are in front of a choice . we want to live in a monochromatischen world of monotonie or in a world &apos;s most diverse world ?
margaret mead , the great anthropologin said , &quot; it &apos;s been the biggest fear that we move towards a faden , gestaltlosen , generischen , we can &apos;t just see the entire range of human imagination to a eingeengte mindset , but that we wake up one day from a dream and forgotten that there were any other possibilities .
and it &apos;s demütigend to think that our species has been there for over the last time .
the neolithische revolution that brought us agriculture , and we have this moment to unterwarf the kult of the saatkorns unterwarf , the poetry of the priesterschaft of the priesterschaft ersetzte and hierarchy and überschuss -- found only 10,000 years ago .
the modern industrial world , as we know it is hardly 300 years old .
now , this is a very oberflächliche story , i don &apos;t tell me that we all have answers to the challenges that we face in the front of millennia .
if we ask these unzähligen weltkulturen after the meaning of human questions , they respond to 10,000 different voices .
and in this song , we &apos;re going to be able to be the possibility of what we are : people with full conscious conscious , who are aware of the importance of all people and gardens to flourish , to flourish , and there are great moments of optimism .
here &apos;s a picture i took on the northern end of the baffin-inseln when i went to inuits on the narwhal-jagd , and this man , olaya , told me a wonderful story of his grandfather .
the canadian government is not very well umgegangen with the inuit , and during the 50iger years of the etablierung of our rule , they were forced to move to neighborhoods .
the grandfather of this old man refused to be .
the family who was afraid to be in his life , he took all of the weapons and all the tools .
now you have to know that the inuit are not afraid of cold , they used to use their advantage .
the gleitschienen of their schlitten were originally made of fish that was eingewickelt in karibu-haut .
the man of man didn &apos;t feel before the arctic night or the wehenden storm .
he was out of the outside , he left his pants down from seehundsfell and defäkierte into his hand , and when the feces began to turn , he shaped them into the form of a messers .
he was speichel speichel on the side of the fäkalien-messers , and as it was completely frozen , he was erstach a dog with it .
he enthäutete the dog and improvisierte a geschirr , he took the skeleton of the dog and improvisierte a schlitten , spannte a dog , and entschwand about the eisschollen with the fäkalien-messer on the front of the gürtel .
that &apos;s how you can do something .
and this is a symbol of a symbol of the resistance of the inuit and all the native rights in the world .
the eastern government gave the inuit in april 1999 , and the complete control of the complete control over an area that &apos;s bigger than california and texas .
it &apos;s our new country , and it &apos;s called nunavut .
it &apos;s a unabhängiges area . they &apos;re all controlling mineralvorkommen .
an amazing example , like a nation , a state that can search and reach the wiedergutmachung .
and finally , i think it &apos;s pretty obvious , at least for those of us who traveled to these distant goals of the earth , to realize that they &apos;re not at all .
they &apos;re the heimatländer of somebody .
they represent parts of the human imagination that are zurückreichen in past times , and for all of us , the dreams of these children are going to be part of the geographie of hope .
and what we &apos;re doing in national geographic is we believe that politicians never achieve something .
we believe that polemik -- we believe that polemik is not compelling , but we believe that storytelling can change the world , and therefore we &apos;re probably the best institution for storytelling in the world , and our website gets 35 million hits every month .
we send the other people who send our fernsehkanal .
our magazines are read by millions .
and we &apos;re going to take a series of travel in the ethnosphäre , where we take our audience to places about the gesehenen werden. and hopefully , you will take one of the central revelation of anthropology , that this world deserves it to exist in different ways that we can find a lebensmöglichkeit in a really multikulturellen world , where the wisdom of all people can contribute to
thank you .
what i first can do is show you , as fast as possible , is a new technology that we have microsoft as a übernahme of a übernahme year , and that &apos;s seadragon . and it &apos;s a environment where you can either be local or from a huge amount of visual data .
we see many , many of the gigabytes of digital photographs here , which is nahtlos and constantly heranholen , schwenken , in a way that can be new .
and it doesn &apos;t matter how many information we look at how big these collections are or how big the images are .
most of you are digital photographs of a camera , but this one is a scan of the kongressbibliothek scan , and it &apos;s in a region of 300 megapixeln .
it doesn &apos;t make a difference , because the only thing that can be a system like this is a einschränken is the number of mobile on your screen at every moment . it has a very flexible architecture .
this is a whole book , an example of nichtbild-daten .
this is bleak &apos;s house from the dickens , each column is a chapter .
to prove to prove that it &apos;s really about text and not about a painting , we can do something like this , to really show that this one is a real representation of the texts and no image .
maybe this is an artificial way to read a e-buch .
i wouldn &apos;t recommend it .
this is a realistischerer case . this is a copy of the guardian .
every big picture is the beginning of a abschnitts .
and that really gives you the pleasure and the good experience to read a real papierausgabe of a magazine or a newspaper , which is a kind of a medium with multiple scales .
we also did something about the corner of this particular copy of the guardian .
we have designed a false display with very high resolution , which is much higher than a normal display , and we added more content .
if you want to see the functions of this car , you can see them here .
or other models , or even technical .
and this really does these ideas , to stop this limitations of the available space on the screen .
we hope that that &apos;s no pop-ups and other nonsense , that should not be necessary .
of course , the mapping is one of the most obvious applications for a technology like this .
and i don &apos;t really want to spend a lot of time here , except to say that we &apos;re going to contribute to this area .
but these are all roads in the u.s.
übereinandergelagert at the top of the erdräumlichen picture of nasa .
now let &apos;s take a different approach .
this is actually live in the internet . you can get it .
this is a project called photosynth that really connects two different technologies .
one is seadragon , and the other is a very good research on computervision that von from noah , a universitätsstudenten at washington university , under the advice of steve seitz on the uw of the uw .
and rick szeliski was done by microsoft research . a very good collaboration .
so this is live on the internet . it &apos;s driven by seadragon .
you can see that if we create these kinds of view where we can penetrate through images and make this experience of mehrfachen .
but the spatial structure of the images is actually what it does .
the computervision-algorithmen , they put these pictures together to put this into the real space , where these footage that were all over near the grassi lakes , are to be done in the canadian rockies , and you see elements of stabilisierten slides or panoramischer bildverarbeitung , and these things were all related to each other in relation to each other .
i don &apos;t know if i have time to show you other environments .
there are which that are much more räumlicher .
i &apos;d like to show you a originalen datensätze of noah , and this is from a early prototype of the photosynth that we used to be in the summer to show them what i think is really the kind of the pointe behind this technology , which is the photosynth-technologie , and this is not necessarily so obvious when you look at the environments that we have on the
we had to make ourselves feel about the lawyers and so forth .
this is a rekonstruktion of the cathedral , notre , who was done in the computer with images from flickr , and they just give a notre lady in flickr and get images of men in t-shirts and on the universitätsgelände and on the universitätsgelände and on the universitätsgelände and so on , each of these orange kegel represents a picture that was discovered as a model .
so these are all flickr-bilder , and they all are in the context of the relationship with each other .
and we can navigate in this very simple way .
and you know , i never believed that i was going to work at microsoft .
i &apos;m very thankful for the reception .
i guess you can see that these are many different kinds of cameras : everything is from the handy-kamera to professional slrs , a fairly large number of them that have been zusammengeflickt all in this environment .
and if you can , i &apos;ll find some of the strange ones .
many of you are verdeckt by faces and so on .
somewhere here , there are a series of photographs -- here they are .
this is actually a poster of a notre lady that was recorded right .
we can change from the poster to a physical view of this environment .
the point here is that we can do things with social environment , and it &apos;s going to collect data from all of the data -- from the entire collective memory of what the earth looks -- and everything is connected .
all these photos are interconnected , and it creates something that is larger than the sum of the parts .
they get a model that comes from all the earth .
look at this as the sequel of stephen lawlers on virtual earth .
and this is something that &apos;s going through the complexity that people use , and it &apos;s going to use its use for the user as it is .
their own photos become metadaten beschildert , who has taken another person .
if someone has done the effort , and you have a mitteilt and you have a picture of the notre dame-kathedrale of all this data , and i can use it as a starting to come up in this room , into these metaverse , taking photos from other people and doing a kind of übergreifender social experience with the use of other people &apos;s use .
and of course , the nebenprodukt of all of these are the immense rich , virtual models of every interesting part of the earth that has not only been given by überflüge or satellite images and so on , but through collective memory .
thank you .
i understand right ? your software enables you to be given at a certain point , within the next few years , all the images that are used in common in the world are being connected in principle .
yeah . she &apos;s doing nothing else to discover .
if you want to make it hyperlinks between the images .
and she does this because of the content in the images .
and this is really exciting when you think about the abundance of semantischen information that you have many of these images .
how if you do a websuche of pictures , where you enter sentences and the text of the website contains a lot of information about what &apos;s the picture .
but what about if the picture associated with all of her pictures ?
then the volume of the semantischen and the amount of abundance that makes it out , really enormous , it &apos;s a classic netzwerkeffekt .
blaise , that &apos;s really incredible . thank you .
thank you very much .
i &apos;m going to tell you some things from my book , which i hope is in einklang with other things you &apos;ve already heard about , and i &apos;m going to try to make some connections if you haven &apos;t noticed these .
i want to start with what i call &quot; offizielles dogma . &quot;
the official dogma of what ?
the official glaubenssatz of all western economies .
the official dogma works : if our goal is to maximize the ultimate of our citizens , this is all about the maximierung of the freedom of the individual .
the reason that is that freedom is good for itself , valuable , meaningful , a unverzichtbare premise for human .
if people have freedom , each of us are about themselves to do the things that we don &apos;t maximize our good value and nobody has to decide for us .
the path to maximize freedom is to maximize choice .
the more choices people have , the more freedom they have , and the more freedom they have , the more common they have .
this is , i think , so deep in our water supply , i think it would not be able to question it .
and it &apos;s also been rooted in our lives .
i &apos;m going to give you some examples of what makes us modern progress .
this is my supermarket . no big one .
i just want to say a little bit about salatdressing .
there &apos;s a lot of dressings in my supermarket , if you don &apos;t mitzählen the 10 different extra balsamico-essig , and 12 balsamico-essig you could buy for a large number of salat dessings , in the case that you &apos;re not the 175 of the store for you .
so that &apos;s the way the supermarket is .
and then they go to the verbraucher-elektronik business for a stereoanlage , lautsprecher , cd-player , radio , verstärker , and in this one , there &apos;s so many stereo facilities .
we can put together 6.5 million different stereo facilities , in the components that are offered to this .
you have to admit that this is a big selection .
in other areas , the world of communication .
there was a time when i was a boy , because you could have a phone from the phone to have to be as long as he got to bell bell .
you &apos;ve got a telephone phone . you didn &apos;t buy it .
a consequence of this was the telephone never had broken .
these days are over .
we have now almost an infinite choice of phones , especially in the world of mobile phones .
these are the mobile phones .
my favorite is the one in the middle -- mp3-player- , nasen-haar-trimmer and crème brûlée .
and if you haven &apos;t seen this yet , you can &apos;t have this in your business , you can be sure that you will soon be .
and what it does is it makes people to walk into business and ask that question .
now you know what the answer to that question ?
the answer is no .
it &apos;s not possible to buy a cell phone that doesn &apos;t do too much .
in other aspects of life that are very much more powerful than buying objects , the same explosion of choice is .
health care -- it &apos;s no longer the case in the united states that you go to the doctor , and the doctor tells you what to do .
instead , you go to the doctor and the doctor says , we could do a , or we could make b .
a has these benefits and risks .
b has these benefits and risks . what do they want to do ?
and you say , &quot; doctor , what do i do ? &quot;
the doctor says , a has been these benefits and risks and b has the benefits and risks .
what do you want to do ?
and if you say , &quot; if you were , doctor , what would you do ? &quot;
the doctor says , &quot; but i &apos;m not . &quot;
the result is -- we call it a good thing , but in reality , a shift of the burden of decisions for someone knows something -- namentlich the doctor -- to someone who knows nothing , and most likely is a decision to make a decision -- namentlich the patient .
there &apos;s an enormous marketing for people who are for people like you and me , if you think about it , doesn &apos;t make any sense of any sense , because we don &apos;t buy them .
why do they make us feel if we can &apos;t buy ?
and the answer is , you expect to call the doctor in the next morning and ask a change in the verschreibung .
something like our identity is now a question of choice , like this slide .
we don &apos;t erben identity ; we invent it .
and we invent as often as we want to be .
that means that every day , when you wake up the morning , you have to decide what you want to be for a type of person .
in terms of marriage and family , there was a time where the standard-annahme was that almost everybody had one , and they could quickly heirateten them as they could , and then they got as fast as they could .
the only real choice was , &quot; who , &quot; not when , and not what they were doing .
now , all right now , it &apos;s all easy .
i teach wonderful intelligent students , and i give them 20 percent less work than i used to do .
and that &apos;s not because they &apos;re less smart , and not because they &apos;re less carefully .
it &apos;s because you &apos;re busy with other things , you ask yourself , &quot; should i marry or not ? should i get married now ?
should i get married ? should i have children , or i &apos;m going to do ? &quot;
they &apos;re all einnehmende questions .
and they &apos;re going to answer these questions , but , whether it means all the tasks i &apos;m going to do and not get a good grade in my course .
and indeed , they should do that . these are important to be beantwortende questions .
work -- we &apos;re blessed , as carl has been , with the technology that allows us every minute of every day on the planet , to work on the randolph hotel .
there &apos;s a corner that i &apos;m not going to tell you that will work on the wirelesslan .
i &apos;m not going to tell you because i want to use it .
so what it means is that incredible freedom of choice we have to make decisions about work , again and again and again , whether we should work or not work .
we can watch our kids playing football , and we have our mobile phone on a hip , and our blackberry on our hip , and our laptop is probably on our lap .
and even though they &apos;re off , every minute of our child , in the verstümmeln of a fußballspiels we , we also ask ourselves , &quot; should i suppose that call ?
should i answer this email ? should i write this letter ? &quot;
and even if the answer to the question , &quot; no , &quot; is it certainly will be very different from your child &apos;s experience .
wherever we look , big things and small things , material things and lifestyle , life is a question of choice .
and the world we lived in the world was looking at .
so i want to say , there were some choices , but not all was a question of choice .
and the world we now live in is like this .
and the question is , is the good news or bad news ?
the answer is yes .
we all know what &apos;s good about it , so i &apos;m going to get it bad .
all these choices have two effects , two negative effects on people .
a effect , paradoxer , is that he &apos;s lähmt the lähmt .
so , with so many options you can vote for , it &apos;s very hard to get to decide .
i &apos;m going to give you another example of giving a study of investment in volunteer volunteer .
a colleague of mine had access to investitions-akten from vanguard , the giant fondgesellschaft of about a million employees and about 2,000 different jobs .
and what she found was a 10 investmentfonds who anbot the arbeitgeber , took the participation for two percent .
they offer 50 investmentfonds -- 10 percent less employees in than if she would offer them just five .
because there are 50 investmentfonds that are on the selection , is so hard to decide what to choose , aufschieben it .
and then tomorrow , and then tomorrow , and tomorrow , and tomorrow , and tomorrow , of course , comes to .
you know , that &apos;s not just means that people have food food , because they don &apos;t have enough money to go to the travel , it also means making decisions so hard to miss great investitionsangebote of their arbeitgeber .
and they &apos;re not going to be involved in participation , to 5,000 dollars a year on the arbeitsgeber that he would have been happy to reproduce .
paralysis is a consequence of many choices .
and i think it makes this look like the world .
you want to make the decision really , if it &apos;s all eternity , right ?
they don &apos;t want to vote for the wrong investment , or even the wrong salatdressing .
so this is one effect . the other effect is that even if we can overcome the paralysis and make a decision , we end less satisfied with the outcome of choice , as if we had the opportunity to decide between less possibilities .
and there are several reasons for this .
one of them is a lot of different salatdressings , if you buy one , and it &apos;s not perfect -- and it &apos;s easy to imagine that you could have a different decision to have been able to make a different decision , and what happens is that these bildlich vorgestellte alternative is that they have the decision to regret , and that regret is negative on happiness that
the more opportunities there , the more it is , the more easy it is , the more that it is , so enttäuschend for the choice they make .
second , what economists call oppertunitätskosten .
dan gilbert did a big point in this morning by telling how much the way we judge things , depends on what we compare .
well , if there are very many alternative to concerns , it &apos;s just attractive characteristics of alternative to alternativen that you &apos;re making , which makes you less happy with the alternative you voted .
here &apos;s an example . for those of you who are not new yorker , i apologize .
but here &apos;s what you should have thought .
here &apos;s a couple of the hamptons .
very expensive real estate .
beautiful beach . great day . they have it all for themselves .
what could be better ? &quot; damn &quot; the man thinks , &quot; it &apos;s august .
everybody in my neighborhood is gone .
i could park right outside my house . &quot;
and he spends two weeks of the thought he &apos;s verpasst the possibility of having a great parking lot to have a lot of parking .
oppertunitätskosten lower happiness that we receive through our choice , even if we &apos;ve chosen a fantastic thing .
and the more options there are choice , the more attractive properties of these choices are going to be considering into the oppertunitätskosten .
here &apos;s another example .
now , this cartoon is a couple of statements .
he makes a statement about this now , and perhaps to do things slow .
but a important point he &apos;s doing is always who you decide for a thing , don &apos;t choose to do other things .
and these other things may have many attractive characteristics , and it will be what they &apos;re going to do less anziehend .
third , is the eskalation of expectations .
this was met me when i was going to exchange my jeans .
i wear jeans , almost all the time .
and there was a time in which there was just jeans , and they bought them , and they were bad , they were incredibly unkomfortabel , and if they were wearing them long enough , and they &apos;d often washed enough , they started &quot; ok . &quot;
so i went to buy new jeans for many years old , and i said , &quot; i would like to have a couple of jeans , here &apos;s my height . &quot;
and the guy said , &quot; do you want to be schlanke , easy to anliegende ?
do you want to put the buttons or reißverschluss ? rock or säure ?
do you want to leave jeans with holes ?
you want to be geschnitten , kegelig , blah blah blah , and so on .
my jaw was down , and after i recovered , i said , &quot; i would like the kind that was the only way . &quot;
he had no idea what was , so i spent an hour of all these damn jeans , and i got the business -- and i say the truth -- with the best appropriate jeans i ever had .
i &apos;d better . all these choices made it better .
but i felt bad .
why ? i wrote a whole book to try to explain myself .
the reason i felt worse was that i felt bad for all of these available possibilities , my expectations for what was going to do for a good couple of jeans , and they went up .
i had very low expectations . i had no place for me to have in a way .
when you came in 100 species , it &apos;s a damn thing that you should have been perfect .
and what i got was good , but it wasn &apos;t perfect .
and so i was compared to what i had to get to what i expected , and what i had was disappointing to what i expected to do .
adding of opportunities to life , the people will inevitably increase the expectations of people who are going to be good at the way .
and this leads to less satisfaction with what outcomes , even though the results are good .
no one in the world of the marketings knows this . because if you would , you all know what it &apos;s going to be here .
the truth is more like this .
the reason that used to be better at all , it was better than anything worse than anything worse , it was possible for the people to make experience a pleasant surprise .
today , in the world we live -- we are wealthy , the industrialisierten citizens , with perfection as an expectation -- the best for you to hope is that things are so good to be that you expect .
they &apos;re never going to be angenehm because their expectations , my expectations , are haushoch .
the secret to glücklichkeit -- that &apos;s what they &apos;ve all came -- the secret to the glücklichkeit is low expectations .
i want to say -- a short moment of a moment -- i &apos;m married to a woman , and she &apos;s really wonderful .
i couldn &apos;t make it better . i didn &apos;t have niedergelassen .
but niederlassen is not always a bad thing .
finally , a consequence of the kaufens of a bad sitzenden , jeans , if there &apos;s only one way to buy , is that if you &apos;re left , and you &apos;re wondering why who is responsible , the answer is , the world is responsible . what would you have ?
if hundreds of different kinds of jeans are available , and they buy a enttäuschend , and they ask why , who is responsible ?
and it &apos;s also clear that the answer is to be the question .
you could have done it better .
with 100 different kinds of jeans in the schaufenster , there &apos;s no excuse for mistakes .
and so , if people make decisions , and even if the results of the decisions are good , they feel disappointed about them , they are beschuldigen themselves .
clinical depression of the industrial world in the last generation .
i think a signifikanter -- not the only one , but a signifikanter beiträger to this explosion of depression , and even suicide , is that people have experienced that are because their standards are so high , and then if you need to explain those experiences themselves , think about it .
and so the bilanzergebnis is that it &apos;s getting better to us , it &apos;s better , and we feel worse .
so let me remind you .
this is the official dogma that we all think of right , completely wrong . it &apos;s not true .
there &apos;s no question that is a little choice for not a choice , but it doesn &apos;t follow that more choices than a little choice .
there &apos;s a magic amount . i don &apos;t know what it is .
i &apos;m pretty sure that we missed this point for a long time to make our good good .
now , as an grundsatz question -- i &apos;m almost finished -- as a policy question , which is about thinking , what all these choices are allowed in the developed societies , is the material of wealth .
there are many places in the world , and we &apos;ve heard about many of you whose problem is not the big choices .
your problem is they have too little .
so the things i &apos;m talking about are a curious problem of modern , rich , western societies .
and what &apos;s so frustrating and frustrating is , steve levitt tells you yesterday about how these expensive and hard to help installierenden car seats , it &apos;s a waste of money .
what i &apos;m telling you is that these expensive , complicated decisions -- it &apos;s not easy that you don &apos;t help .
they &apos;re actually hurt .
you &apos;re worried that we &apos;re going to get worse .
if something of what people allowed to make our society makes decisions so that people would have too little choice , not only the lives of people , but our dignity .
economists call this a pareto-verbesserungs .
einkommensumverteilung is going to make it all better -- not just the poor -- because all these great choices are plagt .
finally , you ask this cartoon , and a hochentwickelte person , says , &quot; ah ! what does this fish know ?
you don &apos;t know anything possible in this goldfischglas . &quot;
verarmten imagination , a kurzsichtige view of the world -- and that &apos;s the way i read it first .
the more i thought about it , the more i got to the view that the fish knows something .
because the truth is that when you break the goldfischglas , that everything is possible , you don &apos;t have freedom . you have paralysis .
if you break the goldfischglas , so that everything is possible , you lower happiness .
you increase the paralysis and lower happiness .
everybody needs a goldfischglas .
this is almost begrenzt safety -- possibly for fish , definitely for us .
but the abhanden of a metaphorischen goldfischglas is a recipe for misery , and i guess disaster .
thank you very much .
you know , i &apos;ve talked about some of these projects before , about the human genome and what it might mean , and the discovery of new groups of genes .
in fact , we &apos;re starting from a new point : we have digitized biology , and now we try to get from digital code into a new phase in biology by creating new life and build new life .
we always have to ask meaningful questions .
what is life ? it &apos;s something i think many biologists have tried to understand and that on different levels .
we tried different ways to simplify it to the minimum components .
we have digitized almost 20 years ago , and as we sequenced the humangenom , the change from the analog world of biology has the digital world of computers .
now , we &apos;re trying to ask whether we can regenerate life , or can we create new life , from this digital universe ?
this is a map of a little organism , a mycoplasma geitalium that can have the smallest genome of a species that can replicate itself in the lab , and we &apos;ve tried to do that with a smaller genome .
we &apos;ve been able to give it to about a hundred genes , to give out the 500 , or something that are here .
but if we look at this metabolic map , which is very simple , compared to our one . trust me , that &apos;s easy , but if we all look at these genes that we can eliminate one of the other , it &apos;s very unlikely that this would lead to a living cell .
so we decided that it &apos;s the only way we can actually forward to the front of this chromosome , which allows us to vary the individual components and so to ask some of these fundamental questions .
and so we started with the question , can we get a chromosome ?
is it possible to make chemistry to make these really big molecules , which has never been done before ?
and if we can , we can take the chromosome ?
one chromosome is just a piece of inertes chemical material .
our steps at the digitalisierung of life was exponentially .
our ability to write genetic code has been developed very slowly , but it &apos;s been increasing , and our final point would take on a exponential curve .
we started 15 years ago .
it took a couple of years to start with a bioethischen review before we did the first experiments .
and it turns out it turns out it &apos;s very difficult .
there are tens of thousands of machines around the world , making small pieces of dna , but it &apos;s a degenerativer process , so the longer you make a piece , the more mistakes happen .
so we had to develop a new method that we could put these little pieces and correct the error .
this was our first attempt to start with the digital information , the genome x x .
it &apos;s a little virus that kills the bacteria .
we made small pieces , made a fehlerkorrektur and had a dna molecule that was about 5,000 letters .
the exciting stage came when we took this piece of inerte chemical and put it into a bacterium , and the bacteria started to read the genetic code , and then did it .
the viral particles then got to be released from the cells and then killed to kill e. .
recently , i talked to the oil industry , and they said they were doing this model .
they laughed more than her .
so we think that &apos;s a situation in software actually , in fact , can build your hardware in a biological system .
but we wanted to build a lot more , we wanted to build a whole bakterielles chromosome , and it &apos;s got more than 580.000 letters genetic code , and so we thought we &apos;re building it in kassetten , and we could vary the size of the tape , and to understand what the individual components are in a living cell .
design is the key , and if you want to launch with digital information in the computer , this digital information has to be really accurate .
so , when we first sequenced the genome in 1995 , the fehlerrate was a fehler with a fehler .
we found 30 errors in the resequenzieren , if we used the original sequence , it would never have been possible .
part of design is to make pieces that are 50 letters long and the other 50-buchstaben pieces are überlappen to build smaller sub-einheiten and build these together .
we have a unique elements here .
you may have heard that we have waterzeichen .
think about this : we have a 4-buchstaben code : a , c , g and t.
so , triplets of these letters -- these letters are about 20 amino acids , and here is a single purpose of any of these amino acids .
so we can use the genetic code to write our words , sentences , thoughts .
we were just signed at the beginning .
some people were disappointed that it was not a word word .
we &apos;ve engineered the pieces that we can just break them with enzymes , and there &apos;s enzymes that repair and bring these back into the repair and bring back together .
and we started making pieces , starting with pieces that had the fünf- to siebentausend letters , put these together together to make 24.000-buchstaben-stücke to put together again , to 72.000 .
and in each step , we have these pieces of the surplus that we could sequence them , because we tried to create a very robust process of what you &apos;re going to see in a minute .
we &apos;ve tried to get to the point of the automation .
so , this looks like a basketball-playoff .
if we get to these right big pieces -- with over 100,000 pairs -- they &apos;re not simply growing in e. &apos;s in the e. of modern biology , and so we &apos;re so wandten to other kinds of mechanisms .
we knew about a mechanism of the homologe rekombination , which is used to be used to fix dna that can bring together pieces like this .
here &apos;s an example of this . there &apos;s an organism called deinococcus radiodurans , which übersteht the three million rad of radiation .
you see the top of the upper field that chromosome just fall apart .
12 to 24 hours later , everything was put together as it was .
we have thousands of organisms that can do that .
these organisms can be ausgetrocknet , they can even live in the vacuum .
i &apos;m absolutely sure life exists in space and move around for looking for aquatischen conditions .
in fact , nasa has shown that there are a lot of it out there .
here &apos;s a gefügeaufnahme of the molecule that we &apos;ve made by using these processes -- actually , we &apos;ve only used hefe-mechanismen hefe-mechanismen with the right design of the pieces , we put them into eingepasst . yeast will automatically put them together .
this is not a elektronenmikroskopaufnahme mikroskopaufnahme .
it &apos;s a big molecule that we can actually see it with the lichtmikroskop .
this is footage on a long period of six seconds .
this is the publication we &apos;ve been done recently .
these are over 580.000 letters of genetischem code . it &apos;s the largest molecule with definierter structure that has ever been created by humans .
it has a molekulargewicht of about 300 million .
if we could print it with a schriftgröße of 10 and without the other , it would include 142 pages , just to auszudrucken this genetic code .
now , how do we take a chromosome ? how do we do it ?
obviously , it &apos;s very simple with a virus , it &apos;s a lot more complicated to deal with bacteria .
it &apos;s also easier to do it in eukaryonten like we &apos;re doing : you just take the nucleus out and you get a different in , and that &apos;s exactly what you all heard about the dog .
so , in archaebakterien , the chromosome is actually embedded in the cell , but recently we &apos;ve shown that you can take a full chromosome from a cell to the other , and then activate those activate .
we reinigten the chromosome of a mikrobenspezies , so roughly , these two are apart from the human and mice , and we gave some of them to choose this chromosome , and we zersetzten it to destroy all proteins -- and it was very amazing when we gave it in a cell -- and they &apos;re going to estimate our very ausgereiften graphs .
the new chromosome went into the cell .
in fact , we thought that &apos;s the end , but we tried to keep the process on the process .
this is the hauptmechanismus of evolution here .
we &apos;re all finding species of species here , which has a second chromosome or a third of irgendwoher , each time , thousands of charakteristiken in just a second to a species .
so people who think of evolution as a gene that has changed at a time that has missed a lot of biology .
there are enzymes called the restriktionsenzyme , which are actually eating dna .
the chromosome in the cell has not , or the chromosomes we &apos;ve put on .
it was exprimiert in the cell , and then realized the other chromosome as a fremdes material , and so we ended up with a new chromosome .
it verfärbte in blue because of the genes we &apos;ve been doing .
and after a very short time , it had all the characteristics of species , and completely completely lost into a new species based on the new software that we gave in the cell .
all of the proteins changes the membranes changes -- when we read the genetic code , it was exactly what we had left .
it may sound like a genomische alchimie , but we can move the software-dna , things quite dramatically change things .
now i have argued that this is not the genesis -- that &apos;s based on 3.5 billion years of evolution .
and i have argued that we might be creating a new form of the kambrischen explosion where there might be massive new artenbildung based on this digital design .
why should we do that ?
i think it &apos;s pretty obvious about what we need .
we &apos;re anzuwachsen from six billion people to the next 40 years .
to put it in my context : i was born in the year .
today , three people on this planet today has existed for each one in the year , and within 40 years , it will be four .
we have problems with food , with fresh water and clean water , medicine , fuel for the 6,5 of the 6,5 .
it will take a challenge that will be to be 9 .
we need about five billion tons of coal , 30-plus billion oil oil . that &apos;s a hundred million barrels of the day .
if we think about biological processes or any process to replace this , it will be a huge challenge .
then , of course , there &apos;s the whole co2 of this material that goes into the atmosphere .
we now have our discoveries from all over the world , a database of about 20 million genes , and i want to believe that these are the most designkomponenten of the future .
the elektronikindustrie had a dozen components and see the diversity that came out of it .
we &apos;re actually stoßen in the first line , the boundaries of biological reality and those of our imagination .
we have technologies today because of this fast technology system that we call about what we call kombinatorische genetics .
we now have the possibility of building a large robot that can make the millions of chromosomes a day .
if you imagine these 20 million different genes , or to optimize these processes to create oktan , or drugs new vaccines , we can change a little group more molecular molecular than the last 20 years .
and it &apos;s just nurmale selection . we can selektieren after lebensfähigkeit , production of chemicals or treibstoffproduktion impfstoffproduktion and so on .
this is a shot of real design-software that we work with , and actually sit down and new species of the computer design for the computer .
you know , we don &apos;t necessarily know what it looks like , we know exactly what the genetic code will look .
we &apos;re now focusing on the treibstoffe of the fourth generation .
they &apos;ve recently seen corn corn , which is just a bad experiment .
we have treibstoffe of the zweiten- and third generation that will be pretty soon coming out of the very much higher zuckerwertigkeiten , like oktan or different kinds of butanol .
but , as we think , the only way we think that biology is a big impact , without any more increase in the cost of the food or the limitation of its availability , if we look at co2 as a source of the source , and therefore we &apos;re working on cells that go to the other way .
and we think we &apos;re going to be the first ones to be the fourth generation of the fourth generation , and this is about 18 months .
sunlight and co2 are a way of a way .
but in our discovery , we have all sorts of different ways .
this is a organism that we described in 1996 .
he lives in the deep sea , about ein-einhalb miles deep , in almost kochenden wassertemperaturen .
it &apos;s turning co2 from methane to use hydrogen as a source of its energy .
we &apos;re going to look at whether we can use carbon dioxide that can just be brought to be produktionsplätzen , konvertieren co2 in the fuel , to drive this process .
within a short period of time , we might think we could be able to solve one of the basic questions of life .
you know , we really have -- moderate goals like the ersatz of the whole petrochemischen industry . right . if you don &apos;t want to do it at ted , where else , you can get a hauptquelle of energy .
but we &apos;re now working on the moment that we use the same approach to development .
you saw this year with flu , we &apos;re always a year of the back and have a dollar to a little bit when it comes to the right vaccine .
i think that &apos;s going to be changed by creating rekombinante vaccines in the vorhinein .
this is what the future might look like with changes , can be accelerating today , with synthetic bacteria , archaen , and perhaps eukaryonten .
we &apos;re light years from the way to improve people . our goal is that we have a chance to survive long enough to do that . thank you .
and at the last ted conference i gave an introduction to the lhc .
and i promised to come back to explain how the machine works .
so it &apos;s as far as it is , and for all those who were there , the lhc is the largest scientific experiment that ever been the first -- 27 miles in the diameter .
his task is to create the conditions that are less than a second second of the universe , and that to 600 million times within a second .
it &apos;s just breathtaking ambitious .
this is the machine underneath geneva .
we take images of these mini-urknalle in detectors .
this is what i work . it &apos;s called an atlas detector -- 44 meters in the wide 22 meters in diameter .
so here &apos;s a spectacular picture of the atlas of the construction so you can see the scale .
the 10 last september year , the machine went to the first time .
and this picture was taken by atlas .
it &apos;s caused huge jubel in the room .
it &apos;s a picture of the first strahlenpartikels that all the way around the lhc , then it &apos;s acting with a part of the lhc to kollidierte a rain from particles to make the detector .
in other words , when we saw this picture of 10 , we knew that the machine works , which is a great triumph .
i don &apos;t know if this is the biggest jubel , or this , as someone went to the google and the front page .
it means that we have a cultural impact beyond the scientific .
about a week later , there was a problem with the machine that had to do with these wired , and these golden wires of the wires here .
these wires lead 13-tausend ampere when the machine &apos;s going on hochleistung .
now , the engineers are going to look at them and say , &quot; no , no , they don &apos;t . these are little wires . &quot;
you can do that because if you get them very far , they will be called supraleitern .
so at minus 271 , you know , as the space between stars , these wires can sustain tension .
in one of the connections , between neuntausend magnets in the lhc , there was a manufakturdefekt .
and so , the wires geringfügig and 13-tausend ampere begegneten resistance .
this was the result .
now , this is still amazing when you imagine that magnet weigh over 20 tons and a half inch .
so we &apos;re eating about 50 of the magnet , which is about 50 of the magnet .
and they had to remove what we did .
we konditionierten them , reparierten them .
they &apos;re all going back on their way back .
by the end of march , the lhc will be funktionsfähig .
we &apos;re going to be able to turn it up , and we can expect to collect the first data on june or july , and we continue to spend our journey to figure out what the building blocks are .
now , of course , in a way , these accidents have been entfachen debate around the value of science and ingenieurskunst at such boundaries . it &apos;s easy to reject this .
i think the fact that it &apos;s so hard to reach out , the fact that we reach beyond our boundaries , it creates the value of things like the lhc .
i &apos;m going to leave my abschließenden words of a english scientist , who is , as i guess , when he verteidigte the nutzlosen experiments of his lehrlings , his apprentice was michael faraday , and he said , &quot; nothing is so dangerous for the development of the human mind , as to assume that our scientific ideas are endgültig , that there are no mystery in nature
thank you .
i &apos;m a writer .
writing books is my career , but it &apos;s of course more than that .
it &apos;s also my big , lifelong love and fascination .
and i don &apos;t expect that to change .
but the fact that i &apos;ve done a little bit of a weird thing in my life , and my career , which has led me to rethink my relationship to this work .
this was a strange event i recently wrote a book recently -- a biografie eat , pray eat -- that , decided , in other ways , as all my previous reasons were hinausging into the world and a big mega-ereignis , international bestseller-ding .
and what &apos;s result is that i don &apos;t care where i &apos;m going to be treated as if i was to the fall of the fall .
seriously , the fall of geweiht .
for example , they &apos;re concerned about me and say , &quot; don &apos;t you fear that you will never be übertreffen this success ?
don &apos;t you have a fear of weiterschreiben your whole life and never make a book that anyone in the world ? &quot; never again ? &quot;
okay , that &apos;s really what i call .
but it would be worse if i didn &apos;t remember that i was about 20 years ago , when i first told me as a teenager , for the first time , i was going to be writer , to be faced with the same kind of angstbesetzter reaction .
people said , &quot; don &apos;t you fear , never to succeed ? &quot;
don &apos;t you fear that you kill the demütigung of a absage ?
you don &apos;t worry you &apos;re going to live your life for your life and you never create something and you will die on a schrotthaufen dreams -- your mouth filled with the bitteren asche of the versagens ? &quot;
so , you know , you know .
the answer -- the short answer to all of these questions is : „ yes .
yeah , i &apos;m afraid of all these things .
and i always had it .
and i &apos;m afraid i &apos;m afraid that no one would be able to see .
like algae -- and other furchteinflößende things .
but , if it &apos;s about writing , i &apos;ve been thinking about this for a while , and i ask myself , why ?
is it reasonable ?
is it logical that by someone should be expected to be afraid of doing the work that he feels like to do ?
and what &apos;s really about the creative business , that they &apos;re making us feel secure , in a way , how other jobs don &apos;t do ?
my father , for example , was a chemist , and i can &apos;t remember a situation in his 40 years as a chemist , who was asked to be afraid to be chemists .
with your chemiker-blockade , john -- how do you go ?
it just didn &apos;t come , you know ?
but to be fair -- the group of chemists have not been given the reputation of alkoholsüchtigen people &apos;s reputation about centuries .
we have writers to have this kind of reputation , but not only the writers , but the creative of all genres , seem to be , mentally , unstable , unstable unstable .
all you have to do is to look at the bitteren todeszahlen of really great minds alone from the 20th century that died young and often of their own hand .
and even those who didn &apos;t actually have vernachlässigt suizid , they really had really neglected their talent .
norman mailer said briefly before his last interview : „ every my books , i got a little bit more weiter .
a extraordinary statement that you can do about her .
but we don &apos;t even think if we &apos;re going to hear someone so something about this , because we know this kind of thing as long as long , somehow we accepted the notion of this and collective of creativity , of course , of course , of course , and that art -- always leads to the seelenqual .
and the question i want to ask today today is this idea for you , totally fine ?
you know , you know ? because with only one centimeter away from the distance , i don &apos;t feel at all that perception .
i think they &apos;re abscheulich .
and i think it &apos;s dangerous . and i don &apos;t want to watch how she &apos;s taken into the next century .
i think it &apos;s better when we &apos;re living our great creative .
and i definitely know that it &apos;s been for me -- in my situation -- very dangerous , to start to start this dark path of the kind of thinking -- especially in the fact that i &apos;m in my career in my career .
that means -- look at this : i &apos;m pretty young . i &apos;m just about 40 years old .
i might have another 40 arbeitsjahre in my arbeitsjahre .
and it &apos;s very likely that everything i &apos;m going to write from now to write is from the world as the work that came after the abgefahrenen success of my last book , right ?
i &apos;m saying it geradeheraus , because we &apos;re all kind of friends -- it &apos;s probably probably probably that my greatest success behind me is .
oh , jesus , what a thought ?
that &apos;s the kind of thought that can get someone to start at 9 a.m. in the morning , and i don &apos;t want to drink .
i would prefer to continue to do this work i love .
so the question is , how ?
after some of the time , the reflektierens seems to me that i can continue to write , to be able to design a kind of schützendem psychological construction .
somehow , i have to find a way to put a safe distance in the writing , and i think , in my very natural beklemmung , and my very natural beklemmung about how the reaction to be the writing .
while i was looking for models for the last year , i was looking for the past , and i tried to find other societies to see if they might have better or more vernünftigere ideas about how to help the emotional risks with the emotional risks that are associated with creativity .
this search led me to old greece and old rome .
please follow me , because the circle will close .
but in old greece and rome , people don &apos;t believe that creativity comes from people , okay ?
they believed that creativity was a kind of göttlicher diener-geist , who was from a distant , unknown , from the people -- from unerklärlichen , unknown reasons .
the greeks called these göttlichen diener-geister of creativity of creativity .
from the sokrates , he &apos;s known that he believed he had a dämon , which was weisheiten away from a distance .
the römer had the same idea , called this kind of körperlosem creative mind , “ genius .
that &apos;s great . the römer didn &apos;t really think that a genius was a very clever individual .
they believed that a genius was this kind of magical göttliches being believed that it literally lives in the walls of a künstlerateliers -- about the same like dobby , the hauself -- the rauskäme and the artist in the work of a gewissermaßen , unsichtbar assistierte and the result of the work .
this is brilliant -- there &apos;s it , there &apos;s the distance i spoke about -- the psychological construction that protect you from the consequences of your work .
and everybody knew that it worked , right ?
the artist of the altertums was protected in certain things , like , for example , too much , right ?
when your work was brilliant , you couldn &apos;t look at everything for you , everybody knew you had this körperlose genius that helped you .
when your work is floppte -- not entirely your mistakes , or ?
everybody knew , your genius was a little bit lahm .
so people in the west have thought about creativity .
and then the renaissance came , and we had this big idea . and this big idea was , let &apos;s put the human individual into the center of the universe -- all gods and mysterien , and there &apos;s no room for a mystische creatures taking orders of the göttlichen .
it &apos;s the beginning of the rational , and the people started to think that creativity has completely come from their own individual .
for the first time in history , people hear this or some of these artists , they &apos;re a genius -- instead of what he has a genius .
i have to tell you , i think that was a big mistake .
you know , i think , a person that is to allow you to think , he thinks it or she &apos;s like the gefäß , like the becken and the essence , the source of all of the göttlichen , creative , unendlichen mysteriums is a little bit too much to a viel , to aufzubürden them .
it &apos;s like to ask someone to eat the sun .
the entstellt and all of the verzerrt , all of the egos , and it creates all these unerreichbaren expectations at success .
i think that this erfolgs-druck has been the künstler of our artists for the last 500 years .
and that &apos;s true , and i think it &apos;s true -- is the question of this .
can we change it ?
perhaps to a ancient understanding of the relationship between people and the mystery of the creative .
maybe not .
maybe we can &apos;t do this for 500 years of rational not just in a 18-minütigen talk .
and there are certainly people in this audience who really would sign a berechtigte scientific question about the idea of -- essentially -- feen , who apply to people and feenzauber on their projects and so on .
i &apos;m probably not going to take all of you on this journey .
but the question i want to do is why not ?
why not that be that ?
because it makes much sense of all the other things i &apos;ve heard about when it went to explain the absolutely crazy machende in the process of the creative process .
a process that -- as everybody knows who has ever tried to do something -- so in other words , everyone here -- not always vernünftig .
in fact , it can sometimes feel really true .
i recently had a very encounter like i had a little encounter with the extraordinary american poet stone stone , which was now a lot of life , but she told me that she was working in the dörflichen virginia outside the fields , and she said , she would feel and hear how a poem can be about the landscape on her landscape .
she said it would be like a donnernder train of air .
it would be zurollen to you .
she felt like it came , because it would take the earth to take the earth to the beben .
she knew she could only do one of the moment , and that was -- in their words -- „ running like the devil .
she ran like the devil for the house , as she was verfolgt by this poem , and it was only the only point that they had to get enough to a piece of paper and a pen , so they could capture it through the blatt and held on the sheet .
at other , she wasn &apos;t fast enough . she ran and ran out and ran , but she didn &apos;t get the house , and she would roll up through her , and she gave it , and she said -- „ after another poet .
and then there were these moments -- the part i &apos;ll never forget -- she said that there were moments in which they were almost verpasste .
so , you &apos;re running out , and you go to the house and you go after paper and the poem is through you , and you &apos;re taking a pen , as it hindurchgeht through you and then -- she said -- was that it was going to reach with your other hand and grab it .
she caught the poem on the tail , and she pulled back into her body and took it on the sheet of paper .
and these opportunities , the poem came out and intact on the paper -- but backwards -- from the last word for the first .
when i heard about this , i thought that &apos;s really scary -- that &apos;s exactly how my creative process is going to happen .
this is not like my creative process -- i &apos;m not the channel .
i &apos;m a maultier . to work , i have to get up every day at the same time and schwitzen me , abmühen and really awkward durchquälen .
but even i have in my maultierart sometimes gestreift this thing .
and i guess many of you have done this .
and even i had worked or ideas that i &apos;m out of a source of mine that i really can &apos;t relate to .
what is this thing ?
and how do we kick to lose this in relationship without losing our minds , but to keep in the opposite of the mental health ?
for me , the best living example of how to do this is the musician tom waits , i was allowed to interview him a magazine for a few years ago .
we talked about this topic . and you know what ? most of his life was tom die of the gepeinigten of modern artist who tried to master these unkontrollierbaren of creative impulses that lived in him and help them with them .
but then he was getting older and more quiet . he told me he was going to go to a schnellstraße in los angeles , and there was everything that changed for him .
he was going to have high speed when he suddenly sounds a little piece of a tune that &apos;s a lot of tangible for him , and he wants to be , and he &apos;s prachtvoll . he lechzt it , but he can &apos;t grab them .
he doesn &apos;t have a piece of paper ; he doesn &apos;t have a pencil , he doesn &apos;t have a kassettenrekorder .
so he starts to see these old beklemmung into it , like i &apos;m going to lose this thing and i &apos;m going to be verfolgt by this song on forever .
i &apos;m not good enough , i don &apos;t make it .
but instead of panic , he just stopped .
he ended up the whole of the whole , and doing something completely new .
he just looked in the heavens , and he said , &quot; „ , can you not see that i &apos;m driving car ? &quot;
„ is i like that , i &apos;m just writing a song ?
if you really want to exist , come on to a second moment , if i can take care of you .
if not , quäle today .
go to go to go to the quäle cohen cohen .
his whole whole arbeitsprozess has changed .
not the work itself . it was still as dark as ever as ever .
but the process and the heavy beklemmung that surrounds him was , he was more than he took the genius out of where he was caused nothing to trouble , and then he took him to where he came from , and he realized that it had no verinnerlichtes , quälendes thing .
it could give a eigentümliche , wundersame , bizarre collaboration , a kind of conversation between tom and the fremdartigen , äußerlichen thing that wasn &apos;t very tom .
when i heard this story , it also changed a bit of the way i worked and i &apos;ve been saved .
this idea was saved me as i was in the middle of the schreibprozess of „ eat , love “ , and i fell into one of these gruben of the zweifels that we all fall into , and it doesn &apos;t work , and you start thinking that it &apos;s going to be a disaster . it &apos;s the worst book that has ever been written .
not just bad , but the worst of all time .
i started thinking , i should just put the project .
but then i remembered that tom talked to the free sky , and i tried to .
so i took my look at the manuscript and i spoke my comment in a leeren corner of the room .
i said , &quot; „ , you hear , you , you , you and i know , if this book is not brilliant , that it &apos;s not completely my fault , right ?
because you see me , i &apos;m seeing everything i &apos;ve got , i &apos;m not going to have it .
so if you want to have it better , you have to show up here and you &apos;re going to get your share of the deal with you .
okay . but if you don &apos;t do that , you know what , the hell with it .
i &apos;m going to keep writing , because that &apos;s my job .
and i want to leave you to leave that i was here today for my part of the jobs here .
because ... at the end , it &apos;s like this . before centuries , people have been versammelt to mondscheinfesten people with holy tänzen and music that have been stopped for hours -- until the dawn .
these are always great , because the dancers were professional and they were fantastic .
but it &apos;s and again , very rarely , something special happened . one of the actors was actually überweltlich .
and i know you know what i mean because i know you &apos;ve all seen a performance in your life before you .
it was like the time , and the dancers , through a kind of pforte meeting , did nothing different than he ever did before -- 1,000 nights before , but everything was in common .
and all of a sudden he was no longer seemed to human human .
it &apos;s been bright and down from the bottom and everything erhellte through a göttliches fire .
when something happened then , people knew what was that . they called it to his name .
they put together hands together and started singing : „ allah , allah , god , god , god , god .
that &apos;s god , you know ?
interesting historic fußnote : when the mohren südspanien , they took this practice . the aussprache changed over the course of jahrhunderte allah , allah , allah “ to „ olé , olé , olé “ , which still sounds like stierkämpfen and flamenco-tänzen .
if an actor in spain has done something , something magical has done , „ allah , olé , olé , great , bravo “ , it &apos;s like a flüchtiger view of god .
and that &apos;s great , because we need this .
but , the part of the next morning , when the dancers even wake up and recognizes , she &apos;s 11 o &apos;clock on a tuesday -- and he &apos;s no longer a fünkchen of god .
he &apos;s just a alternder sterblicher mit , and maybe he will never rise to the heights again .
and maybe someone else will never call god &apos;s name if he &apos;s about it . but what would he do with the rest of his life ?
that &apos;s hard .
this is one of the most schmerzhaftesten of a creative life .
but maybe it &apos;s not going to be so full of pein , if you didn &apos;t believe in the beginning , the most significant aspects of her daseins was coming from you .
if you might just believe that you &apos;re a leihgabe -- from a unvorstellbaren source of your life being passed on someone else when you &apos;re done .
when we start thinking about this , it changes everything .
so i started thinking , and i think i think that i &apos;m going to work with safety in the past months , while i was working on the book that will soon appear -- as dangerous , beängstigende , erwartete nachfolger to my abgefahrenen success .
and what i &apos;ve always got to say myself is , when i &apos;m crazy about it , is not afraid .
don &apos;t be entmutigt .
just make your job .
it &apos;s still for your contribution to whatever it is .
if your job is dancing , dance .
if this is the silly , göttliche genius , who is put on the side , decides for a short moment to show a hauch of wonder through the effort , then „ olé !
and if not , dance , they &apos;re doing their dance .
and „ olé ! “ for you despite all of this .
i think it &apos;s about , and i feel that we should teach this .
„ olé ! “ for you , just for that , you have the mere human love and the eigensinn , for that .
thank you .
thank you .
olé !
last year , i showed these two slides to illustrate that the arctic eiskappe that had been the size of the lower states of the lower states , to reduce 40 percent .
but this doesn &apos;t really drückt the ernsthaftigkeit of this particular problem , because it &apos;s not the thickness of the ice .
in a sense , the arctic eiskappe is the beating heart of our global warming .
it grows in the winter and the schrumpft in the summer .
the next slide i &apos;m showing you is a zeitrafferaufnahme which has happened in the last 25 years .
the dauereis is labeled red .
and you can see it &apos;s markierte on the dunkelblau , this is the annual ice in the winter ; and it &apos;s schrumpft in summer .
the so-called dauereis , five years old , or older , is almost like blood that &apos;s herausfliesst out of the body .
in 25 years , it &apos;s going to be gone from here to here .
this is a problem because warming is auftaut the frozen reason to the arctic ocean , where there &apos;s big amounts of carbon carbon , which is what it &apos;s going to be done by microbes from microbes to methane .
compared to the total amount of klimaverändernden materials in the atmosphere , that amount could double if we cross that critical point .
already today , in some of the shallow lakes in alaska methane from the water .
professor katey at the university of alaska is to have traveled to another arbeitsgruppe sea at another flachen lake .
wow .
you &apos;re all good . the question is , how will it be ergehen .
and one reason is that this enormous amount of wärmespeicher is warming up from the north .
this is a jährlicher tauwasserfluss .
but the volume are much bigger than ever before .
this is the kangerlussuaq river in the southwest greenland .
if you want to know how sea level rise through sea levels , it &apos;s going to go into the ocean .
these rivers are going to be a very rapid .
at the other end of the planet , antarctica , the biggest eismasse on the planet .
last month , researchers reported that the entire continent has a negative eisbilanz .
and the westantarktis that showed up a few unterwasserinseln , is particularly strong in the melting .
this is 20 feet , like greenland .
in the himalayas , the drittgrössten eismasse , they see new lakes that were glaciers a couple of years ago .
40 percent of all people in the world are getting half of their trinkwassers out of this schmelzwasser .
in the anden , this glacier is the trinkwasserquelle of the city .
the wassermengen have been expanding .
but if you &apos;re versiegen , it &apos;s also going to be like most of the drinking water .
in california , a 40 percent reduction in the u.s. population of the sierra .
this is the speicherbecken .
and the predictions , as they read them , are serious .
these austrocknung in the world , that leads a dramatic increase in fire .
and the disasters around the world have in a really ausserordentlichen , and before never , dagewesenen ausmass .
four times the last 30 years , as well as the vorhergegangenen , in the vorhergegangenen .
this is a completely unhaltbares entwicklungsmuster .
if you look at this in the historical context , you can see what it &apos;s going to be .
in the last five years , we &apos;ve produced 70 million tons of co2 all 24 hours -- 25 million tons of every day in the oceans .
if you look at the area of eastern pacific , the american continent western and the beiderseits of indian subkontinents , where there is a drastischen decline of oxygen in the ocean .
the biggest factor for global warming , besides deforestation , which is 20 percent , is burning by fossil fuels .
oil is a problem , and coal is the most biggest biggest problem .
the united states is one of the two largest verschmutzer , together with china .
and the suggestion was to build a lot of other kohlefabriken .
but we &apos;re beginning to see a change .
here are the ones that have been taken out in the last few years , with some green alternative that were proposed .
trotzdessen is there in our country .
and the kohleindustrien and ölindustrien have spent a viertelmilliarde dollar last kalendarjahr to promote clean coal , which is a widerspruch .
this picture reminded me of something .
for christmas around christmas , i went home in tennessee , a billion tons of kohleschlamm .
they saw it in the news .
this is in our entire country of zweitgrösste america &apos;s abfallfluss .
this happened to christmas .
one of the commercials of the christmas industry was that christmas of the christmas was that .
frosty of the kohlenmann is a vergnügter , happy guy .
it gives it in the envelope and abundance in america , and it helps to grow our economies .
frosty , the kohlenmann will clean up every day .
he &apos;s affordable and liebenswert , and workers remain in lohn and bread .
this is the source of most coal in west virginia .
the most powerful bergarbeiter is the head of massey coal .
let me say one thing . al gore , nancy pelosi , harry reid , you don &apos;t know what they &apos;re talking about .
so the alliance for klimaschutz has started to live .
this is one , part of her .
in the climate crisis , we see climate change as a serious threat to our business .
that &apos;s why we set up to the supreme court , a significant geldsumme to spend a werbeaktion on the road to get the truth about coal .
the fact is , coal is not dirty .
we think it &apos;s clean -- and it smells even well .
so , don &apos;t worry about climate change .
let &apos;s leave it for us .
saueber coal , they heard a lot of it .
so let &apos;s take a tour of this modern , clean kohlefabrik .
fantastic ! this machine is pretty loud .
but it &apos;s the sound of the clean kohletechnologie .
and yet , the burning of coal to global warming is the remarkable clean kohletechnologie that you see here , changes everything .
look at this , this is today , clean kohletechnologie .
finally , the positive alternative to our economic challenge and our challenge is the national security challenge .
america is in a crisis , the economy , the national security , the climate crisis .
the red string that connects them all together is our dependence on kohlenstoff-basierenden fuel such as dirty coal and ausländisches oil .
but now there &apos;s a bold , new solution to get us out of this .
versorge america with 100 percent clean electricity , within the next 10 years , within the next 10 years .
a plan to get america back to work , make us secure , to stop global warming .
finally , one solution that &apos;s big enough to solve our problems .
versorge america . find more .
this is the last one .
it &apos;s about a neuversorgung of america .
one of the fastest ways of our abhängigkeit , dirty fuels that we &apos;re going to bring our world to reduce .
the future is here . wind , sun and a new energy system .
new investment to create jobs for good jobs .
versorge america is new . it &apos;s time to accept reality .
there &apos;s an old african saying , &quot; if you want to be fast , go alone .
if you want to get there , go together . &quot;
we have to get far , and it &apos;s fast .
thank you .
i want to start by asking you to zurückzudenken your childhood , when you were playing with bauklötzen .
while they realized , as you can pull out your hands and zugreift , the klötze and move , you actually learned to think about thinking and problems with understanding and verändern räumlicher relations .
and spatial thinking is deeply connected to how we understand a lot of our environment .
as a computer scientist , with my fachberater patti and my colleague jeevan kalanithi , i started to wonder , what if we could use computers , instead of a maus-zeigers , which is instead of a maus-zeigers , which moves like a digital fingerspitze on a flat surface of a flat surface -- ... what if we could intervene with both hands and to physically take and anordnen it
and this question was so moving that we decided to study the answer to the answer and siftables .
in short , a computer is an interactive computer in the size of a kekses .
you can move by hand , you can see each other , you can pick your movement and you have a screen and a funkempfänger screen .
much more important , are physical , so you can only move them through the reach of hands and access .
and the siftables is an example of a new generation of hilfsmitteln to manipulation digital data .
and if these tools are being physical and are developing a conscious awareness of their movements , and you can see each other and the edges of our lives with you , then we can start with the exploration of new and a new unterhaltsamer .
i &apos;m starting with some simple examples .
this siftable is for the videowiedergabe konfiguriert , and if i put it in one direction , the video will play forward ; if i go it into the other direction , it &apos;s going backwards .
and these interactive portraits take each other .
so if i put them together , they get their interest .
if you &apos;re surrounded by voneinader , you &apos;ll notice that also , and you can make a little bit nervous .
and they &apos;re also feeling their movements and their tendency .
so an interesting episode of the interactions we started to realize was that we could apply everyday gestures to data , like how colors to schütten how you do it with fluid .
in this case , we have three siftables as a farbtöpfe konfiguriert , and i can use them to cast color in the middle of the middle , where they &apos;re going to be mixed together .
if we can go it , we can zurückschütten a little bit .
there &apos;s also some kind of nice opportunities in education like languages , mathematics , or logikspiele , where we give people the opportunity to fast and see the results instantly .
here i am -- this is a series of fibonacci that i &apos;m making with a simple gleichungsprogramm .
this is a game that is a game that is a kind of mixture of scrabble and boggle .
basically , every round you can get every runde random letter and you &apos;re trying to make words , and they &apos;re going to be geprüft by a dictionary .
then , after about 30 seconds , again , again , and you have a new new consumer and new possibilities .
thank you .
these are some kids who came to the media lab at the media lab . i could make them try and take a video of it .
they really loved it .
an interesting fact about this kind of applications is that you don &apos;t have to give people a lot of instructions .
all you have to say is &quot; the &quot; is &quot; the words , &quot; and they know exactly what to do .
here &apos;s a couple of people who are testing it .
this is our youngest beta-tester on the bottom right there .
it turned out that he was just going to have the siftables of the siftables .
so for him , they were just bauklötze .
this is an interactive trickfilmanwendung .
we wanted to develop a lernmittel for sprachlerner .
this is felix .
he can bring new characters into the scene by aufhebt the siftable from the table , which shows this character .
this is where he gets the sun .
the sun is going to go on .
now he &apos;s going to take a traktor into the scene .
the orange one .
good work ! yes .
by shaking the siftables , and she puts them together , he can make the characters interact .
... his own story .
hi .
it &apos;s a story of open end , and it can decide how to evolve .
flying cat .
the last example i have now , for me today , is to show it , is a musik-sequencer for live-auftritte that we &apos;ve recently developed , and in the siftables as a sound , like führungsstimme , bass and schlagzeug .
each has four different variations ; you can select what you want to use .
and you can sequence these notes into sequence that you can then organize in any pattern .
and you &apos;re speist them by simply holding a ton-siftable to a sequenz-siftable .
there are effects that you can change live , like hall and filter .
you connect it with a specific tone and it tends to be einstellen .
and then even more powerful effects like the speed and volume you &apos;re doing in the entire sequence .
so let &apos;s see .
we begin to put the führungsstimme in two sequenz-siftable and anordnen them in a row , expand them and add a little more of the voice .
now i add a bass .
now i &apos;m going to do something more painful .
and now i &apos;m going to combine the filter with the drums so that i can steer the effect that live .
i can accelerate the whole sequence by kippe the speed of one or another .
and now i &apos;m going to add the filters to the bass , for something more .
i can change the sequence as it is going .
so i don &apos;t have to plan it in the front of the car , but i can improvise , in verlängern , or verkürzen .
and i can conclude by the end of the whole sequence by running the lautstärke-siftable on the left .
thank you .
so as you can see , my excitement is to develop new mensch-computer-schnittstellen that can fit better to how our brains and bodies work .
and today i had time to show you a part of this new design-welt and some of the possibilities of what we &apos;re working on in our lab .
the thought i want to give you with the way , is that we are at the threshold of this new generation of werzeugen to interacting with digital media , which is the information that we need to bring information into our world that we need to have .
thank you .
i &apos;m delighted to talk about all of them .
yes , good day .
i &apos;m excited that i &apos;m there .
yeah , so what &apos;s supposed to be ?
i have to get a little bit of a little bit of a little bit , and that &apos;s just about modern molecular biology .
i study molecular biology , and i &apos;ve been doing this for a couple of years ago , and i started , because i just wanted to know and just to know , and it also wanted to make it even more of what i learned in the study of theory .
so that was my primary motivation .
so it was a curiosity , and i wanted to get closer to the matter , so .
and i think that the molecular molecular in general now , now , generally , speaking , is the biotechnology , everything that you count , synthetic biology , and so on .
extremely important , now , extremely important , is a lot more important , much more important will be more important in the future .
there &apos;s so umstrittene things like this whole gentechnisch of the plants to the äckern .
there are craig venter in the u.s.a that try to make biofuel , so it &apos;s going to algae with algae .
and then there &apos;s also things that are totally in the everyday life , which is really not aware of most people , for example , for example that allow us to wash vierzig , also , gentechnisch enzyme enzymes .
and the list can continue on the past .
and so , from the interest of this , this technology , i just kept on the way further .
so what is the case now ?
most people know most of the people who know this from the softwarebereich .
computers hacken , and then it will always become the media , yes , the hackers break somewhere into a and stealing data and so forth .
so , it &apos;s kind of a really sad for the hackerszene , because it &apos;s not what it &apos;s really true , what actually , really , what it actually started , and what &apos;s really behind it .
and that &apos;s the software-hacker , in the &apos; 70s , achtzigerjahren with computerbasteln , and it &apos;s also created the internet .
and it &apos;s about a playful , creative , original way to solve a problem .
and the problem , it &apos;s not just a technical problem , it can also be a social problem , it can also be a zugangsproblem problem , which can simplify things like things , so any problemstellung , a question , and how can you do that better or how you can do .
and it was just like to have software , but there &apos;s also in the elektronikbereich , there &apos;s also a whole bastlerszene that make all kinds of different kinds of things .
and now , in fact , in some ways , i want to take this metaphor , which is a informationswissenschaft , because the d.n.a code is a abstract code , which is , it &apos;s not quite the same as computers because it &apos;s dynamic , so it &apos;s real matter , so it &apos;s real matter , and not just cyber .
but it &apos;s also a code , and you can also code , and you can also hacken it , so , and that &apos;s what i found incredibly fascinating , and i just wanted to get a lot deeper into it .
it actually took a really zweitausend , really zweitausend , these networks .
there &apos;s a hackteria dot , which is originally from switzerland , which is with europe and with cooperation in india , but i have members of being members of active people everywhere around the world .
this is a more artistic orientation , so there &apos;s a lot of artists and philosophers and working with scientists in working with these technologies , and to ask questions about questions and process creative , and there &apos;s museumsausstellungen , and yes , everything .
but it &apos;s always about how such a lockeren access to find such a kind of spielerischen to have so much .
and then there &apos;s do-it-yourself-bio dot , d.i.y.bio .
this is from the u.s.a network , which is actually a kind of a kind of public where you can go and talk online .
they &apos;re a little bit of technical , and also a bit of a businessmäßiger , and then they &apos;re going to ask , yes , angewandte questions .
and based on these networks that have been the popular popular has , it &apos;s going to have evolved a scene that i want to just want to do .
here in the picture on the left , you see biocurious , which is a hackerspace , so basically a kind of school , such a school school , a nonprofit group of facility where everybody can get .
kids , old , all kinds of people go to just that , they just auseinanderzusetzen , they set up a lab and look at what is when they &apos;re doing that .
and down on the left there is a group in indonesia , house-of-natural-fibers , which is , you know , there &apos;s a pretty long time .
it &apos;s more than these other two networks .
and also , in such an artistic aspect of biological materials , and , yes , also , also , elektronikbasteleien , and combine it in a pretty abgefahre way .
a group of ankara that i met a while ago , that &apos;s a studentengruppe , who would like to give the public more vermitteln what they learn in college , and they &apos;ve done so much so on straßenfesten small actions and try to explain what &apos;s d.n.a .
and i have the top in the top of the other picture , in copenhagen in copenhagen in the medical museum in kombination with an exhibition .
and this is , yes , that &apos;s the most young people , but the only thing that really all the united , this fascination is the fascination of technology .
and what you can do with that , and you can also help with the society of the society and ask them , like , okay , what do you know what you want to do , you have interest to bring it to you ?
so , o.k , to hacken biology , you need to be kind of material .
you have to have biological materials , and you need tools , and that &apos;s a laboratory .
and what you normally do is understand a lab that &apos;s kind of like abgefahrene machines , extremely expensive , extremely , distanziert , nur , ausgebildete , and so on .
and our approach was to say , &quot; well , &quot; that &apos;s not that you don &apos;t have to do it .
it &apos;s not necessary because every every single every single every single every single one has higher technology as most of the laborgeräte , that &apos;s really .
and , of this premise , it &apos;s the o premise of this premise , for example , brian degger in england , then , a minimallabor zusammenzustellen , then took a dampfdruckkochtopf , and yes , so suppenbrühe , and then she was gezüchtet bacteria .
so everyone , who &apos;s a soup that &apos;s already gelassen for too long , has been doing it .
i then tried this in my lab , a little bit of auszuweiten , and then i could buy on the second-hand-equipment on ebay and made a little bit of d.n.a analysis , so try to make a vaterschaftstest , so that &apos;s an vaterschaftstest fingerprinting , even at home .
now , this should be no joke at all .
and down here in the picture , you see the laboratory , in anführungsstrichen , so this is a zugestellte garage , which has been uni , and the university of laborgerümpel , which has uni , a group in paris , which is in the place and pretty well interesting things , and i &apos;m going to just a project to do a project .
and this is biocurious , who also mentioned hackerspace , that yes , such a kind of volkshochschule principle for molecular biology .
and yes , you know , it &apos;s relatively relatively heterogen , so that &apos;s where people are doing that alone , to go to large larger organizations , which are more formal in institutionalisierter form already .
but always the approach is that it &apos;s easy to be easy and accessible .
the first project we did as international group , as we were , we &apos;re bewusst ourselves , o.k , and we &apos;re now in here as real scene , and we &apos;re online , and we know that the people that are always and it and so .
and then i came from the do-it-yourself-bio org website of the founder , and i said , &quot; we &apos;ve got to see , we have to meet real time , too , and then we have two functions , &quot; in london , 10 times , and shortly in the u.s.a , in san francisco .
and then , it was about that , yes , who are , who are we , what do we want , what do we want to say ?
and what is our values and what are what is our purpose , our basis ?
and then we &apos;ve been able to work out a code-of-conduct .
it was quite intuitive , so everybody has just a kind of wishes , his own , and what &apos;s going to say it .
and there was , i think , a very good code .
and then we don &apos;t have it , but that &apos;s yes , i think , i think , has been pretty well of durchgesetzt , people are quite convinced by that .
and we actually tried to zurückzubringen this in the world &apos;s academic world , but there &apos;s somehow it somehow .
so i think we &apos;re from the biohackerszene , in the way , even more than the world &apos;s academic world .
well , what do we do so are now that we &apos;re doing this ?
a project i did with the hackteria-netzwerk in switzerland was that we wanted to make a so-called optical eye or optical pinzette .
this is when you &apos;re focusing a beam , you can put small particles in the air or in the liquid , and then move in the liquid , and then it &apos;s captured there , so it &apos;s like a traktorbeamstrahl like this .
and this really works , that &apos;s going to be in academic setting , and we &apos;d be thinking , well , we could get it , and then we could take a webcam , the aufgeschraubt , the lens , umgedreht a microscope , and it &apos;s going to vergrößert around the vergrößert .
that &apos;s what you see .
and then we have a d.v.d brenner auseinandergeschraubt , and the brenner brenner the laser , and then it &apos;s trying to focus on this camera .
and it didn &apos;t work out , but we &apos;ve learned a lot of that .
so another project that came from the french group of paris , that &apos;s what , it &apos;s pretty cool .
and he &apos;s so one , so he &apos;s so a hirnwellenmessgerät , so e.e.g , so he &apos;s engaged with neurobiologie , his nickname is sam neurohack .
he &apos;s built this one of these helmet , and in the museum of the museum , it &apos;s what happened .
and then , you could go in the room , you could sit down on this chair , you &apos;re wearing this helmet .
then their brain were measured , and the after they thought , or how they thought , then they &apos;re really addressed to different lights in the room .
it was a pretty schickes project .
another thing from the united states that has just been to do with this vaterschaftstestgeschichte , is the p.c.r , which is the polymerase-kettenreaktion , complicated word .
so it &apos;s about copy genes , to replicate , to replicate , d.n.a , to replicate , to make it visible .
so now , if i do this , the profiler of the scene , go to the collect , and then they do that , and then they do this method , and then they can say , o.k , that hair belongs to this person .
and the machines that make this kind of thing , they &apos;re pretty expensive to buy commercial , they &apos;re going to go to viertausend dollars .
and this is not in the hobbybereich , but it &apos;s a really cool technology that can also be a lot .
so this is just one application of many that you can do with it .
and they have been so two two bastler rangesetzt and said , &quot; o.k , &quot; we do that , and they have a lot of the cheap source , so free available hardware , elektroniksachen , and now that &apos;s where this device is zusammengebastelt , and now that are the most willing to the world &apos;s the most dangerous anbieter of these devices .
i think , sort of , like , six dollars , or something like that .
but anyway , it &apos;s still not cheap , but it &apos;s definitely in a frame where it &apos;s going to be very available .
so it &apos;s been a very gelungener hack .
a project i started to have recently started building a gene-gun .
gene-gun , yes , like this kind of luftdruckpistole , the shooting of about this way , two centimeters or so .
you put d.n.a on goldpartikel , and then you put them into these luftdruckpistole , and then i took them to zwiebeln , and then they brought it to the light .
so the device that you see there is not that it works .
but this is my prototype , which has been pretty abgefahren , so on a branch , this one , put it on , electronics on it , and put it on the pressure , and it was the pressure , but it was too tall , the thing had broken .
and then i took a sahnespender and connected it to this .
a sahnespender , if you make the full of water , you have enough pressure , so i think vierzig or sechtzig bar like it .
and then you can accelerate the particles up to the particles , and then they go in the zwiebel .
and the commercial device costs about fünfzehntausend or a fünfzehntausend or something , sahnespender to the 50 .
so it &apos;s not the same efficiency , but it &apos;s basically feasible .
so , this is the moment that the kernanliegen of the scene is now to increase this availability of technology and also increase the information and the verständlichkeit , that more people can be engaged .
because , as i said , it &apos;s an extremely important technology , and most people have relatively little idea of that and also no chance to make it really good .
because , if you &apos;re just reading about it , from sekundärliteratur , that &apos;s not the same as if you &apos;ve done it yourself or seen it yourself .
and i think technology will always be more important in our modern societies .
and if you can also make a good choice for society , you want to be able to make a society and want to be able to join , you need access to knowledge and technology .
and you have to do it too , and understand it to understand it .
and then this is the firmiert of open open knowledge and citizen science .
so , you can be versetzt as citizens to be able to get through these scientific technologies .
and this is the kernanliegen from the biohackern .
these are the people who are at least officially on the website , d.i.y.bio-dot-org website .
this is a relatively remarkable number of people worldwide .
and interesting is also that they are in asia asia .
this is i think that there are fewer people , when actually exist .
so i know some of the people who don &apos;t have been .
and these are just the biohacker , the individual people .
and in part , these hackerspaces , so these places put together there .
and that &apos;s actually the beginning .
as i said , zweitausendacht has been started .
and so hackerspaces , the computerhackerspaces , because the c-base in berlin was the first , neunzehnhundertfünfundneunzig .
and this is now a huge network of very good , yes , infrastrukturzentren , who are represented all over the world .
and we hope , of course , that we would have to spread something like that , and then also connected to similar , so that can also be involved in the other day .
and i would invite everyone to be concerned with it , and try to try and try out .
now , it &apos;s not that simple , but it &apos;s not impossible if you have enough curiosity and enough energy , then you get there .
thank you for listening .
that &apos;s it .
yeah , hi .
how do we work ?
this is a question that i &apos;m very moving as a designer , but also in the area in the forschungsbereich usability and user to all sorts of things .
there &apos;s how you &apos;ve met people in interactive media so they can use this interactive media and they create an equal experience .
and i think that the interactive media in us are archaische , cognitive models , so paradigm that have been einprogrammiert in our biological memory , very long time , and that we can also be able to create the way through interactive media .
and this is very amazing because you actually believe that these hochtechnologie , which you &apos;ve met you that you &apos;re actually going to get in the future , but actually , the future is in the future of our archaischen roots .
what are actually archaische models ?
i &apos;ve got four stichworte and i want to explain that to briefly .
so , to archaischen cognitive models , and that is the models we have in the vorindustriellen times .
to this archaischen models , we &apos;ve heard that we have a prinzipiell ratio to virtualität .
that sounds , in principle , that sounds unusual .
i &apos;m going to take a second to this , and i &apos;ll prove you through trial that you have a natural relationship to virtualität .
the second thing is that we &apos;ve been able to do this for the very archaischen of these archaischen models , really , very , very bildlich , even though we use a kodifizierte language .
and the third area that explains itself .
we all know that the interactive media is a definition of definition , which is the verneinung of the linearität , and what we &apos;re saying is , of course , that we feel the linearität today .
the fourth point is that the story of the history is for us .
now , what about the virtualität that is actually the most natural thing in the world .
i &apos;d like to prove you to prove that .
how many doors have the house in which they live ?
and we can &apos;t answer it immediately , but it will happen , and it &apos;s happening at the moment .
they go through this house in the spirit , in demn , and look at how many doors there are .
and that &apos;s what they &apos;re doing .
they &apos;re virtualisieren reality , and they &apos;re completely without computers .
fantastic , right ?
and we &apos;re struggling for example , for example , to show the virtual reality in our v.r.-labor , and we can actually do that all the time .
and these assets , the virtual vermögen , they have the virtual reality that have people in the vorindustriellen times , they had nothing to do .
they didn &apos;t have books .
or they didn &apos;t have no fotolitografie .
they didn &apos;t have a mass media .
the only thing that had had was her head .
and in that head , the memory was .
in this head , knowledge has been abgerufen and using these virtual images , the imagination , was also passed on knowledge .
and so it &apos;s also so strong in us that we can handle the virtualität .
and the interesting thing is , if i can make a little trip .
yes , that &apos;s going .
and what &apos;s interesting about this is that , at that time , the human being used to be medienproduzent and medium itself .
now , if you think about a piece of bits .
what are media today ?
then you &apos;ll notice that there &apos;s been a change .
but i &apos;ll get to talk about that .
the most important tool of the informationsvermittlung has been the stories of history .
schamanen , priest , so-called wissenswächter , were extra to help you preserve knowledge .
and also today we &apos;re also on today , very strong to stories .
the author of the book of the storytelling animal , jonathan gottschall , we still zufolge verbingen hours with the rezeption of stories every year .
this means for a child that &apos;s been able to reach the most of his life that most of his life has spent the most of his life with the rezeption .
now we think our love for stories depends on that we were sitting on the lap of our parents .
no , no , gefehlt .
that goes back to a lot of time , in the cultures of the vorindustriellen .
but for me , in the realm of interactive media , as a particularly impressive , we have a verankert in our biological memory , the ability to think of it .
i brought you one example from the north american tribe of the nootka-indianer tribe .
and life lived in the küstenregion of british columbia .
and as you can see , this is a very inselreiches area , and you had to be able to walk through an island to island to get food .
and they did this with what called lead-landkarten .
you may know that , even though , if you &apos;re interested in this , you &apos;re interested in the australian .
they have similar principles .
they don &apos;t have lead-landkarten , but they used to use the same gennanten songlines .
and what &apos;s interesting about this is that the navigation and the topographie of regions could be mapped about songs .
in which the language was untergeordnet , it was a rang .
that means you &apos;re navigierte about sound and rhythm .
and these sounds , and this rhythm , the geology , the surface of a region , and it also enables that to defragmentieren these songs and put them in the left and to move back to the right and back to the back .
why don &apos;t we sing anymore to come from above a to b ?
anyway , not to navigate .
what &apos;s happening in this ?
it &apos;s what happens that &apos;s the gennante .
we &apos;ve been moving around in this called vogt-zeitalter .
it &apos;s what &apos;s happening , and it &apos;s happened the book , and it &apos;s happened to be the fotolitografie .
and that &apos;s what happens is that we have the responsibility for our memories and the own production of our individual memories , on external media .
and on the book , and it &apos;s on the picture .
so , unfortunately , we have god &apos;s a bit of verlernt god .
and so , in fact , it &apos;s alien to be alien to us from us , and it &apos;s nothing more to us with reality .
bruce brown , a famous designforscher at the brighton-university , is so far to say that this mass media , he &apos;s the book , and the picture , not the tv , the internet and so on , what we call media mass today is that this mass of mass media and our ability to erudiert our ability to virtualisieren .
let &apos;s make a small zwischenbilanz .
from the vogt-zeitalter to the machine .
what does influence on our thinking and our erinnerungsvermögen ?
then the verblassenden of the vorindustriellen cultures .
and they &apos;re going to be more überschrieben over the course of the centuries , and more überschrieben through the forces of the maschinenzeitalters .
that means instead of remembering us , we have a standardisierte , conventional patterns of memories that we can hang to our personal memories .
we don &apos;t produce even more .
we have an abstract language , we have an abstract language .
we don &apos;t think about it anymore in images anymore in images , but we kodifizieren them our language .
we &apos;ve used to have a lot of time to happen in linear .
and we &apos;ve accepted the linearität as law , and there are only exceptions , like , for example , the non-linearität .
what &apos;s left us is the storytelling .
still , we are very , very verhaftet , as a informationsvermittlung , very stark .
the question is , what is going to happen ?
we had the vogt -zeitalter , we had the machine , and we &apos;re going to go to this as called cyber-zeitalter .
this sounds very spacig , and sounds like a lot like the fiction fiction , i know .
but these concepts of the cyber-zeitalters , which bring us these possibilities back to our capabilities again .
it &apos;s about virtualität , it &apos;s about non-linearität , it &apos;s about storytelling .
i want to give this a little bit of a little bit .
there are technical concepts like the augmented reality , which is the distributed reality .
so if you look at google glasses , then this is a concept that allows us to combine the virtual world with the real world , which is the affinität that we use to virtualisierung , which is the virtual response to the virtualisierung , which is a virtuelle , to be angesprochen .
another example is this so-called virtual reality .
so , of course , that &apos;s what i think about my talk , i think , in the context of my talk , we move to physical , virtual worlds , to the model of the holodecks .
and other example , other example , the ambienten , smart systems .
these are spaces that are responding to people .
all this takes the ability to accept our ability to accept a real habitat of the real habitat .
i graduated from , and i hope the video works , a very , very beautiful project , this is the bachelorarbeit of michael burk , ann-kathrin krenz , joris klause and jan-moritz müller .
and the two letzteren are here today .
maybe you can stand up for a long time , so you can &apos;t talk to the two of the project .
and this project i &apos;ve brought as a example of what &apos;s been going to be done in this archaischen cognitive models .
all of the game is a game , i have to say that .
which of course , of course , extremely entgegenkommt , and it &apos;s a computer game .
and if i &apos;m going to say , you have very likely to have eyes that people have people in some konsolen herumhappeln , or they &apos;re playing with some kind of konsole in their hands .
anyway , they &apos;re doing that in the inside .
this is a game for outside .
and that &apos;s specifically , to think that i found the outside world , so i found the real world again .
and this game is connecting the virtual world , so the data is the datenraum that we produce , with the real world .
i apologize for me to be abkürzen .
you can &apos;t explain that much better , there &apos;s more than that much more than that .
and that &apos;s why i &apos;m going to find a city by looking at which places in positive or negative .
and so i get from the city a very different sight , a very different impression , which is i see negative and positive zones of a city and erhalte , so in this way , a very different virtual map of a very real city .
and we can now see that .
ah , what you can see here , sorry , is a little explanation of what you &apos;re going to see .
of course , this virtual world is in the walls of our cities , right now .
and with a kind of a light , we can make these virtual worlds .
so , i &apos;d like to summarize my talk , and in the sense that the characteristics and the skills that we &apos;ve acquired from the vogt -zeitalter and the ability that we have so much verschütt us , in the age of the machine that we can be aktiviert on the other way that so-called cyber -zeitalters , and that we can &apos;t be aktiviert on this way ,
thank you .
yeah , i &apos;m very excited to be here .
i &apos;ve been asked to see if this bag is a sprechender , and i &apos;m going to talk .
it won &apos;t make it .
i &apos;m going to get a second of auflösen , which is in there .
but i don &apos;t even make it more curious .
yes , kids are naturally curious about , or should be curious , designers .
i &apos;m a designer of house , so i &apos;m also , of course , with the subject of curiosity , and how is the curiosity that curiosity also think , and why we might also lose curiosity and must be neu and so forth .
this is a whole bunch of things that you &apos;re doing next to your actual dasein .
when professors are curious , they will be a lot of so forschungssemester .
and this is what i had in the last half a year .
a forschungssemester forschungssemester , for a very natural user interface interface .
now you &apos;re going to ask yourself why , all of the designers , all of the designers are going to start with this natural , archaischen communication of communication , and to engage with the other way and so on .
and i just keep one of these little devices , because things are always more intuitive , always more natural , and there &apos;s a muss , and there &apos;s a muss , which is actually for us , of course , of course , what is benutzungsfreundlich or intuitive .
and before the background , i have a natural user interface design design , so the next generation of the treatment of human computers in the relationship of being a human being on the relationship of the human being , like the computer , from the computer , are changing by the computer to digital assistant .
so i &apos;ve been doing it , when is , of course , of course , of course .
maybe again , you have to look back .
why does this happen ?
so if we look at the development of our society , we &apos;re going to see it , we &apos;re now moving from the third to the fourth gesellschaftsgeneration or gesellschaftsform .
so , from modern to the computergesellschaft .
every society is shaped by a primärmedium .
at the beginning , the stammesgesellschaft stammesgesellschaft through the language .
and that means that you &apos;ve been talking to a common language , you could communicate with each other , and you could put into the same cave or in other areas , or dörfer cities , and has created so nen stammesgesellschaft .
the primärmedium was the language , something very natural , something very living .
you also have to learn , so no one can talk about nature , but we &apos;re learning to sukzessive it and we &apos;re naturally .
and then this was going to be abgelöst through the ancient society , and the first form of abstraction .
this was a riesen-aufschrei , because of course , of course , the living language began to manifestieren into form of writing , which is what fluid and alive is , and i start to start it in stone and i &apos;m going to do it .
the after i meißel and when i meißel , it &apos;s obviously a very different coverage than when it &apos;s a alive to be alive .
but sukzessive then moved to the script as a primärmedium , and it was einzug .
then the next generation came in today , where we actually live today .
this is just a druck and print script with gutenberg and others .
at the time , it was the same as a affront , where the adel , klerus and others have said , are you really insane , when the people start to read , then the afterwards will be , and that &apos;s completely fatal .
and now we &apos;re coming into the next generation , and the exciting is , so a generationswechsel is just a few hundred years , and we &apos;re at the moment in this phänomenalen period that we can be involved .
and of course , that &apos;s really confused by us , because we see the new media , social media , facebook and so on .
with total transparency , what the new thinking is , what &apos;s the old thinking , what &apos;s happening to the old thinking , don &apos;t say that in the lasagne pferdefleisch , and no beef is more or other phenomena , which is i want to just just vertuschen it , and i want to kundtun it .
and these two worlds just open up and neues and old thinking .
the exciting thing is , if you look at this , these new society , these computergesellschaft , entlehnt very many mechanisms , principles and archaischer paradigm from the stammesgesellschaft .
now , not more on the local level , but on global level .
we &apos;ve understood that the weather is global .
that the subject of ecology is a global global .
not if i think local ökologisch , and the neighbor thinks less green , it doesn &apos;t work anymore .
this is , from local village , in a global village , a global village has become a global village , of course , of course , the intuitive , but also the total transparency .
as you knew in the village , who had what to whom and when , this is what happens to these erweiterung of our self through these mobile endgeräte on a global level .
it &apos;s that we know , we know global anhäufen , and we always get more and better .
as it used to happen to the village before the village .
so , i just looked at the background , which is actually what it means , because , of course , what &apos;s going on for us , which is , of course , what we might also have , but also , what does it make sense ?
because they &apos;re often people , they can &apos;t make it benutzungsfreundlich so that everybody can handle it .
so you have to deal with it , which is , and not just simply , just change it , it &apos;s different , but it &apos;s going to be better .
and of course , of course , of course , it &apos;s a little bit of intuitive , and how can i make a designer and make it so much for the things that you &apos;re like , you know , you know , the very intuitive , you know , that &apos;s how intuitive are , because then you &apos;re fun and just to use .
you &apos;re going to be doing it , even during the degree , with the subject of perception and the wahrnehmungspsychologie .
and that &apos;s , of course , where you start and look and say , okay , now i &apos;m going to look inside the inside of the inner self .
and what about it , because it &apos;s actually in there ?
so how do we work when we &apos;re going to get there ?
and what means , of course , of course , intuitive and how do our channels of perception , and how does the cognitive work work ?
because steve jobs used to say , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you &apos;d like to take you to dig to understand it .
so you really have to look at the details when i want to make something benutzungsfreundlich or intuitive handhabbar , which is the core .
and there you see , you know , you know , you know , you have a seven senses , we &apos;ve only got five , and it &apos;s actually seven of us , which is certainly going to be the next , achte meaning , and also as an erweiterung of our own self .
and just how process process information , how do we take information ?
in fact , what &apos;s information ?
information is every difference that makes a difference .
a lot of the word , you know , don &apos;t know what it really means .
but i have to understand at the core , when it gets information , when becomes information information , when will be information from information and information , so i know how to make things like i could do things like to be able to make or of course handhabbar .
and of course , as it does design , design influence influence .
we see this , when i make things , i can design them to be confusing to the right side , where i don &apos;t know , what &apos;s salt and pepper , or i can design it , like i &apos;m showing things .
so much natural , in a gefäß , but i &apos;m sort of looking at where &apos;s salt and pepper .
and if i tell someone i give up salt or pepper , then it &apos;s going to figure out the right , where is it in the right ?
and the left is just intuitive and intuitive with the left , and i hope that there &apos;s no sugar in it , and give the salt to a very long way .
but also our perception , as they can , as well .
for example , these perception in context .
the right circle looks bigger than the small one , even though it &apos;s not the case , but it &apos;s equal to the same , and yet , our perceptions , depending on what context we &apos;re doing .
anybody know what this is ?
come on the other .
pattern recognition should work .
there &apos;s it &apos;s been more like my glasses .
so it &apos;s the n .
a second circle starts to relate to respect or associate .
and then , if i stop a halboval , we don &apos;t even see a unit , which is , and yet we see a unit , and yet we see a unit , we don &apos;t see three parts , a circle , a circle , a different one .
it &apos;s called a gestaltgesetz or a little bit gestaltpsychologie that we also might affect us in the perception of perception .
so , for the designers , the most part of the time , the first part of the semester , the great gestaltgesetze .
gestaltgesetz of the nähe , gestaltgesetz , the continuity and so on .
and then you know , the third thing is already .
but it &apos;s an essential important part , if you want to design things that way you want to design things .
the next phenomenon , which is also very interesting , is the vision .
now , sounds very trivial , but it &apos;s very exciting to get closer to it .
so we have the eyes the front , and now you think , we &apos;re looking at the front of the front behind the back .
that &apos;s wrong .
you &apos;re looking at the back of the back .
because they &apos;re projiezieren a assumption , that you see something that you recognize , beispielweise circle .
that means we &apos;re not seeing our vision before we see it back back to the back of our seheapparat , to say , okay , okay .
i mean , i think , &quot; ne , &quot; you &apos;ve got what you want to see .
and then that &apos;s there , then that comes back again .
then it goes back , because the back of the front doesn &apos;t end up , and it &apos;s not saying , but now , you know , it &apos;s really going to look at you , and sure you can see if you see what you &apos;re seeing .
and then it goes back to the back , and then it &apos;s going to be really seen .
so , a very , very spannender process , like certain things , and what &apos;s going on for doing things like that .
i don &apos;t know who knows this picture .
and it &apos;s exactly what i described as a moment i described .
now , everyone is trying to see something .
i don &apos;t know who can see what .
does anybody see a little bit ?
a dalmatiner , right .
once i saw that , that there &apos;s a dalmatiner in there , you know .
they will never forget that , because i &apos;m showing you where the dalmatiner is .
now , you see the dalmatiner .
and further , now you see it .
so , i actually verdorben them to dahingehend that they don &apos;t recognize any patterns , but i &apos;ve got them konditioniert over time in a very short time , and i can see this dog in this verworrenen image .
and this is the projection of the brain , rückkopplung .
now i know , and i &apos;m now going to get to the front that i see the dalmatiner .
i see the dalmatiner .
so , quite exciting processes that then , you know , yes , you &apos;re actually not really , but here you just go in this rosanen crowd .
anybody know what three seconds ?
long , yeah .
that &apos;s our present .
so , it &apos;s also interesting to know as designers .
if i know , i know , a little bit of a takes of a etwas to say , i &apos;m going to go out of the present and i can bridge a very good wartezeiten , which i &apos;m doing by three seconds .
it &apos;s got to process the present .
and so it goes into the past , and so i can bridge a very elegant wartezeiten for the computer , if i know this phenomenon .
what is going to take a minute ?
yes , milliseconds .
also an interesting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the time you fall in love .
that means , you know , if you know that now , you &apos;re looking at what you &apos;re looking for for a long time , because i don &apos;t have any gewähr for what can happen to you .
and sechzehn milliseconds , also an interesting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the time of most perceptions that we have .
that means that first impression is going to happen in a fast fast speed , how we perceive things .
and as we can see things that we &apos;re looking at , and how we &apos;re going to protect ourselves against our environment so we can think about it .
of course , the creator of the whole movement is not just about perceptions and neural verarbeitungen , but of course , of course , with the subject of mensch-objekt-beziehung .
so , like a human being , a human being goes through a certain way .
there &apos;s a produktsprachlich device that &apos;s practical functions , so it &apos;s so formale to be so formale .
there are anzeichen-funktionen , where i know exactly where i have to grab .
but there are also symbolic functions , why is someone for such a little täschchen , where , anyway , is little was , so horrende money on money , even though it &apos;s not so practical ?
we &apos;re more on the symbolischen , on the bedeutungsebene , which we are also , of course , of course .
back to my actual subject of natural interface and the subject , of course , of course , is usability .
and usability always means i can achieve a very small goal , or how can a users can achieve the most effective in a given nutzungskontext , efficient and zufriedenstellend .
that &apos;s what it &apos;s like the norm .
how can i make something that i can do ?
i can use that directly or i need to do it , or i need to use an active training for that .
and less usable or benutzungsfreundlich .
that i just make it different and make it more beautiful , doesn &apos;t mean it &apos;s better .
you have to understand that .
and then , in part , the software that we &apos;ve seen , you know , you can also understand why neunundneunzig percent of our current today &apos;s software , not intuitive , isn &apos;t intuitiv , or not to anhieb , that i-pad in many areas or i-phone , although it &apos;s a much more intuitive than classical software .
in this case , intuitive benutzbarkeit is not only since apple &apos;s elementarer wirtschaftsfaktor , nen elementarer , if i want to make technology that i want to use to use the people .
why ?
because in the rule , we usually the regel of this new type of nutzbarkeit , so the natural user is ínterfaces , for example , five times more than a level of average on our goal .
you have to imagine that if you do something of the classical softrware , five hours and this new kind of natural software just has one hour .
it doesn &apos;t mean that you can probably go home four hours a bit more , but your own personal or anyone will have to notice about how he &apos;s going to deal with the four hours .
but i want to say that , of course , it &apos;s a entsprechende leistungssteigerung , of course .
and then , if we &apos;re going to take the area in the field of software , this is the first command line interface that was very abstract , where you have months to deal with these systems .
and then the next thing that came out with a nem model or mental model like the software , they &apos;ve worked , you know , you have an idea of something , the metaphor , the metaphor of a desktop to make the computer .
so , not as zeros and ones or kryptische code , but a metaphor .
this has been doing a lot of benutzungsfreundlicher , but it &apos;s also much better .
the next generation of graphischen benutzungsoberflächen is already working a lot more with behavior .
so i &apos;m going to make a lot more of a lot more of what the behavior looks like .
this is also a paradigm shift .
i think that this is always the look at the end of success , the usability is going to be a app .
and then , if i can take a step into this kind of natural user interface , i can talk about a speech , by a language , by the same time , by the gesture of a mouse and cursor , i need to control things , i &apos;m still faster and more than i &apos;m going to do .
but that leads me to the point , when , when are the things that are actually more intuitive ?
if you &apos;re more intuitive , and then i have to get back to my little friend here and see , what &apos;s that &apos;s from the point of view , when is it now that something that &apos;s really intuitive ?
and that &apos;s for us , for us , people are always intuitive , when i think about it little bit about it .
so apparently he doesn &apos;t want to think , but it &apos;s just a little bit of it .
the less i think about it , the more intuitive it is .
and what does this mean for designers ?
so that means that if we look at that we can transmit existing handlungsmodelle of one on something different , for example , the metaphor , then i can use it as a designer .
this is , i can just take an intuitive , human handlungsmodell onto a software and make the software a lot more benutzungsfreundlicher .
and of course , the question is , what is actually the intuitivste of us that &apos;s actually the intuitivste of us , and now i &apos;ve been telling it .
this is what we call the osit-modell .
it &apos;s all using each of us and osit is an akronym and it &apos;s orientieren , selektieren , informieren , transagieren .
and that &apos;s all of you all of you , but it &apos;s doing it , and it &apos;s unconscious , or it &apos;s sort of intuitive , or some other people in part .
the model is already going to be ausprägt in the womb , and it &apos;s interkulturell , so it works in young and old , and it &apos;s used by us all the time without the most people that are there in the world .
osit osit will be about 50 to siebzigtausend times the one of us , so in sleep , you &apos;ve found that it &apos;s going to be less often than a day .
i can now take this mental mental handlungsmodell , selektieren , informieren , transagieren , übertragen to a interaktionssystem .
and through this kind of transmission , like the metaphor of the desktops , now , no longer a metaphor of a physical object , but a metaphor of a handlungsmusters , a handlungsprinzips .
and this is on a higher grail of the benutzungsfreundlichkeit as the transmission of a classic metaphor , which is the desktops .
and if i &apos;m going to take this now , for example , in my head of übersicht , selektieren , i &apos;m going to get out of the case , it &apos;s big up to me , i can look at it in the details , and yes , transagieren , i can send it somewhere anywhere or shop and shop and so forth .
then i can transmit all the way .
i &apos;m trying to do this by a beispiels .
and i had a cake that i had to eat .
and i &apos;m going to use it , i &apos;m now , to sort of , i &apos;m going to use this object , again , rauszoomen .
i &apos;ll get the whole track of this , and i can filter this and say , just for me , just for example , just for a little bit .
and i have an interface that &apos;s more intuitive and much more natural .
because i can grab things like the bits of the bits , and it can come to me , is essential to me , is a lot more natural than when about hierarchisch organized websites or other mechanisms for these things to be available .
imagination is more powerful important knowledge , and with this one sentence , i &apos;d like to close to this one , a and another one , and again , designers have to think differently , to come to new solutions , and in that sense , i &apos;m quite a very herzlich for your attention and ask .
i want to help you help you help you a very specific aspect of curiosity .
the first thing that you &apos;re going to be big as a child is that you &apos;re going to take care of what you &apos;re doing , yes ? and depending on whether your parents have allowed you to play more or less in the game and to move , the more , of course , your curiosity will be geweckt .
and the curiosity doesn &apos;t learn .
so that &apos;s why they &apos;re all about , and curious , in fact , people who have a property that you can &apos;t learn .
i &apos;m now about this , which is basically all of the umweltdiskussion , weltuntergang , 40 years of club-of-rome , in quality of it .
and there &apos;s a central point here .
and it depends on phosphorus .
give pee a chance .
every day they give you to give them about two grams of phosphorus , and every single day they need to add two grams of phosphorus .
otherwise they can &apos;t have teeth .
they can &apos;t store energy .
you can &apos;t have a bone .
we could just as a amorphe mollusken around the weltmeere .
if we don &apos;t take phosphorus and make it .
but it &apos;s amazing , we &apos;re dealing with something that &apos;s actually a beschäftigen , but not that it &apos;s .
because everyone talking about energy , but nobody talks about the phosphor-problem .
the phosphor-problem is much more critical .
we &apos;re dependent on two countries .
we have only phosphorus for two years , and already through the world &apos;s phosphor-bergbau , much more uranium in the environment than all of the atomanlagen are used .
in the last 20 years , fünfzehntausend tons of uranium are distributed in germany .
and we take all this .
it makes leukemia with children .
and we think we would protect the environment if we &apos;re a little bit less harmful .
so , for example , schütz the environment , driving less car .
schütz the environment , make less waste .
schütz the environment , verbrauche less energy .
it isn &apos;t protection .
this is like , if i would say , schütz your child , just three times five times .
that &apos;s just a little bit less destruction .
if we think about the wiege to the bahre , our entire planet will be used to be a friedhof or later .
so that &apos;s why we &apos;re thinking about the wiege to the wiege .
and the most important thing is to look at the ground , as a result .
it &apos;s saved over sechzig percent of the kohlenstoffs .
we &apos;re going to build corn and lose water between 11 and 30 tons of water per hectare , or on the square meter , auch .
that means we &apos;re losing about five times more than new times .
and we can actually look at the müllproblem .
and it &apos;s all packaging , or content .
in offenbach , for example , at the most hausmüll 20 percent of the müllmenge in the inzwischen .
and because we &apos;re older , the windeln will be larger .
that &apos;s all of them in the vorwindelphase .
yeah ?
one baby needs about six windeln .
we could reduce this , of course , about 10 percent , but what does it do ?
this is going to be ausgeglichen in china .
that &apos;s completely trivial .
so the question is , how do we go to this windeln ?
here , one of the proof of the evidence is that men are not pigs .
let me tell you .
because the phosphorus is made by pigs to be in the festen .
people are about the urine .
yeah .
so men can &apos;t be pigs .
because this is belegt , right ?
traditionally , we think in the umweltdiskussion , we &apos;re too many of the world .
and if you think of the people that if you feel the people who are there , if you say , that would be better , you don &apos;t have them to be there , you will be raffgierig and feindselig .
and so someone like al gore , one of our great heroes , there &apos;s nothing wichtigeres than to stabilize human populations .
in israel , you say , if you &apos;re a lifetime , you &apos;re going to be rettest the earth .
this is what the more you get more , the better .
yeah .
the first question is , is we really too much ?
if you look at the ants , the weight of the ants on earth , the ants weigh roughly four times more than we humans .
i could also take a termites to me , but in the united states , no one like termites , even though they &apos;re a vegetarian .
that means the ants weigh much more than we .
and because they &apos;re working on a lot of work than we , and because they live only three to six months , they &apos;re equivalent to their weight , in the energy use of 30 billion people .
that means we &apos;re not too many , we &apos;re too stupid , yes ?
and where you can see how far we are going away , what we really want to do , and how sad we are , that we &apos;re at all on earth , can you see that , for example , offenbach has a program to 20 , you might have to be here , yes ?
they can only be klimaneutral if they don &apos;t exist , right ?
the only chance .
you &apos;ve seen a tree tree once ?
yeah ?
one ?
that means , our whole intelligence means that we want to be dümmer as trees , right ?
yeah ?
no tree is kohlenstoffneutral .
luckily , not , yes ?
there &apos;s no überbevölkerungsproblem on trees .
there are still six billion trees in the u.s.
you &apos;ve heard about a little bit of trees from trees ?
that means all our intelligence means we want to be a trees .
and where you can see , even in something like demeter , strikteste bio- , doesn &apos;t allow our own stoffwechselprodukte to go back .
every year we lose this three million tons of phosphorus that really need to go back in the way .
and so we &apos;re too many .
just about this .
that &apos;s called us so guilty of the earth that we say , we &apos;re saying , no bio-landbau , no bioland , no nature-et-progrès , and all of them , they &apos;re all saying that our own exkremente go back .
is that not sad ?
so we &apos;re too many .
it &apos;s safe to be useful to be less harmful , which is ölverbrauch .
but where are we useful ?
we &apos;re trying to minimize our ecological footprint , but it &apos;s about having a big footprint that is useful .
we want to be good for society , we want to be good for the economy , but if it &apos;s about the environment , it &apos;s the highest , not being there , right ?
nullemissionen , yes ?
they can only have nullemissionen if they &apos;re not there .
even if you shoot yourself now , you would have emissions .
so you can &apos;t solve this .
we can do it differently .
we can bring our nutrients .
we &apos;re doing in brazil in brazil where we get nutrients .
and right now , we can bring back in this way , in agriculture .
we &apos;re doing this in china , for example , where we take the waste of it .
in china , a nachttopf is still honigtöpfchen , sort of , right ?
and in our western world , we were always too stupid to zurückzubringen our nutrients .
this is called the whole western zivilisationsgeschichte of what it &apos;s made by the city , and it &apos;s never been a zurückgegeben .
and so , the cities had to grow more and more because the farmers went into the cities and the cities would always have to get their nutrients away .
all of the western rich are always expanding , until they don &apos;t have done the infrastructure , and then they &apos;re implodiert .
yeah ?
in china , it was different .
you &apos;ve done bruchlos civilization over the fünftausend , because you were able to get the nutrients .
even today , if you invited to lunch , you &apos;re going to be expected to eat that it &apos;s long as you &apos;re going to go to the bathroom .
because it &apos;s unfreundlich to go to go and take the nutrients .
you have them to get them to lunch , not to the nährstoffdiebstahl .
that means you can see the internet , how to get the nutrients back .
so this is really nice if you do that , so agriculture , a biogas , on a hectare of fünftausend in favelas , in order to create a farmer of eintausendfünfhundert dollars and the plant is waiting for chickens and chickens and vegetables and vegetables and fish .
and the great thing about this is that the verbrechensrate in the favelas goes over to about the neunzig percent .
so we don &apos;t need to control the people to be less bad .
we can support them to be good .
of course , that &apos;s high-tech-landwirtschaft , but the facilities are carrying themselves .
the nebenprodukt is clean water .
and they &apos;re designed to design through design that a farmer can just make .
that means that the verbrechensraten go back .
and none of these facilities , we &apos;ve now built over hundertfünzig in the last 20 years , none of these facilities has ever been sabotiert .
you could just simply reinwerfen a liter of altöl , and then the anlage would be ruined .
not instead .
that means we don &apos;t need to control the people to be less bad .
we can support them to be good .
that means we need to zurückkriegen phosphorus .
and by the way , if you want to do what you want to do , you &apos;re going to write in germany , in germany , the best of all the treatment treatment is in frankfurt .
unfortunately , not in offenbach , but maybe you can help the frankfurtern .
because the frankfurter facility could be the best of phosphorus .
and it has to go back .
we &apos;re seeing that phosphorus is really critical .
and we see that it &apos;s really true .
we &apos;ve been using it for three years now .
the dutch government has explained , they will be the first country in the world , which phosphorus zurückgewinnt .
but we need to get that overall .
you know , there are two countries that control almost 70 percent of the world &apos;s disease in the world .
there &apos;s a bunch of waisenknaben .
these are sechsundzwanzig countries control 40 percent of the ölvorräte .
and the oil will be we can replace with other energy .
but the phosphorus is not going to replace .
that &apos;s why it &apos;s not about making the existing a little less bad , but it &apos;s about making something right .
and all of the first of all of things is to ask what the right thing is .
that means it &apos;s about efficiency , not about efficiency .
in holland , you understand that , of course , because in holland , the country is built on flowers .
yeah ?
imagine if your wife is sad if you &apos;re having a geärgert , and you &apos;re coming with 50 .
completely inefficient .
but it &apos;s really effective , yes ?
or take a lippenstift .
a woman in germany , about six , eating three komma of the same in their lifetime .
that &apos;s what .
this is not just a science isn &apos;t right because we don &apos;t know how much weggeküsst is going to do it .
but a lippenstift , even in these lighting , i can tell you , is completely inefficient , but it &apos;s really effective , yes ?
a whole thing that is beautiful in life is not efficient .
that &apos;s not resource efficiency , but efficiency .
to ask , what is the right ?
not to burn the klärschlamm , and it &apos;s not going to be a little bit better and abzulagern it and to lose it in the verbrennungsanlage of the whole materials for cycle , but first of asking , how do you make the cycle ?
you can get a mozart .
yeah ?
when i put them out for dinner and say , yes , there &apos;s a pill with offenbach-geschmack and a glass of water .
wonderful , ne ?
that &apos;s efficient .
all of the things that are beautiful in life is not efficient .
if you fall in love with someone , efficient ?
yeah ?
that means everything that matters in life is not to avoid reduce .
all the umweltdiskussion .
we tell people , oh , you don &apos;t have green green .
no , the throw away is right now , right ?
every place where you &apos;re wegwirft , you , yes , you can get back to lebensmöglichkeiten .
but the wrong things .
if you put the wrong things , you have a müllproblem .
in the way we think of north .
there is any footprint there .
if you walk , yes , every footprint , you zerstört the floor .
because the floor is going to die off the ground , and the wind and the water is water away .
but if you &apos;re in italy , everybody is an footprint that the water remains longer in the meadow .
so , it &apos;s about creating a huge footprint , which is going to be a feuchtgebiet .
not schuldmanagement .
we &apos;re in germany .
yeah ?
but if i ask you , how do you go to your wife ?
what do they say ?
sustainable .
then i say , herzliches beileid , yes ?
that &apos;s just the minimum .
so not save , avoid .
every waste is nährstoff .
and it &apos;s a lust , if you look in italy , like people in the high bow , i don &apos;t know , it &apos;s a ne coladose from the car .
because you know , it &apos;s a lustvoller process .
it &apos;s a ne form , yes ?
you can show , i was there .
but with the right design , please .
we have developed a eiscremeverpackung , which is at room temperature , it &apos;s a liquid .
they can get them to get where they go .
in two hours , they &apos;re building it all over the place .
and it contains seeds of rare plants , so that they &apos;re contributing to biodiversity and value it through the wegwerfen .
that means we &apos;re useful , not less harmful .
so there are two cycles .
not all of course , of course , is to be kompostierbar .
a television or a washing machine , which is just using them .
just the things , the verschleißen , like schuhsolen , like bremsbeläge , like autoreifen , they need to be that they &apos;re going to go into biological systems .
the things that are used only are going to technical systems .
but today we &apos;re talking about biological systems .
yeah ?
for example , the sneaker , yes ?
it &apos;s not direct ads , and it &apos;s not to se the company by se , but for that , you know , that you &apos;re going to help you to make these products successful .
because we don &apos;t make things free .
yeah ?
so , if i &apos;m going to eat them to eat and say that , free , it &apos;s helping you nothing .
no , we &apos;re stuck in the way .
positive .
so not like detox .
not in the giftiges .
it &apos;s all that &apos;s in it &apos;s useful .
these are the first shoes they can hinlegen from the fußgängerampel and the rubber in biological cycles , right ?
all of it is kompostierbar .
and if it &apos;s us , we can &apos;t work for adidas , for nike , for hennes and mauritz and all the industry industry .
and this is half of all the world &apos;s most abwasserprobleme worldwide that are being created by the industry industry .
and so you help them ask people to do that .
hey , puma , do you really really seriously ?
because they have changed twice the vorstandsvorsitzenden .
and i &apos;m not sure you really dabeibleiben it .
so , help me a little bit of that .
but it &apos;s going .
yeah .
this is what &apos;s been shown .
that &apos;s going .
we can do things so that if you &apos;re verschleißen , if you &apos;re kaputtgehen , you can go into biological cycles .
technical cycles is the same .
there &apos;s a direct rücknamesystem .
this is the first ecological , actually , that &apos;s made for this to go back in the cycle .
so , that , in every store , you can do things .
if you come to that , right ?
do you remember the windel ?
when the moment is the waste .
all this is windeln around , almost like .
in the countries where people get to money .
but the front front is the deponien , but also in the landscape , right ?
if we change the plastics , so that it can go into biological systems , if we change the wasserspeicher , the inside that they can back back in zellulosebasis , then they can plant a baby in israel or in tunisia .
yeah ?
and just by the way you take these windel , you zerkleinern , sterilisieren and the powder to plant trees .
so the baby is kohlenstoffpositiv for the whole life , from beginning .
so we don &apos;t need to be klimaneutral , we can be klimapositiv .
it &apos;s sort of a beneficial poop .
yes , in a way .
yeah ?
we can do that .
we can reinvent everything else .
i started a institute .
now there &apos;s a lot of people working with , and they can be engaged in all of them .
there &apos;s an extra club to get out of the world , where everybody can be involved .
so no longer save , verzichten , avoid , not schuldmanagement , no schuldmanagement , but smart waste .
do you make this curious ?
thank you .
the work of the interpreten .
music as a language .
in the description of my speech , i wrote that i was a interpretin , i think as a übersetzerin , as a übersetzerin , in english , right now .
interpreten are a translator &apos;s english book in music music .
that , as a translator , you can &apos;t hear word text into a different language , but also , the deeper sense of words and wortzusammenhang must understand so it makes a good translation , everybody who has to do with fremdsprachen .
for the germans to translate english , you can require more knowledge , &quot; zumal , &quot; it &apos;s when you &apos;re poetry or poetry .
but it &apos;s a strange thing to be , but for laien , what we do with our musiksprache .
as a interpretin of a musikstückes , i only have the written grades .
you &apos;re sure that the composer in the notes did exactly everything that he &apos;s dreamed of .
in reality , the grades are very vague and ungenau .
these grades are about exactly just exactly the same , like a verbale , if very seemingly penibelst , a landscape of a landscape .
because in this verbalen , the smell of flowers doesn &apos;t smell , the degree of the grüns just to erahnen the säuseln of the windes doesn &apos;t feel .
this means , the interpret has to be these ungenauen of the notensprache in a different way , which is a hörbare , concrete , nonverbale musiksprache .
today i want to share this thing i think is musical , so interpretiere , even in a language of language .
so basically , a translation of translation .
so i prefer to do it all more than a german , because if i had to translate it into english , it would be equivalent to translation into translation of translation of translation .
so , the music works for me as much as spoken language .
the notierten grades have the function of the letters of a script .
so it &apos;s not going to be able to learn just the grades , and they &apos;re doing it to put the keys on the piano or to press the right place on a violinsaite .
and that &apos;s just the letters you &apos;ve learned .
the point of the letters is that you can only see if you can do the language .
so , for the learning process , you need to be at least as long as spoken language .
and then there &apos;s also a abstufungen , whether you learn it for the hausgebrauch , only passive passive , or you can also talk to action , to the musical speaker .
the work of the interpreten starts to be similar to the kind of a theaterregisseurs .
after you have a piece of selected for you , because you &apos;re excited about it , you &apos;re going to first of hintergründen the origin of the composition .
you collect information about the piece of the sekundärliteratur .
you read in the letters , tagebüchern , notes , or whether it &apos;s words , thoughts by the composers itself .
you studied the works that he previously and afterwards .
you compare compare .
the beweggründe to write it .
how , and what did it feel ?
how were his life , how the society and politics were ?
all of this interest me .
you think in this time , by looking at contemporary images , you can see a contemporary image or reading the literature .
but also , you know , as an interpret , you have an rich knowledge of the composers you play in your time , and it makes you always a lot of leichter to feel and feel .
the composer is becoming more to a friend that you live together .
his cause to write the piece is becoming more and more and more to my personal cause to play .
now , the grades is all different than a precise record of the value of the composer , but just a framework , i &apos;m now turning this framework to make it back with meaning and meaning .
i &apos;ll say , in my own words , what might be written between this framework .
i play games , which could be these sounds .
now for me and for the composers of the time , and what you might mean today for today .
every note , each of the phrase gets a sense of because i feel it myself because it &apos;s an individual gelebten from my own personal .
it has to be now stimmig for me and now , otherwise , i can &apos;t convince my audience to convince my cause .
it &apos;s always a happy concert that i have to have , if i have the experience , the piece that i &apos;ve been doing so long , to experience how new .
and you &apos;ve seen a happy new day , and again , again , again , with the same rituals of life , up , breakfast , to work , so i &apos;m going to get the same piece on the same piece .
i grew up again a day that &apos;s seasons , my pulse is slower at night as one morning , in a konzertsaal day , it takes a longer to return the sound back home .
i take the breath of the audience , consciously or unconscious .
all that affects me and all that affects me as well as it was my experience .
but it &apos;s also wonderful when i &apos;m standing with a duo-partner on the stage , and we have the same wavelength .
and then the same thing happens in a good , angeregten conversation .
you get a new idea in it and you can get a sogleich that answers to a reaction .
it &apos;s exciting , because things we don &apos;t have geprobt , and what you can &apos;t get to samples .
it &apos;s great fun to make music , and you &apos;re in the audience , you know , what the music is communicating to the music .
so every concert is a different concert .
i &apos;m never going to play more like this .
i can &apos;t play this as in 20 years .
i &apos;m going to have more lebenserfahrung than today , and i &apos;m going to have a lot of more farbnuancen , more than my palette , emotions and emotions than today .
sure , i &apos;ll have some farbtöpfe farbtöpfe , but for that , i &apos;m going to have new dazubekommen .
i have a nice example of this .
it was on a klavierkursus for musikstudenten in my beloved old teacher , professor jürgen ude , a famous beethoven-spezialist , konzertpianist and langjähriger professor of the musikhochschule in stuttgart .
i was still too young , so that he was already emeritiert , when i finally started studying .
but i had been very lucky , very early , at the age of 13 , i &apos;d come to know , and so i was already at my school high school .
i was 17 , when i was in one of his courses once again , and i was the last of the four balladen by the chopin , a spätwerk .
he asked me what the introduction of this ballade was to me .
this is a getragenes part .
and in my jugendlichkeit , i said , expectation .
and he said , &quot; so ? &quot;
this has to be the altersunterschied .
because for me , it means memory .
he was already sechzig .
well , with 17 , you have dreams , but not a significant memories .
i play the piece of the piece every few years , and always , it turned out for me , even though not only has a grade .
every time it &apos;s exciting , because i &apos;m going to read something new .
one example of this in a very different area , and it &apos;s a monet that gemalt x-mal .
it &apos;s always the same garden , but to different tageszeit , where verschiedenem light .
he &apos;s translated the seerosen verschiedentlich , as he saw them , as she did in this moment .
his personal impressionen of the seerosen .
the x-malige interpretation of a piece is comparable .
i &apos;ve also been also as a chopin , as a chopin , with zweiunddreißig years .
he lived only a neununddreißig years .
and it &apos;s important to me , again , to look at the grades , even if i think they &apos;re auswendig .
to keep zwiesprache , right with the composers .
because the grades are the only connection to him .
especially if he died .
now , how do you begin to talk the language of music ?
i already said , you need about for the spoken language for that .
and so often , the musikunterricht is that you &apos;re only learning the grades .
you learn , in principle , you learn to read before you just talk a word .
you learn the sounds at the notes on the instrument .
then , if all of the fingers on time and right , as it is in the notes , then sound will come out of sound like music as music .
when the accurate is accurate , the students gets up the nächstschwierige piece .
it &apos;s not speaking about the interpretation .
well , there &apos;s the front of the front , and this is a fast piece .
lento , slowly .
according to the leisezeichen and leisezeichen , r and b , etc .
that &apos;s what most of us know .
but also , as you put these out of these , it still stays there &apos;s just something technical .
and still it &apos;s still not interpretation .
i wonder .
i wonder that you often don &apos;t forget a little bit of a elementares .
because it &apos;s that to make music on the instrument , that can do your own musical , and feel it should be present before .
because that &apos;s singing .
a child who doesn &apos;t learn that , because it doesn &apos;t have the parents , it won &apos;t do it .
this is like sprechenlernen .
it &apos;s necessary to have its own experiences and the idea of music , then then to bring it over another way , to make a difference .
people who never have been singing , and they never felt immediately with their body , as it is to form a tone .
phrase a phrase with his own breath .
the music system is the expansion of our body .
and we had a stimmbänder stimmbänder to sing , our hands and feet for dancing .
so the hammerköpfe in the piano is the fortsetzung of my fingers .
the tune is coming out of the gesungenen and the rhythm of the dance .
the dauernde berieselung nowadays with music is not förderlich .
you don &apos;t need to make yourself more music when it gets bored .
no longer need to whistle a liedchen or sing .
every single music is going to be plattgemacht , if you &apos;re constantly beschallt from the outside with music .
sure , there are some of you who say , yes , but what do you do if i don &apos;t sing ?
i ask the question , can &apos;t sing , a , because they believe they can &apos;t sing ?
or b , because they didn &apos;t learn to sing ?
and both of them , in both , they &apos;re not too late to find out , if they can &apos;t yet , or learn how to get these little muscles that einstellen the stimmbänder , right .
you can train that .
or c , because you have them to get them to be untauglich .
so , i ask , how fachlich kompetent was that diagnosis ?
have you been able to get a zweit- or a drittmeinung , as you say , these days ?
or d , you don &apos;t like music , and you want to do a lot of it .
but i &apos;d already regret , because music is a beautiful , kommunikative thing .
but maybe you can also even umstimmen them .
well , you can see , all of the cases , no one has to be a aussichtsloser candidate .
but don &apos;t say , i don &apos;t know , i don &apos;t understand the classical music .
i can &apos;t tell whether it &apos;s good or bad .
i &apos;m saying , but surely you can tell you if you like it or not .
because i don &apos;t think it &apos;s saying , i don &apos;t know if it &apos;s taste , because i can &apos;t cook .
so they don &apos;t get to eat it , because they can &apos;t cook .
so they don &apos;t have to give music to classical music because they don &apos;t play an instrument .
listen to you and say , &quot; it &apos;s not like it or not . &quot;
whether the music is too gepfeffert or too sweet .
tell me what you &apos;re feeling .
and at the time they can also make a difference and want to make some more gewürze because drinhaben or taste even fine differences .
why do i ask for my audience that is that it &apos;s listening to action ?
because the music is a language , and a language is to communicate .
one of the artwork you never look at has no force to work .
the food that was used to be used by a chef or a chef , you need to eat and not just look at the recipes .
so you can hear if you &apos;re playing music .
it &apos;s not just a nice geräuschtapete .
if in an environment where the adults are active music , or at least active music , a child will be , then it &apos;s very easy for a musiklehrer , to ask , what color does your flower ?
can you play in blue now ?
and the child plays , after a gedenkpause , instead of a blue flower , now a blue flower .
and this sounds very different from the time .
and then , that was the very first beginning of a personal musical expression .
so the first step is to take one .
and what happens when you play a piece that was originally a hundred hundred years ago , before it was written , it was written by a hundred years ago ?
meanwhile , the instruments have been fortentwickelt .
and there was no piano at the time of the instrument .
it wasn &apos;t even invented .
i think that the bach would have been excited if he had the klanglichen possibilities of today &apos;s modern klaviere .
i can now bring the klangvorstellungen that bach has had the stream to sound on the modern wing , which can &apos;t be a barockes cembalo .
and by beethoven , you know he heard more than he had become deaf .
today , a modern orchestra is able to play everything , which has been rejected by the time that a orchestra has been rejected .
that &apos;s why the composers are dependent on us that erfinden the pieces .
so they &apos;re going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to have a sense of what you &apos;ve thought in the mind .
and also , what you think today in mind today .
or what i &apos;m going to do today is because what you might be thinking .
thank you .
you know what is envy ?
were you a neidisch ?
and how did it feel ?
suck .
i have a friend who goes a passerati .
when i come with my little v , and i &apos;m going to get it off , come on this feeling .
i &apos;m going to shoot something through my head .
i say , &quot; ulf , what do you need for n ?
that &apos;s a year for half the value in the first year .
and at all , you &apos;re going to work much less than i do .
why do i have to afford the n of a little car ?
and then i think it &apos;s immediately , that &apos;s unfair .
it &apos;s against justice .
and as i say the word justice , it &apos;s an awkward feeling .
our organism has invented a great way to make such such feelings feelings , like envy , to make it disappear .
you can also try that with words like rache or gewinnsucht or something .
i want to explain to you today , something about this mechanism , or something that you &apos;re familiar with , which is probably familiar with you .
the mechanism comes from a lie .
but don &apos;t think about the lüge as you might have heard you , if people say , no one has to build a wall .
and then they steine stones so he &apos;d be able to get away .
in a solchen , you see that the liars themselves don &apos;t believe what he says .
it can be easy to test that it &apos;s very different in mind .
he &apos;s only täuscht them , and not themselves .
no , the lie that i &apos;m talking about , that &apos;s what i &apos;m talking about , that you &apos;re täuschen .
they need to have this lüge to maintain a selbsttäuschung .
they can make them less easy , yes , nachprüfen or to collapse .
they need time .
and this is a anecdote that you may know .
spanish painter picasso , once a woman has a woman .
this woman has been beschwert , the portrait would not see her .
picasso says , wait .
it will always like you .
and at this point , and if you laugh , you see how important that lie is and how much time you need to learn something that artists can tell us very well .
because artists have a gestörtes relationship to lie .
the artist shares them something , and especially of this lady , what they don &apos;t see if they just look in the mirror .
the artist shares them in a kind of a portrait of something that they &apos;re only familiar with when they look at this artwork over time .
and then this uncomfortable disappears , it may not look like you , and it will always like you .
and here you have this mechanism that we can use a lie as a great invention to use our lebensverhältnisse .
and not just in art , even in the volksmärchen , in which mythology , in stories , comes up again .
you may know this idea of the lady that looked in the mirror every morning and asked him , who &apos;s the most beautiful in the country ?
one day , these mirrors , yes , there &apos;s a schönere .
behind the seven mountains , and so on .
and you also know how much feindseligkeit feindseligkeit from this true , also the mirror can &apos;t lie out of this true auskunft .
but we should just be familiar with this to say that you can &apos;t tell a woman that there &apos;s a schönere somewhere else .
and this is what we need to understand , which is what we &apos;re trying to understand under the politically .
we need this lüge that lüge us aufrechterhält , without the ones we can &apos;t even live .
we have not only in art , in the volksmärchendichtung , but also in science as well as science .
and there &apos;s this story of the woman &apos;s wife of worchester .
she heard about this book of charles darwin , the origin of species and the ancestry of the human .
that man , the man , the monkey should be , and , at least , a common ancestor between people and monkeys .
and then she ran her to her husband and said , well , that &apos;s not true what charles wrote .
the person would be , from the monkeys , or a common ancestor .
no , no , that &apos;s not .
and if it &apos;s true , we need to prevent people who are getting knowledge of it .
why do we prevent people to know about something that &apos;s true ?
because without these lebenslüge , we can &apos;t live .
because we &apos;re going to be this selbsttäuschung , this sense , to be great , of the highest creature , not from such a naturebene , like a kind of unberechenbarem like an organism that exists still to a stone and whatever things that is for us .
so , we can &apos;t really feel these things .
we need to prevent people who are getting knowledge of things , especially , then , when they &apos;re true .
so you can see how slowly this mechanism is , and like the trace that leave behind you , which is going to lead to something else than that , in this great image of ourselves , i want to give you another story .
a particularly beautiful story , as i mean .
my wife told her .
she came out of school one day , she &apos;s teacher , and she told her about a student .
a autistischer student .
she likes it especially because he has a tendency to aufrichtigkeit .
and she asked him , what are your hobbys ?
and he says , well , i &apos;m in the fire department .
and because i &apos;m in the fire department , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
yes , you feel it when you &apos;re heiter at that point . there &apos;s something wrong .
i said , &quot; i said , &quot; and , &quot; i said , &quot; always , if a human being used to be the wörtchen , we should try to replace it through the wörtchen . &quot;
do that once , and then you know the sentence .
even though i &apos;m a fire service , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
you feel that , that &apos;s the actual truth behind the auskunft .
so a little bub , that &apos;s not what i &apos;m interested in .
so , the interessiert is interested in the feuermachen .
but there are no clubs that we can look at , where you learn how to do fire .
there &apos;s only the second best second , just the fire service .
he signed up .
and überdies , you don &apos;t say , you know , your teacher doesn &apos;t tell you that you like to put a brände out and you &apos;re happy when the fire is coming out of the ground .
no , it &apos;s just a lot better if we show that we are in charge of the dangers that are going to create the other if they put fire .
and you have this little mechanism .
these verweis that , in the innersten of the bub , he knew that he was actually related to the fire , but that he doesn &apos;t tell you .
here you have this zensor between the unconscious and the conscious conscious mind , which is immediately anspringt , without that you can do something about it , and the things you know that you &apos;re going to look very differently is that you can sound much better for you and others .
and so simply just set up those words that we &apos;re doing in the language of the political and politisch .
we actually know that something else is .
but we know if we can tell that , the social and the social story is so sensitive .
we can &apos;t just do that .
it &apos;s impossible to present things in a society that &apos;s supposed to work .
so i want to give you a little bit of what we found in my institute .
according to what logic of these deception , these selbsttäuschung , the willingness , a different reality than the ones that we already know in the unconscious , is that they &apos;re not being valid out .
so , i want to give you two , perhaps , three examples .
the first example is , what many of you know and some of you value some of you don &apos;t need to even need at all .
i mean the soul .
what is the soul ?
the soul is so a little bit of mental , says about the leibniz .
it &apos;s something that &apos;s not stopp , or is it .
and if you have people who are the solid belief that you have a soul , or you can also say that you have been able to be able to live with your life , and then that &apos;s kind of like the soul of the mind , you know , as a geistiger framework for you , not matter of matter , and some kind of steinernes , etwas
and by this soul , you think that you &apos;re kind of in this wolkigen nature , in this luftigen nature , it &apos;s called the latin , the lufthauch , present .
and when this lufthauch then ergießt over the people , it &apos;s filled with dignity , with spirit that can only live , right now with soul .
and then he can be davonlaufen .
that &apos;s the idea of how the soul works .
so , she &apos;s supposed to be able to get from the outside to the people .
so we should perceive them as something that is very much to present to our lives .
and if you have these premise of your mind , you understand the logic , which we &apos;re experiencing with this happiness , through a lie , to improve our world .
because now you can apply a dreisatz .
and you know , you know , you know from school .
now , this is a dreisatz dreisatz that defines us .
this is the hardest part of my talk by the way .
you need to be a logic , but also to lie the willingness .
because it &apos;s like lying that you can &apos;t apply these logic .
in this dreisatz , three sentences come .
the first line is , klaus claims , there &apos;s no soul .
so the second line is , if the klaus is right , it doesn &apos;t have a soul .
now there is a third sentence .
i &apos;m actually hervorgehoben him in particular .
a third sentence , which immediately comes back to people who have a strong sense of a soul .
they say who &apos;s no soul , who is dead , and can &apos;t say anything at all .
and here you feel it .
this is the logic in this , yes , in this täuschenden speech , the expression .
you can see it immediately .
the first two sentences , these are logical correct .
because i can say everything .
the logic doesn &apos;t make any sense about reality .
i can say , the kanzlerin is a man .
and if i have right , then the kanzlerin is a man .
if i don &apos;t have right , then the kanzlerin is not a man .
logic doesn &apos;t make a statement about what &apos;s true .
i can claim everything .
but the key thing is , if i have right , it &apos;s true .
so when klaus says , there &apos;s no soul .
second , if he &apos;s right , he doesn &apos;t have a soul .
these things are logical correct .
and now our consciousness is feeling consciousness , that can make something .
it &apos;s a third sentence that has nothing to do with the first two sentences and it &apos;s doing as the opposite of the first sentence already has already proven and vorausgesetzt .
because actually we have to prove if there is the soul or not .
but with this logic , which is simply that two sentences are accurate , and a third dazuhängt that looks like it would have something that looks like we can save our lives .
so , we do that , as if it &apos;s not , it &apos;s impossible to be able to live without a soul .
and we &apos;re very happy about this .
we can continue these things at different examples .
in the present , we have a very modern example , which is always filling up the tageszeitungen .
and for example , they have to be another more philosophisches subject , a dauerbrenner of philosophy , present .
this has to do with this , that we go back to the vierzehnte century .
there was a gelehrten named johannes buridanus , and after that is called the buridansche esel .
the buridansche esel is a esel that is made of pure nature .
it doesn &apos;t have this soul .
this is a naturding .
and if you place the exact right between the middle between two gleichgroßen heuhafen , it &apos;s verhungert .
because he doesn &apos;t know what a little bit he would do .
so he &apos;s in the middle .
so the naturdinge is introduced .
gleichgroße forces with gegensätzlichem vorzeigenzeichen to solve each other .
there &apos;s nothing that happens at all .
and then , if you take another example , so if you immediately make a difference , it doesn &apos;t need reason to reason , and nothing about it .
automatically , it &apos;s going to work for the right idea .
so if you have this idea , you &apos;re kind of driven in nature , and it &apos;s going to be determiniert , from the larger pile that you put it immediately , you also have the feeling that it must give you a free will .
and if we &apos;re here in frankfurt at the main , i remember the max-planck-institut of brain research .
there &apos;s a gelehrten called the wolf to wolf , and they say , sometimes , wolf claims , there &apos;s no willensfreiheit .
now we can make the second sentence , and can say if the wolf is right right , he doesn &apos;t have a willensfreiheit .
these sentences are absolutely logical and correct .
and so what we can read in the daily daily every day , that &apos;s what they find in this third sentence .
it looks like this , who has no willensfreiheit , can &apos;t move for its action and behauptungen , and it &apos;s therefore unzurechnungsfähig .
here they have it again .
actually , you &apos;d actually have to prove to whether there &apos;s something like willensfreiheit .
but the logic of the deception is allowing us to do that , as if the first sentence is wrong , as if you would take it to take the opposite without evidence .
and now you can just , if you want to do anything , if you want to test anything , and especially if you want to make people happy , that courage to practice .
for example , you can do this for example , if you meet a person you can say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
and please don &apos;t use the german word for vorhersager , which is called the prophet .
you can &apos;t call it , that would be a little politically politisch .
say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
immediately , you will , for granted , for granted , you know , you can &apos;t prove that .
and you &apos;ve already got a problem .
because while you &apos;re concerned , you can &apos;t prove that you can &apos;t prove there &apos;s no vorhersager , the man is very happy .
he &apos;s very happy about it because he &apos;s getäuscht them .
because he led them to a fährte that he doesn &apos;t aufhält themselves .
because actually , this person doesn &apos;t care about evidence .
he &apos;s just interested in the need of freizuhalten to prove that there are vorhersager .
so , in the way , the shift of the beweislast , they experience the großartigkeit of the lie .
and once you have a chance to feel that dreisatz in other people , you do it because you will make other people who don &apos;t remember it in this way .
thank you for your attention .
yes , good day .
i was allowed to ask myself , i could mention them .
she &apos;s one of the veranstalterinnen here of this great event , and i asked me if i want to take a talk here and give my idea .
i have to say , you know , you &apos;ve got it , it &apos;s got hard to me to talk about my idea .
and i might be able to imagine my inselprojekt i &apos;m trying to imagine you .
but it &apos;s , of course , the sum , of course , a lot of ideas .
i &apos;m probably probably , the two nice girls are still , i &apos;m probably the generation that has taken out of this bad öko image , because i &apos;ve been starting to study engineering research in karlsruhe , technical school , today , i think , i think , i guess .
and i was verschlagen in the middle of the achtziger years of berlin , because i wanted to make renewable energy , and that &apos;s not there in karlsruhe .
there &apos;s the kernforschungsanlage leopoldshafen .
the hießen at the time was all kfa , also the jülich was kfa .
the hot today are projektträger .
because a good engineer has either built a great car or atomkraftanlagen .
but it &apos;s a lot of doofes &apos; n , from a hundred watts of the square meter that was a toy .
and in berlin , there was a verrücktes ingenieurkollektiv .
i &apos;m grateful that he rehabilitiert the word again again because after the mauerfall , you didn &apos;t use the word for nothing , because everything left was bad .
but that was not in the achtiziger years .
there was a lot of that there was selbstverwaltete alternativbetriebe , and one of them was sitting in kreuzberg in the mehringhof , where you think evil .
the point of the terrorismusses , but it was called wuseltronik , and it was wind and the sun &apos;s sun , and i started the mitte in the achtziger .
and yes , much of what i said today , i &apos;m very , very , because many , many , many beautiful expressions i &apos;ve been through .
i worked for 11 years in the collective , which was basisdemokratisch .
we were 20 people .
if you have no , the vetoprinzip , which has a completely zermürbt , i &apos;ve been hard for 10 years to see if i really had my great ingenieurstudium ingenieurstudium , because all my father &apos;s father ever had zugeredet , you &apos;ve got the money to the window to the window of your child .
it &apos;s been doing it with schwachsinn .
and this was really , very , very bitter , and you also showed up a picture of durchhalten , where i &apos;ve been asking about 10 years , a thousand d-mark , that &apos;s the yes , grundlohn , einheitslohn , of course , could that be the great thing .
and i then have it to sechsundneunzig , and then we &apos;ve become a mitbegründer of the company , and then they got together with the spin-off q-cells of the world &apos;s largest zellenhersteller .
and we have a riesenerfolgsgeschichte , but we have a riesenerfolgsgeschichte problem , and we have a kleine problem , and we &apos;ve got a small group , and we decided we &apos;re going to go back and go back and to go and to go and think about the next topic of the future , and i think it &apos;s a bit crazy , that &apos;s what &apos;s going
and i brought you a project that i &apos;m going to imagine you now .
and the title of the talk was , yes , as you get to 100 percent renewable .
and we just started with a relatively einfach-verrückten story , where could you actually use a memory of value today .
in this island , this is the island of graciosa on the azoren .
yes , that &apos;s the data .
there are a half thousand people .
they have renewables today &apos;s worth of 15 percent today .
and the question is , why don &apos;t they have anymore ?
that &apos;s just technological .
when you zubauen more windkraft , it starts to fail .
i &apos;m always telling the politicians when they &apos;re besichtigen in berlin-adlershof .
they always say , why ?
we &apos;ve already got 20 percent in germany .
but it can &apos;t be a problem .
but not , we have seven percent in europe , and our net is the european european european .
if we had 20 percent in europe , we &apos;d have the same problems that people have on this island .
the question was simply , the number of things that was zweitausend2006 , the first contacts started with the island , but just by the time .
and how big would you have to be , because actually , you have to be a battery so that you will say that an island on 20 , 30 , 40 , 50 percent renewable renewable renewable .
and yes , i &apos;ll go again a slide .
the conventional system looks like this in the world .
by the way , a hundred gigawatt of electrical performance are on dieselbasis zugebaut in the world .
that &apos;s the equivalent of the power of a hundred nuclear power , because it &apos;s going very fast everywhere .
the energiehunger of the world that &apos;s taking place , it &apos;s gelöscht by diesel , because you don &apos;t need permission .
this is fast .
you put that box .
and then it &apos;s the rule that it looks like .
and in the end , three of the dieseln , two will always be waiting .
yeah , this is what it &apos;s going down the last .
we also have very detailed data .
and the windkraftanlage or the solaranlage or whatever it is , is usually a system of a system , or a system , which is just in small amounts of it .
our goal was to say , okay , okay .
the diesel will wind , and the wind , sun will use the load so that they can map the larger amount of time .
and if you want to go about 20 , 30 percent of renewables , energy per year , not the performance at the moment , you have to turn off the amount of the amount .
that means that the moment you have to make sure that renewables can be able to take over the entire net .
you can , of course , if you &apos;re going to be gemanagt in any way .
that &apos;s not what i did .
this is in a small scale , so you can use your rasierer to use your rasierer to use a little wechselrichter .
people always ask me , what do you really do , because actually , in adlershof ?
this is already .
but if you want to have several of these wechselrichtern and to build a network , it will be extremely complicated .
and our goal was we wanted to get to 70 and neunzig percent renewable and then leave that rest of the last few , the last 10 , 20 percent renewable , that will be very , very expensive , and it &apos;s not going to work that you make it out of batteries .
this will be a energieträger , which then , hydrogen , methane , power of gas , you know , or sch , that will be it .
you have to go to a saisonalspeicher and winter-sommer winter-sommer and not just tag-nacht tag-nacht .
we just wanted to know what &apos;s about a normal , stinknormalen battery battery .
how far does you get there ?
and then , then , you have a lot of simulation .
and wind and the sun and the load off and the load durchsimuliert and came to the conclusion , a very interesting result that you &apos;re using a mittleren , which is a mittleren strompreis by about 50 cents a kilowattstunde , about vierundvierzig cents .
these were the first calculation six years ago .
and then we said , okay , we said , okay .
it &apos;s great , then we have a business model .
we &apos;re cheaper like the diesel-system , if the oil prices will increase five percent a year .
and then we started to negotiate with the insulanern .
what would it be done ?
have a lot of money to do with investors , i &apos;ve looked new gesellschafter .
we were only five people at the time to rebuild one in the society .
and here &apos;s the representation .
the brown is sort of the conventional system , the green is our system .
that our system also has a preisanstieg , because we &apos;re still doing 20 percent of the world with the diesel , and also not durchschlagen a preissteigerung on the other things .
and the power-utility that the elektrizitätsversorgungsunternehmen on the island , it &apos;s meant , we &apos;re very excited about it .
we want to support , but we don &apos;t believe that you can solve the problem .
and so we decided to build a hall in berlin , where we could , in order to map the electrical verhältnisse of the island of the island of the island of the island .
that means we have to look for one first of the world &apos;s largest battery .
here she is .
it &apos;s naturally from asia , in the case of japan .
and witzigerweise , in the &apos; 70s , she &apos;s been mannheim by bbc , who was abb , and then became auslizensiert to the japanese .
you can see , it &apos;s a very , very large battery .
it has a megawatts of power , and it can bring that performance , and it &apos;s the battery that we have to have simulationstechnisch .
and then they set up .
we also have one of these diesel-aggregate in the same size , as he &apos;s standing in the hall , actually , the full dynamic behavior of this web , so in the hall it &apos;s now , there &apos;s the diesel , here &apos;s the big battery , here &apos;s the whole umrichter that we can simulate the web .
and over here , we simulate the whole übertragungsleitungsystem , the kilometer-physik of the cable to kind of represent the schwingungsverhalten in the web .
and here you can see the whole thing .
we can also aufschalten zweihundert kilowatt on the net .
here we see this again again , again , again , again , again , the whole , single aggregate .
and what we &apos;ve done , since zweitausendneun , the hall was done , until today , basically , zweitausendzwölf everything that was here between the individual system in electronics that was developing software , we did .
so we &apos;re not batteriehersteller , but we define ourselves as a company that is just about the subject of the subject and the subject of the subject and it &apos;s in between .
you have to communicate to the battery , of course , you have to communicate on the web , and that &apos;s very complicated .
and the beauty of this is , you know , you &apos;re basically , in this island , it &apos;s the vorwegnehmen problem that we &apos;re going to get if we want to increase our share of renewables .
so this whole discussion , like this is going to be back and forth , energiewende , like this , we &apos;ve got to the island of the island , for example , to 30 percent of exzessenergie , so we müdsen the wind and the sun abregeln .
natürlicht then offers smart-grid .
so smart-grid , a riesenthema everywhere .
we can start to integrate the insel on the island , to integrate , rumzufragen , because it can &apos;t manage the load .
that means if you &apos;re in siebzig percent of renewable , you won &apos;t do it without any memory .
you can smart-grid through the n , you can be able to get nets , yes , that &apos;s what you should do , the fraction of the fraction , but you never can &apos;t get rid of the memory .
and that &apos;s the n of the message .
so many people , and look at this , because you can see what problems you get .
if we turn off the amount of the stuff , you just don &apos;t have this kind of rotierende mass that causes a certain amount of the pattern .
and our europäisches verbundnetz is basically just rotierenden masses of large kraftwerken , where the wave is all about a very europe around all around europe .
we look at this grid , and we see the fünfzig hertz , and when it &apos;s going to be neunundvierzig , we &apos;re going to start a few ventilchen aufzumachen , and then a little bit of merh steam in it goes , then we come up again .
that &apos;s the system .
and of course , this is incredible .
if you runterreißen it somewhere , it &apos;s going to be a little bit of time .
the spinning reserves has at least 10 seconds to keep the net stable .
and in time , they can react again .
if you don &apos;t have that , this is a rotierende mass , then you have to replace it with leistungselektronik and elektrochemie .
and we can rein-rausschalten two millisekunden to that big .
there &apos;s already what enormous geschwindigkeitsmöglichkeiten there .
and the message is , we have to give up a rotierenden masses of what we &apos;re in our goals 20 , 20 percent , 20 , 30 , 30 percent , and so on , if we want to reach the case .
then we have to break our must-run capacity in the net .
must-run is simply , the power station goes to the frequency .
yes , that &apos;s a riesendebatte at the moment , zubau from the kohlekraftwerken , because we don &apos;t , or gasturbinen , because it &apos;s not going .
and we just try to make a little bit that you can break up the capacity , the must-run capacity , can also take a elektrochemische of memory to the grid .
now , there are now a whole bunch of studies now .
and for that purpose , people always come and look at our versuchsstand , like , in our inselteststand .
and yes , the discussion is always about the question , how far can you get a little bit of the future there .
and many discussions that i had in the last six years were similar to the discussion that i had been on the last 30 years to have been on the subject .
not , it &apos;s schwachsinn , kinderspielkram , we all have to do it .
we have 30 gigawatt photovoltaik in germany today .
this is vorbildlich .
and i just go out that we have the same capacity for the next 30 years , we &apos;re going to store the same capacity of elektrochemischen store all over the world .
it &apos;s just like this .
there &apos;s a whole bunch of widerständen and streitereien .
and the beauty of that is i &apos;ve been having a really , in the last two years , that scientists are asking my site .
we &apos;ve got over 10 million förderprojekte of the förderprojekte , also , to klemmen the german net now .
this will be in the next april .
so , from that , you also notice that there &apos;s a change there and it &apos;s only about this abwehrhaltung to the idea , to a hundred percent renewable renewable right .
and if you have a hundred percent renewable , then it &apos;s like a autarkes system .
so far in arguments , these insulaner , they &apos;re doing autark , they have a very small net , that has nothing to do with our verbund .
the question is really easy , if you &apos;re completely separate from any fossil or uranen energierträgern , who will be rausgebohrt somewhere around the world , and you &apos;re going to be hingebracht , you &apos;re an island .
and then they &apos;re going to use what &apos;s in the sun , and the wind is there where they live .
and this is a little bit of our vision for a vernüftigen energy , and i &apos;m also grateful that they said , the solar power .
and that &apos;s what we do , and this is the case that we &apos;re doing , also the talk from premium kola that you can be a collective and use the solar energy , here &apos;s a little bit together .
and yes , i just want to encourage you to get the sense that you can be a little bit crazy and also have a vision .
and you have to really remain zäh , but i think it &apos;s going .
thank you .
when steve lopez , the los angeles times , one day through the streets of los angeles , he was a wonderful music .
she came from a man , afro-amerikaner , sympathisch , rau , homeless , who played a violin , who had two strings .
many of you will know the story , because from steves article , later , a book that was verfilmt , which was verfilmt , with robert downey , as steve lopez and jamie foxx as a nathaniel anthony ayers , who was studierte by the juilliard-konservatorium , who was in his paranoide career in his paranoide schizophrenia .
nathaniel left juilliard , suffered a nervenzusammenbruch and 30 years later , he lived living on the streets of skid row in the center of los angeles .
i recommend you to read the movie , you know , to see the movie , not only the wonderful connection that came out between these two men , but also how the music helped make this connection , and how it was the instrument that the instrument is allowed to get the mithalf , nathaniel path from the road .
i met mr. ayers in 2008 , two years ago , in the disney disney hall hall .
he had just heard a performance of beethoven &apos;s first and the fourth symphony , and came up behind the stage to imagine .
he was talking in a very heiteren and geselligen clay on the yo-yo and hillary clinton and it &apos;s how the dodgers never would make it in the baseball world series , and that &apos;s all about the tückischen passage of the first violin in the last sentence of beethoven &apos;s symphony .
we came to the theme of music , and a few days later , i got an email where i was interested in geigenunterricht for geigenunterricht .
i have to mention that nathaniel had a medical treatment , because he was already treated with electric and handschellen , a trauma that has been chasing his whole life .
so , as a result , it &apos;s particularly vulnerable to these schizophrenen periods , and they &apos;re so bad , and he tagelang away to the streets of skid row , and they exposed to the horror of his mind .
and in fact , in the same way , nathaniel , when we were doing our first unterrichtsstunde in the disney disney hall , he had this irre flackern in his eyes and wirkte .
he was talking about the unseen dämonen and smoke and how it was trying to poison him in sleep .
i was frightened , not meinetwegen , but i was afraid i could lose him , that he could take it into one of his states and that i could destroy him to the violin , and i could destroy it to the geige , and i could talk about scale and other exciting forms of didaktischen geigenpädagogik .
so i just started playing .
i played the first sentence of beethoven &apos;s violinkonzert .
and while i was playing , i realized that in nathaniels eyes , a complete shift was going on .
it was like he was standing under the impact of a unseen , a chemical reaction , whose was a catalyst to my game .
nathaniels manischer anger transformed themselves in understanding , in a ruhige curiosity and anmut .
and as a miracle he took his violin , and he started playing a couple of the ausschnitte of violinkonzerten and then asked me to end up and to end up : mendelssohn , tschaikowski , sibelius .
and we started talking about music , from bach to beethoven , brahms , bruckner and all the other bs , from bartók to esa-pekka salonen .
and i realized that he was not only having a enzyklopädisches knowledge about music , but it was also related to her personal relationship with her .
he was talking about her with a passion and an understanding that i &apos;d only know about my colleagues in the philharmonie of los angeles .
by playing music and was talking about music , from this paranoiden , verwirrten man who was moved through the streets of los angeles , a liebenswerter , gebildeter , ausgezeichneter , in juilliard , juilliard .
music is medicine . music is changing .
for nathaniel , music means of emotional health .
because the music allows him to have his thoughts and the wahnvorstellungen with his imagination and creativity in something real .
and so he entflieht his quälenden .
i realized that this is exactly the nature of art .
and this is why we make music : so that we can make something that &apos;s inside us , deep inside us , our feelings , through our artistic lens through our creativity , to form the reality .
and the reality of that expression is all done , and move , inspired and united us .
what nathaniel was doing , so it brought it back to a community of friends .
the erlösende power of music brought it back into a family of musicians who understood the mind that recognized his talent and achtete him .
and i &apos;m always going to play again with nathaniel , whether in the walt disney hall or skid row , because he reminds me of why i become musicians .
thank you .
bruno giussani : thank you . thank you .
robert gupta .
robert gupta : i want to play something that i stole my cellisten .
i hope you &apos;ll forgive me .
so i used to know a lot of fish in my life .
i only had two loved .
this first one , which was more like a passionate .
it was a beautiful fish , wohlschmeckend , good konsistenz , gehaltvoll , a new york bestseller in the speisekarte .
what a fish .
even better , he was raised to the angeblich highest standards of sustainability .
so you could feel that you could be selling it .
i had this beauty of a relationship with a couple of months .
one day , the head of the company called the head of the company , and asked if i could give a event on a event about the sustainability of the farm .
&quot; of course , &quot; i said .
this was a company that was trying to solve , which is that this incredible problem of our food is going to be like our köche , how do we keep fish on our speisekarten ?
in the last 50 years , we &apos;ve been geschlagen the oceans of the ocean , as we &apos;ve done forests forests .
it &apos;s hard to überbewerten the destruction .
90 percent of the big fish that we love , the tunas , the heilbutte , the lachse , schwertfisch , they &apos;re collapsed .
it &apos;s almost nothing left .
so , i think , or , you know , the übel , fischanbau , is a part of our future .
many arguments about it . fischzuchtanlagen the environment that most of you are , and they &apos;re inefficient , we take tuna . a big disadvantage .
he &apos;s got a futterverwertung from 15 to one .
that means 15 pounds are necessary to get a ton of zucht-thunfisch .
not very sustainable .
it doesn &apos;t really taste very well .
so here , i finally had a company that was trying to do it right .
i wanted to support them .
i was the day before that i called the boss of the öffentlichkeitsarbeit for the company .
let &apos;s call it .
&quot; don &apos;t , &quot; i said , &quot; just to have the facts right , you &apos;re famous for that , so far out in the ocean that you don &apos;t have the environment . &quot;
&quot; that &apos;s true , &quot; he said . &quot; we &apos;re so far out that the waste is being distributed from our fish , not concentrated . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; we &apos;re basically a world .
this futterverwertung of 2.5 to one , &quot; he said .
&quot; the best in the industry . &quot;
2.5 to one , great .
&quot; 2.5 to one thing ? what do you do ? &quot;
&quot; sustainable proteins , &quot; he said .
&quot; great , &quot; i said .
and i was in bed this evening , and i thought , what the hell is a sustainable protein ?
so i called the next day , shortly before the event , don &apos;t .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t , what are sustainable proteins ? &quot;
he said he didn &apos;t know that . he will ask .
well , i &apos;m going to telefonierte with a couple of people in the company . no one could give me a ordentliche answer , until i finally biologen the senior biologists .
we also call it don .
&quot; don &apos;t , &quot; i said , &quot; what are sustainable proteins ? &quot;
now , he mentioned some algae and some fischmehle , and then he said , hühnchen-pellets .
i said , &quot; hühnchen-pellets ? &quot;
he said , &quot; yeah , feathers , skin , knochenmehl , reste , getrocknet and zu . &quot;
i said , &quot; how much percent of your futters is chicken ? &quot;
in the assumption , maybe two percent .
&quot; well , that &apos;s about 30 percent , &quot; he said .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t , what is sustainable to feed chicken ? &quot;
there was a long break in the leitung , and he said , &quot; there &apos;s just too much chicken in the world . &quot;
i &apos;m going to get to my fish .
no , not because i &apos;m a selbstgerechter genießer and gutmensch .
that &apos;s actually me .
no , i actually entliebt out of this fish , because i swear to god who &apos;s chicken fish after that entertainment .
this second fish , that &apos;s a different kind of love story .
it &apos;s romantic ways , the way you know the better you learn your fish , you love the fish .
i was eating him in a restaurant first .
a befreundete journalist had been talking about this fish for a long time .
it &apos;s a kind of verkuppelt .
he came to the table with a bright white color .
the chef had verkocht him .
stop twice .
she was still delicious .
who can taste a fish so well after it was verkocht ?
i can &apos;t , but this guy can .
let &apos;s call it miguel . actually , he &apos;s called miguel .
and no , he &apos;s not cooked the fish , and he &apos;s not a chef , at least in the way that you understand .
he &apos;s a biologist at veta la .
this is a fischaufzucht in the südwestlichen corner of spain .
it &apos;s near the mündung of the river .
until the &apos; 80s was the farm in the hands of argentiniern .
they grew up fleischrinder , which was essentially the feuchtgebiete .
they did this by entwässerten the land .
they built this complicated , follow by kanälen , and they were putting out water out of the country and out in the river .
well , they couldn &apos;t make it work , not economically .
and it was a disaster .
it took about 90 percent of the birds to see what a lot of birds are .
and so , in a way , in a spanische company , in a way , in the 1982 , they bought the country .
what did they do ?
they have the river of the water vice .
they literally umgelegt the lever .
instead of water , they used the channels to hereinzuziehen the water back .
they were fluteten the channels .
they created a 11.000 of fischaufzucht -- barsch , meeräsche , garnele , aal -- and in the process , miguel and his company completely completely opposite the ecological destruction .
the farm is incredible .
i mean , you haven &apos;t seen anything like this .
they &apos;re looking at the horizon , which is a million miles away , and all you see are geflutete channels and this density , the üppige march .
i was not a long time ago at miguel .
he &apos;s an incredible guy , three parts of charles darwin and a part of &quot; a crocodile to kiss . &quot;
okay ? there we were , and we fought for the feuchtgebiete and i keuche and schwitze , i matsch , to my knee , and miguel hält a biologievorlesung .
and he &apos;s going to pick up a rare gleitaar .
now he mentioned the mineralbedürfnisse of the phytoplankton .
and here , this is a pattern of bündeln that reminds him of the tansanische .
it turns out that miguel spent the largest part of his career in the national national park in africa .
i asked him how to become a fisch-experten .
he said , &quot; fish ? i don &apos;t know about fish .
i &apos;m an expert on relations . &quot;
and then he goes and fall into more gerede from rare birds and algae and strange wasserpflanzen .
and i don &apos;t get me wrong , that was really fascinating , you know , the most powerful community , that way , in the way that way .
it &apos;s great , but i was in love .
and my head was weak about this verkochte piece of köstlichen fish that i had on the vorabend .
so i cut it . i said , &quot; well , how does it taste your fish so well ? &quot;
he showed the algae .
&quot; i know , boy , the algae , the phytoplankton , the relationships , that &apos;s incredible .
but what do you eat your fish ?
what is the futterverwertung ? &quot;
now , he goes on to tell me that it &apos;s a rich system , that the fish are eating the wild .
the pflanzliche biomass , the phytoplankton , the zooplankton , that &apos;s what the fish feeds .
the system is so healthy , it &apos;s completely selbsterneuernd .
there is no food .
the one of a farm that their animals don &apos;t feed ?
later on this site i was driving around with miguel miguel , and i asked him , &quot; for a place that seems to be so natural , &quot; unlike any farm i &apos;ve ever been , i was going to succeed . &quot;
it was the moment a director would have to ask a bühnenwechsel .
and we bow around the corner , and we would have the incredible sight , thousands and thousands of thousands of thousands of thousands of the pinker , literally pinker a pinker carpet so far .
&quot; that &apos;s success , &quot; he said .
&quot; look at your bäuche , pink .
she &apos;s schlemmen . &quot;
schlemmen ? i was completely confused .
i said , &quot; miguel , don &apos;t you schlemmen your fish ? &quot;
&quot; yes , &quot; he said .
&quot; we lose 20 percent of our fish and fischeiern to the birds .
now last year , there were 600,000 birds , more than 250 different species .
it &apos;s the largest one of the most important private vogelreservate in europe .
i said , &quot; miguel , is a good gedeihender vogelbestand not that one that you want to have on a fischaufzucht ? &quot;
he &apos;s got his head , no .
he said , &quot; we &apos;re building extensiv , not intense .
this is a ökologisches network .
the flamingos eat the shrimp .
the shrimp eat the phytoplankton .
so the pinker that the stomach the system was the better .
okay , let &apos;s rethink it . a farm that doesn &apos;t feed their animals and a farm that &apos;s measuring their success on the health of their predators .
a fischaufzucht , but also a vogelreservat .
oh , and by the way , these flamingos should be not even there .
they breed in a city , 240 miles away , where the bodenbeschaffenheit is better for the nestbau .
they fly down to farm miles every morning .
and every night they go down to 240 miles .
they do that because they can follow the gestrichelten white line of the landstraße .
seriously .
i &apos;d introduced my journey to the penguins , so i looked at miguel .
i said , &quot; miguel , fly , you &apos;re going to fly at a 240 miles , and you &apos;ll fly back to the night ?
do you do that for children ? &quot;
he looked at me , as i was going to be quoted a song from the whitney in the whitney .
he said , &quot; no . you do that because the food is better . &quot;
i didn &apos;t mention the skin of my beloved , fisches , and i don &apos;t like fischhaut . i don &apos;t like sautiert . i don &apos;t like knusprig .
it &apos;s this beißende , verkohlte taste .
i never never cook it .
and yet , when i tried her in this restaurant in südspanien , she didn &apos;t have to make it for fischhaut .
she liked sweet and pure as if you would take a bite off the ocean .
i mentioned this to miguel , and he &apos;s nickte .
he said , &quot; the skin acts like a sponge .
it &apos;s the last one to go before something in the body .
and she evolved in the course of evolution , to aufzusaugen unreinheiten . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; but our water doesn &apos;t have a unreinheiten . &quot;
okay . a farm that doesn &apos;t feed their fish , a farm that measures their success at success of their predators .
and then i realized , if he says , a farm that has no unreinheiten , he &apos;s got enormous , because the water that &apos;s going through that farm comes from the river in the river .
it &apos;s a river that leads all of the things that are very , you tend to have rivers of rivers today , to lead , chemical pollutants , abfluss from schädlingsbekämpfungsmitteln .
and if it fought through the system , and this leaves is clean the water as it is hereingekommen .
the system is so healthy , it &apos;s reinigt the water .
so not only one farm that doesn &apos;t feed their animals , not only one farm that measures their success on the health of their predators , but a farm that is literally a wasser-aufbereitungsanlage , and not only for those fish , but for you , for you .
because when the water herausfließt , it versinkt in the atlantic .
one drop in the ocean , i know , but i &apos;ll take it , and that should be , because this love of love , like romantic , is also also aufschlussreich .
you could say that you &apos;re a recipe for the future of good food , whether we &apos;re talking about barsch or fleischrindern .
what we need now is a radical new concept of agriculture , from one , in which food actually taste well .
but for many people , it &apos;s a little bit too radical .
we &apos;re not realisten , we &apos;re genießer . we &apos;re a lover .
we love wochenmärkte . we love small familienbetriebe . we &apos;re talking about local food . we eat food .
and if you claim that these are the things that make the future of good food , someone is going to tell you , and say , &quot; hey , people , i love pinke flamingos , but how are you going to feed the world ?
how are you going to feed the world ? &quot;
can i be honest ?
i don &apos;t like this question .
no , not , because we &apos;re already producing enough calories to feed the world more than just .
a billion people now become hungry today .
one billion -- this is more than before -- because of krasser , in the distribution , not the gesamtproduktion .
now , i don &apos;t like this question because they have been determined the logic of our mind over the last 50 years .
so , füttere grain of the pflanzenfresser , schädlingsbekämpfungsmittel of monokulturen , chemicals on the earth , chicken of fish , and all the time , the agrarindustrie has simply wondered , &quot; if we feed more people , how terrible can be that ? &quot;
that was the cause . it was the place . it was the business of american agriculture .
we should call them what it is , a gewerbe in abwicklung , a gewerbe , the fast of ökologisches capital , which is possible for the same production .
this is not a gewerbe , and it &apos;s not agriculture .
our kornkammer today is threatened , not because of abnehmender zufuhr , but because of the abnehmender resources .
not by the latest mähdrescher- and traktor-erfindungen , but by land , not by pumps , but by fresh water , not by kettensägen , but by forests , and not through fischerboote and nets , but fish fish .
you want to feed the world ?
let &apos;s start with the question : how are we going to feed ourselves ?
or better , how can we create conditions that can empower each community to feed themselves ?
to do that , don &apos;t look at the agrarindustrie-modell for the future .
it &apos;s really old , and it &apos;s done .
capital , chemistry and machines are in there , and it never made a really good good for food .
let &apos;s look at the ecological model .
this is this , which is auf on two billion years of arbeitserfahrung .
look at miguel , farmers like miguel , bauern .
and the businesses that are not worlds for themselves , businesses that are wiederherstellen instead of aufzubrauchen , businesses that are growing extensiv instead of only intense farmers who are not only erzeuger , but experts for relationships .
because they are the ones who are also experts for taste .
and if i &apos;m really honest , you &apos;re a better chef than i will ever be .
you know , i know , that &apos;s right , because if that &apos;s the future of good food , it will be delicious .
thank you .
if i want to just briefly a thing about this , the whole of the data we consume is greater than the sum of your parts , and rather than thinking about it , i want you to think about it as we can use information that is that patterns are and we see the trends that otherwise wouldn &apos;t be visible .
so , what we see here is a typical sterbediagramm angeordnet .
the program i use here is a little experiment .
it &apos;s called pivot , and what i can do with pivot is that i can filter after a certain cause of death , we say accidents .
and immediately i see another pattern that makes it .
and that &apos;s because in the mittelbereich people who are most of the most active , and they are over here on the gebrechlichsten .
we can go out and step further and we can neu the data and see that kreislauferkrankungen and cancer are the usual suspects , but not for everyone .
now , if we &apos;re going to go to the age of age , we &apos;re going to say 40 years or younger , we &apos;re actually , that accidents are the most important people who are concerned about the people .
and who &apos;s weiterforscht , that &apos;s what &apos;s true of men .
so you can see that the reputation of information and data is actually reminded of swimming in a living informationsgrafik .
and if we can make this for raw data , why not also for content itself ?
so what we &apos;re here are the titelbilder of each individual illustrated , which has ever been printed .
it &apos;s all here . it &apos;s all online .
you can try to test it to my talk in your zimmern .
you can dive into a decade .
you can be in a particular year .
you can jump right to a certain copy .
now , if i look at this , i see the athletes that appear in this issue and the sportarten .
i &apos;m a lance armstrong , so i went on to see all the spending of what i &apos;m going to see in the lance armstrong .
now , if i just want to get a gröberen track of it , i could think , &quot; ok , what if i &apos;m looking at all of the subject ? &quot;
so i go back and i take a look at the perspective .
now i see greg lemond .
and so you get an idea of how you look at this kind of information , gezielter , bigger , reinzoomen , rauszoomen , you don &apos;t want to just don &apos;t just surft .
you do something that &apos;s actually a little bit different .
it &apos;s something between , and we think it changes the way that information can be used .
i want to take this idea a little bit more than something that &apos;s a little bit crazy .
what we &apos;ve done here is we took every single sample of the wikipediaseite and reduce it to a little summary .
the summary contains a short of übersicht and a symbol of the area that she comes out of .
i just show the top of the top 500 of the popular popular .
but even in this eingeschränkten view , we can do a lot of things .
immediately , we get a sense of what the topics that are on the most popular .
i &apos;m going to vote for the government .
well , after i &apos;ve chosen government , i know that the wikipediakategorien that most of the most magazines people are most magazines &quot; people . &quot;
this is really important , because this is a realization that &apos;s not in a single wikipediaseite .
it &apos;s just to recognize when you go back to a step and look at the whole .
so , in a particular one of these summaries , i can go to the subject of time magazines &apos;s subject , &quot; people in the year , &quot; and all of them see together .
now , if i look at all these figures , i know that the majority of these are regierungsbeamte . some of the things come from science , some , even less , come from the economy . here &apos;s my boss . and one comes from the musikbereich .
and interestingly , bono is a ted prize winner .
so we can jump and look at all ted prize winner .
you see , we &apos;re surfing the web , the first time , as if it &apos;s really a net , not just from page , but a lot more abstract .
and so i want to show you what a little surprise might be .
i &apos;m just showing you the new york times website .
pivot , this application -- i don &apos;t want to call it a browser ; it &apos;s really no browser , but you can look at websites -- and we bring these zoom-technologie to every single website like this .
so i can go back and go back and jump right to a specific sektion .
that &apos;s why you &apos;re just important because you &apos;re just looking at the web of websites in this way , the whole internet-verlauf , in the same way .
so i can zoom in in my process in a particular place .
here &apos;s the whole demonstration i &apos;ve been here by the way .
and i can sort of , sort of , i can see anything i &apos;ve been watching today .
and once i take a step back and look at everything , i can anordnen my course , perhaps , after my such-vergangenheit , i &apos;ve looked for nepotistisch , here , or here for live labs .
and from here , i can go into the site and get to get back to it .
it &apos;s a metaphor that &apos;s used and over again , and every time it makes the big picture bigger than the sum of the datenteile .
right now , in the world , we think data is a fluch .
we &apos;re talking about the fluch of the informationsüberflusses .
we talk about &quot; drowning in information . &quot;
what if we could turn this situation and put the internet on the head so that instead of just go from one to the other , start to go to lots of things to many things , and that can see patterns that would be hidden hidden hidden ?
if we can do this , this fossil record will be , perhaps a new source of information information .
and instead of just moving in information , we can get knowledge of it .
and if we know knowledge , we can actually even pull out of it .
so i hear , thank you .
i grew up with a gehörigen of science fiction .
i went to school in my high school , and i went to school , every day an hour per track .
and my nose always put in a book , a science-fiction-buch , which is entführte my thoughts in other worlds and auf my deep deep tief curiosity .
and this curiosity also showed that i was not in school , when i was not in school , through the forests of the forests , and &quot; samples &quot; and the snakes and snakes and the beetle and the beetle and the käfer and betrachtete and looked at the microscope .
i was totally wissenschaftsbegeistert , you know .
it was always about trying to understand the world and to understand the boundaries of the possible .
and my love to science fiction seemed to be in my environment , because back in the late &apos; 60s , we flew to the moon and we were exploring the oceans .
jacques cousteau came into our living room with his amazing shows that we showed us animals and places and a world of miracles that we never imagined before .
and it probably got good at that science-fiction-rolle .
and i was an artist .
i could draw . i could paint .
and there &apos;s no video games , or these übersättigung , the whole imagery in the media environment , i had to create the images in my head .
we all had to read that at all , and when we read a book , we took the description of the autors and then we put them on the screen in our heads .
my reaction to this was to draw and draw from aliens , aliens worlds , robots , raumschiffen and all of the things .
i was constantly caught by the teacher , and i was ständig by the teacher , the hinterm textbook .
creativity had to kind of hold out .
and what happened was something interesting about this , which was fascinated by jacques cousteaus &apos;s shows , was the thought of a completely unknown world on our earth .
certainly , i would never have to reach a alien world with a spaceship , and it seemed quite unlikely to me .
but here was a world that i could actually enter here on earth , and it was just as fascinating and exotic as all that i &apos;d imagined to myself when i read these books .
so i decided to get to the divers .
the only problem is i lived in a small village in canada , a thousand kilometers away from the nearest ocean .
i didn &apos;t get it to entmutigen .
i mean , i nervte my father until he finally had a tauchschule in buffalo , new york , and he had done , right on the other side of the border where we lived .
i made my tauchschein in a pool of the ymca in the middle of the winter in buffalo , new york .
but the ocean , but a real ocean , i got two years later to face when we moved to california .
since , in the 40 years that have been verstrichen , i spent about three hours of water , 500 hours of this in tauchbooten .
and i learned that the world of the deep ocean , even in the flacheren oceans , is so rich in life &apos;s life , as we can &apos;t really imagine .
the imagination of nature knows no boundaries , as opposed to our own , kläglichen human imagination .
to the days i feel deep awe for what i see in my tauchgängen .
and my love for ocean is holding the same intensity as i ever ever .
then , as an adult , i was a career , it was the filmemachen .
this seemed the best way to tell me , to tell my inner , to tell stories with my need to bring images to together .
as a child , i was painting in books and so .
so movies were the way , images and stories together . that fit together .
of course , the stories i was aussuchte , from the science-fiction-bereich , &quot; terminator , &quot; &quot; aliens , &quot; &quot; aliens . &quot;
in &quot; abyss , &quot; i could have my vorliebe for the unterwasserwelt and the diving with the filmemachen .
so , i have two passions , basically my two passions .
something interesting happened in the abyss , to solve a erzählerisches problem in this movie , and that was that we had to create a kind of liquid wasserwesen -- we griffen on computergenerierte animation , cg .
and what came out of this was the first computergenerierte soft-surface-figur ever ever seen in a movie .
the film didn &apos;t take any money , right , he was just playing his produktionskosten , but i noticed something fascinating , the audience around the world was hypnotisiert by the magic that was taking off .
according to arthur , clarke &apos; law is known as fortgeschrittliche technology and magic to not tell us apart .
so they saw something magic .
and i found that incredibly exciting .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s got to be involved in the filmkunst . &quot;
so we went to &quot; terminator 2 , &quot; my next movie , much more .
together with ilm , we made the guy out of liquid metal . the success was all of the time that the effect was going to get .
and it worked . again , we created something magical , and the effect in the audience was the same . but we &apos;ve been doing a little bit more money with the film .
and from those two experiences , it was a very new world , a whole new world of creativity for filmschaffende .
so i started a company , along with my good friend , stan , who was the best make-up- and creature-designer , and she was called &quot; digital domain . &quot;
the idea of this company was to try and try and see the stage in the phase of using visual processes and on other words , and just to start with digital produktionen .
and we did that , and we also helped a advantage of a advantage for a while .
but in the middle of the &apos; 90s , we realized that we were in creature- and character-design -- what we were actually founded the company was , too slow , to slow .
i had written this piece of &quot; avatar , &quot; which is supposed to be schieben the messlatte in the very visual effects and computergenerierter effects in a new way , with the very realistischen human , ausdrucksvollen characters that have been produced by cg , and the hauptfiguren should be all the cg . and the world should be cg .
but the messlatte hit it very nicely . and the people in my company told me that we were not able to do that .
so i went and made this other film about the big ship , the end of the line .
the filmstudio i did , i &apos;ve sold it , &quot; the &quot; romeo and julia on a ship . &quot; it was a liebesfilm epischen , a a leidenschaftlicher movie .
but the insgeheim , but i really wanted to hinabtauchen the real wrack of the titanic .
so i made the film .
that &apos;s the truth . the studio didn &apos;t know .
i &apos;ve convinced you , by saying , &quot; we &apos;re diving to the wrack . we film the real wrack .
we &apos;re going to show it in the eröffnungssequenz of the film .
that &apos;s immensely important . it &apos;s a good marketing for marketing . &quot;
and i was convinced you to finance an expedition .
sounds crazy . but again , it goes back to that the imagination can create reality .
and then we actually created a reality that i &apos;d like to have a russian tauchboot tauchboot , four miles beneath the surface of the north atlantic , and i looked the real titanic through a bullauge .
this wasn &apos;t a movie , no hd , that was really .
so , that really blew me .
and the amount of the time that we have was enormous . we had to build cameras and light and everything .
and i realized , like very , very much these tiefseetauchgänge , a weltraummission .
well , they were also hochtechnisch and bedurften umfangreicher planning .
you go into these capsule , then you &apos;re floating into this dark , feindselige environment , where there &apos;s no hope of saving , if you don &apos;t make it back .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s just as if i was in a science-fiction-film .
that &apos;s really cool . &quot;
i was obsessed with exploring the deep ocean .
anyway , the part that has to do with curiosity and science , it was all . it was adventure , it was curiosity . it was imagination .
and it was a experience that hollywood couldn &apos;t give me .
because , you know , i could imagine a creature that we could design for a visual effect , but i couldn &apos;t imagine what i would see outside of the fensters .
and for some of the next expeditions i &apos;ve seen creatures in thermalquellen , sometimes things i &apos;ve never seen before , sometimes things that had no one before ever seen before , and the science of the science , at the time , when we saw them , had no words found .
so that &apos;s really umgeworfen me , and i wanted to get more .
and so i made a slightly unusual decision .
and after the success of titanic , i said , &quot; okay , i want to put my hauptberuf as a filmmaker in hollywood , and i &apos;m going to give it for a while . &quot;
and then we started , we were on the bismarck , and we found them with roboterfahrzeugen .
we went back to the wrack of the titanic .
we took little robots that we built , which was a fiberglaskabel abwickelten .
our intention was to look at it and see the inside of the ship , which had never been done before .
no one had ever explored the inside of the wracks , and you had no means for it . so we developed the need to be the technology .
so , i &apos;m sitting here , on the deck of the titanic , in a tauchboot , and see planken that these brettern are pretty similar to these brettern , and i know once the band has played there .
and i fly with a little roboterfahrzeug through the gänge of the ship .
i &apos;m actually doing it , actually , but my consciousness is within the vehicle .
it felt like i was physically present the titanic .
this was the most surrealste form of a déjà-vu i &apos;ve ever experienced before , because before i was a ecke corner each other at a time , i always knew what was going to be in the lichtkegel of the vehicle , because i was months of filmset , when we were doing the film .
and the set was a very precise copy of the baupläne of the ship .
so this was a very strange experience .
she made me realize that this telepräsenz-erlebnis thing made me that you could use such roboterhafte avatare and so your conscious conscious of the vehicle , in this other form of existence .
it was really , really profound .
and perhaps a small view of what might happen in a few decades , if you have cyborg-körper to explore something , or to do other things , in all kinds of post-humanen zukunftszenarios i can imagine as a science-fiction-fan .
after this expeditions , we started to learn what we saw the bottom , really appreciate the value , for example , these tiefseequellen , where we saw these incredibly amazing animals , these are like aliens , but here on earth .
they live with the help of chemosynthese .
they don &apos;t exist in a very sunlight , in sunlight , as we do .
and so you see animals that are right next to a 500 degrees centigrade that they can survive there .
at the same time , i was also interested in a very sehr , which was back of my childhood .
and so i ended up with people who are interested in space and the nasa-sachverständigenrat and they &apos;re sitting right in the nasa-sachverständigenrat and they &apos;re going to plan to russia , go to russia , and they go to the mission that &apos;s going to be at the international weltraumstation and take our 3d-kamerasysteme .
that was fascinating .
but at the end , it was out that i was taking a weltraumwissenschaftler with us in the deep sea .
i took them and they got access to them in the world at the bottom : astrobiologen , planetenwissenschaftler , people who were interested in such extreme situations , and i took them to the sources so they could use samples and test instruments and so on .
we were doing a living room , but actually science , in fact , is weltraumwissenschaft .
so the circle between my existence as a science-fiction-fan , then as a child , and they take the reality .
so , over the course of this journey , i learned a lot of things .
i &apos;ve learned a lot about science . but i &apos;m sure you &apos;re going to think , a director , you can also have to lead a leader like a schiffskapitän or something .
i didn &apos;t understand much of leadership before i antrat these expeditions .
because at a certain point , i had to say , &quot; what do i do here ?
why do i do this ? what &apos;s going to come out ? &quot;
these blöden films don &apos;t make us any money .
we &apos;re just going to make a cost of the cost . it &apos;s not a trace .
all of you think i was between &quot; titanic &quot; and &quot; the &quot; avatar , &quot; and i would have a nägel on the nägel on a handtuch on a beach .
i all have these films , these are , for a very small audience .
no glory , no honor , no money . what do you do ?
you do it for the task of will , and the ocean is the most herausforderndste environment that there are , and you &apos;re doing it because of the entdeckerrausches , and because of the strange connection that comes when a small group of people is a team .
because we &apos;ve done all of this with just 10 to 12 people who worked for years for years . sometimes we were in a row for two to three months in a row .
and in this community , you realize that the most important thing you &apos;re aware of is because you have a task that you can &apos;t tell you to explain .
if you go back to shore and you say , &quot; we had to do it , the fiberglas , and the whole thing that the whole technology , and the difficulty of the human being working on sea , if you &apos;re working on sea , &quot; it &apos;s like police officers or with soldiers who have gone through something in common and know that they can never explain
there &apos;s a connection , a gegenseitiger respect .
so when i came back to turn my next film &quot; avatar , i tried to use the same leadership that you were respected to be , and i respect your team and deserves it in the return .
so it really changed the dynamic .
so i was standing again with a small team on a unbekanntem terrain , and we were doing &quot; avatar &quot; with a new technology that didn &apos;t have before .
it &apos;s been extremely exciting .
it &apos;s an enormous challenge .
and we have been to a richtigen family for a period of four and a half .
so , it changed my way to make movies completely .
there were people who were thought we had really nachgemacht these ozeanwesen , and we had pandora to the planet .
for me , it was more a more prinzipielle way to do my job , the actual process that changed in the outcome .
so what can we close from all of this ?
what lessons have we learned ?
i think that &apos;s the curiosity that i think is .
it &apos;s the most powerful human property .
our imagination is a force that can actually create reality .
and the achtung of your team is more important than all the lorbeer of the world .
and i &apos;m going to come to me , young filmmaker who say , &quot; give me a advice to do something like that . &quot;
and i say , &quot; don &apos;t you schränke yourself .
and they have others for you . don &apos;t do it yourself , bet not against themselves , but take risks on you . &quot;
nasa has a lieblingssatz , &quot; fail is not an alternative . &quot;
but in art and in the way , fail has to be an alternative , because there is a vertrauensvorschuss .
no important endeavor , the innovation , they have been addressed with the risk .
you have to be willing to take those risks .
that &apos;s the idea that i &apos;d like to give you away with the way . fail is an alternative , but is not a good fear , but thank you .
today i &apos;m talking to you about energy and climate .
and this might surprise , perhaps , because my vollzeitbeschäftigung at the foundation was mostly about vaccines and seeds to make things that we invent and deliver to make the poorest two billion a better life .
but energy and climate are extremely important for these people , in fact , even more important than anyone else on the planet .
klimaverschlechterung means that their saaten are not growing for many years , and we &apos;re too much , it &apos;s going to rain . and things will change how it can &apos;t sustain their most fragile environment .
that leads to hungersterben . it leads to uncertainty . it leads to riots .
so , a climate change is going to be terrible for you .
and also the energiepreis for them is very important .
in fact , if you could reduce the price of one thing , it would be energy at the end of the most effective energy .
well , the energiepreis is like over time .
in fact , the fortschrittsgesellschaft is based on energiefortschritten .
and the kohlerevolution is the industrial revolution , and even in the 20th century , there was a rapiden case in the elektrizitätspreis , and therefore we have kühlschränke , klimaanlagen , we can make modern materials and do so many things .
so we &apos;re in a wonderful situation with electricity in the rich world .
but if we reduce the price -- let &apos;s cut the price in half -- we hit a new barrier and this barrier is to be with co2 .
co2 warming the planet and the equation of co2 it &apos;s quite clear .
they summieren the ausgestoßene co2 that leads to the temperaturerhöhung , and this temperaturerhöhung has some very negative effects . effects on the weather , and perhaps worse , the indirekte that natural ecosystems can &apos;t adapt to the kind of rapiden changes , and zusammenfallen all kinds of systems .
now , the exact correlation between a co2-anstieg and the dadurch and where their other consequences are , there are some of the things , but not very many .
and there &apos;s certainly unklarheit about how bad these consequences are going to be , but they &apos;re going to be extremely bad .
i asked the top-wissenschaftler several times , &quot; have we really got to get down to close to close ?
is not enough for half or a quarter ? &quot;
and the answer is , until we get near zero , the temperature will continue to increase .
that &apos;s why it &apos;s a big challenge .
it &apos;s very different from saying , we have a 3,5 truck that &apos;s going to come from an 3 bridge , and then you can then quetschen it .
this has to go down , zero .
well , we &apos;re hitting a lot of kohlenstoffdioxid , which is 26 billion tons .
each americans about 20 tons . people from poor countries , less than one .
in average , it &apos;s about five tons for everyone on the planet .
and somehow we have to produce changes that lower zero .
it has been up so far .
just different economic changes have affected it , and we need to get into a verringerung increase and a reduction in a reduction to zero .
this equation has four factors . it &apos;s a little bit of a multiplikation -- you have this thing on the left -- co2 -- that you want to get zero , and it will depend on the number of people , from the service that every person on average , the average energy for every service and co2 that will be emittiert by the average of energy .
so let &apos;s take a factor of each one factor , and we think about how we get it to zero .
probably one of these numbers has to get very close to zero .
now , this is basic algebra , but we &apos;ll go through it .
we first have the population .
today , 6,8 billion people .
and it &apos;s been going to be schreitet to nine billion zu. that are going to be on 9 billion .
if we &apos;re very successful with new vaccines , the gesundheitsvorsorgung and the reproduktionsmedizin , we might have to reduce that 10 percent to 15 percent , but at the time we &apos;re going to see a slope about 1.3 .
the second factor is the service we use .
it &apos;s all that it &apos;s like , the food that we eat , clothing , television , heat .
these are very good things and armutsverringerung means to make these services almost every one on the planet .
it &apos;s great that this number is going up .
in the rich world , at the top billion , we might be able to make abstriche and less use less , but average , that number will increase every year and so forth more than double , the number of services are being put in a person per person .
so here we see a very basic service . there &apos;s a home to go home to read the homework ?
and these students don &apos;t have it , so they go out and read their schulaufgaben under the straßenlicht .
well , in efficiency , the e , the energy per service , there &apos;s good news .
we have something that doesn &apos;t go up .
because of all of these successes in the lichtsektor , through other autotypen , through new methods in häuserbau , there are many services whose energy use some of those people are going to reduce 90 percent .
in other ways , like the manufacturing of düngemitteln , 105 00 : 56,000 -- &amp; amp ; d : 58,000 or luftverkehr , or luftverkehr , that &apos;s a lot of small for improvements .
in total , if we &apos;re optimistic , we might get a reduction in a factor , maybe three or maybe a factor of six .
but for the first three factors , we &apos;re now from 26 billion to maybe allerbestes 13 billion tons , and it &apos;s just not enough .
so let &apos;s take a look at the fourth factor -- and this will be a key thing -- that &apos;s the amount of co2 that will be emittiert down per unit of energy .
it turns out , if you can get it out .
if you burn coal , no .
if you burn natural gas : no .
almost every single herstellungsmethode for electricity today , co2 today , except renewables and nuklearenergie .
so , what we need to do on a global level is to create a new system .
we need energiewunder .
now , when i use the term &quot; wonder , &quot; i don &apos;t mean the impossible .
the mikroprozessor is a miracle . the computer is a miracle .
the internet and the service is a miracle .
the people here have contributed to the development of many of these miracles .
usually there &apos;s no way to have a deadline that you need a miracle to a specific date .
normally you just don &apos;t get to get off and some of them , others .
in this case , we have to give vollgas and get a miracle in very short time .
now , i asked myself , how can i really get this out of this ?
is there a natural illustration , a demonstration that entfacht the idea of the people ?
i remembered that last year when i was mosquitos , and somehow people liked it .
the idea was really tangible for them , you know , there are people who live with mosquitos .
and for energy , this is what i was going to get here .
i decided that the freilassen of fireflies would be my most reliable contribution to the environment .
so here are a few natural fireflies .
you &apos;ve told me you don &apos;t bite . you &apos;re not going to leave the glass .
well , there are all kinds of spielereilösungen , like this , but they don &apos;t all get a lot .
we need solutions , either one or a bunch of them , or multiple , have a unimaginable of unimaginable and unvorstellbare for the other , and even though there are many directions that people look for after that , i really see five demands that can afford these big demands .
i left out of the world , geothermal , fusion and biokraftstoffe .
this might be a moderaten piece , and if you do better than i expect , that &apos;s great , but my favorite statement here is that we need to work on all of those five , and we can &apos;t give them a lot of them because they &apos;re all significant problems .
let &apos;s take a look at burning fossil fuels , burning from either coal or natural gas .
what you have to do is , you might have to do it , it might not seem , but it &apos;s not . you &apos;d have to capture all the co2 that comes out of the schornstein , capture under the pressure and then store somewhere and hope it stays there .
there are some pilotprojekte that can do this on 60 percent -- 80 percent of them to do it , but it will be very difficult to get 100 percent , and a deal for the amount of co2 is a big challenge , but the biggest problem here is the lagerzeitfrage .
who will make it make ?
who can guarantee something that literally larger many billion times larger than any kind of waste that you can imagine from nuklear- and other things ?
that &apos;s a lot of volume .
so this is a hard problem .
next : nuklearenergie .
it also has three big problems , and the cost , especially in hochregulierten countries , is the question of security , that you really feel that nothing can go wrong , despite human cooperation that the fuel is not used for weapons .
and what do you do with the waste ?
because , though he &apos;s not very big , there are a lot of concerns .
so three very difficult problems that might be soluble , and that &apos;s why you should work .
the last three of the five i have summarized .
it &apos;s renewables , as you &apos;re called a lot .
and also , you know , though it &apos;s great , you don &apos;t need a fuel -- you have some of the nachteile .
one is the energy density , which these technologies are dramatically lower than the kraftwerken .
these are energiefarmen , you &apos;re talking about a lot of quadratkilometern , a thousand times more than a normal power station .
and also , these sources are unterbrechungen .
the sun doesn &apos;t seem all day , it doesn &apos;t seem every day , and it doesn &apos;t always weht the wind .
and so you have to depend on these sources , a way , and the energy is in times when it &apos;s not available .
so there are big preisherausforderungen . there are challenges in transmission . if we say the power is outside the country , it &apos;s not just the technology , you need to deal with the risk that the energy from where you come from .
and there &apos;s the lagerungsproblem .
and to show the dimension , i have all kinds of batteries that are made , and you can see the cars , computers , cell phones , cell phones , for everything , and that &apos;s what i &apos;ve got with the amount of electronic energy that the world is using , and i found that all batteries that we now can produce less than 10 minutes of the
so we need a big breakthrough , something that is going to be 100 better than the way to do it .
it &apos;s not impossible , but it &apos;s not that easy .
this happens when you try to get these unterbrochenen sources to say 20 percent of the world , 30 percent of the time .
if you want to support 100 percent of it , you need an incredible amount of energy .
now , where we should go , what is the right approach ?
a manhattan project ? how are we going to be here ?
what we need is a lot of companies working on it . hundreds of them .
in each of these five areas we need at least 100 people .
you &apos;re going to say , they &apos;re nuts ! that &apos;s good .
i think here in the ted group there are many , who are already engaged there .
bill big has several companies , among other things , a named esolar , has the great solarthermaltechnologien .
vinod khosla invested in dozens of companies doing great things and interesting possibilities and i try to support that .
nathan myhrvold , and i finance a company that might be able to get a nuclear approach .
there are some innovations in the nuklearbereich ; it &apos;s modular , it &apos;s liquid .
the development has stopped in this industry , and it &apos;s a long ago , so it &apos;s not a big surprise that some of the good concepts are lying .
the terrapower-konzept means that instead of a part of the urans , the one percent , the u235 , we decided to burn the 99 percent , the u238 .
this is a pretty crazy idea .
but actually , you know , you know , for a long time , you could never simulate a bit of a long way , if it would work , but since there &apos;s a modern supercomputer , you can simulate it and see that , yes , it &apos;s the right thing , it looks like it &apos;s going to be .
and because you burn it , the kostenprofil is much better .
in fact , you burn the waste , and you can actually use the waste of today &apos;s nuclear reactors .
instead of breaking down the head , you just burn it . a great thing .
so uranium is used to be used , a little bit like a candle .
you can see that it &apos;s a kind of column , often called &quot; the &quot; wandernde wave . &quot;
this really does the treibstoffproblem .
here &apos;s a picture of a place in kentucky .
this is the waste , the 99 percent . you have the part that &apos;s going on today , so it &apos;s called aufgebrauchtes uranium .
the u.s. triebe triebe the u.s. u.s. u.s.
and if you can get a ozeanwasser cheap and just filtriert , you &apos;ll get enough fuel for the rest of the planet .
you know , there are many challenges , but it &apos;s an example of many hundreds of concepts that we need to move forward .
let &apos;s think about how we should measure our success .
what should our testimony look like ?
now , let &apos;s go to the goal we need to reach , and then we talk about the zwischenschritt .
many of them talk about 80 percent reduction by 2050 .
it &apos;s really important that we get there .
the rest of 20 percent will be produced in poor countries , and still , as a result , it will be waldrohdung and zement to be clean .
so , to reach these 80 percent , the developed world , including countries like china , are completely umstellen their elektrizitätsgeneration .
the other note says , if we use the null-emissionen technology , whether it &apos;s deployed in all developed countries , and we &apos;re on the way to get them to the rest of them .
that &apos;s great important .
this is going to be a schlüsselelement of this .
if we go back to what should be a statement of the 2020 ?
it should contain the two elements .
we should use the effektivitätsmaßnahmen to get reduction in the way . the less we emittieren , the lower it will be , and it &apos;s also the temperature .
but actually , this note for the things we do is not completely going to lead to the big reduktionen , just a second , or even less important to the other ones that are the speed of innovation for these breakthroughs .
we have to track these breakthroughs to track and we can measure that in firmenzahlen , in pilotprojekten and regulierungsänderungen .
there are many great books to this subject .
and the al gore &quot; we have the choice , &quot; and david mckays energy air energy air air air air air . &quot;
they really go through and create a framework where this is going to be discussed in the wide , because we need help from all sides .
there are some things that have to come together .
that &apos;s a wish .
a very real wish that we invent this technology .
if you just give me a wish for the next 50 years , i could choose the president , a vaccine , and i love that , or i could choose that wish , which is , halbierter energiepreis , erfunden. diesen that wish will take that wish .
this has the biggest impact .
if we don &apos;t get this wish , the dig between the long term and the kurzfristig will be terrible between the u.s. and china , between poor and rich and rich and fast , that two billion will be much worse .
so what do we need to do ?
what kind of thing do i do ?
we need to use more research .
when countries are meeting in places like koppenhagen , they shouldn &apos;t be just about co2 .
you should discuss these innovationsstrategie and they were shocked by the ridiculous little geldern that are going to be spent on these innovative approaches .
we need marktanreize , co2 taxes , cap &amp; amp ; trade is something that a preissignal can do .
we have to spread the message .
we have to have dialogue and full and the things that are being done by the government .
it &apos;s a important wish , but i think we can fulfill it .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you . thank you .
thank you very much . just to understand more about it better -- first , can you give us an idea of scale of these investment ?
bill gates : to get the simulation on a supercomputer , we have all the great scientists to get what we &apos;ve done , we only need a few 10 million , and even if we tested our materials in a russian reactor , to make sure it works , it &apos;s just in the 100en million .
the hard step is to build the first reaktors , more billion , the regularien and the place that actually builds the first one .
once the first one is , if he &apos;s going to be promised , it &apos;s all right , because the economic economy , the energy density is so different as we know it .
to understand this is really , deep into the ground , almost like a vertical column , that &apos;s a verbrauchten urans , and then the process starts to work , and it &apos;s going to work on the bottom ?
bg : right . now , you have to get the reactor in new befüllen , so there &apos;s lots of people and many control that can go wrong . this thing where you open it up and hinein- things , or herausbringt . that &apos;s not good .
but if you have very cheap fuel , you can put it for 60 years -- think of a column that you &apos;re buried without all the komplexitäten .
and it sits there and it &apos;s burning for 60 years , and then it &apos;s done .
a nuklearreaktor , which is a solution to the garbage .
bg : yeah . now , what happens to the waste : you can let him sit -- there &apos;s a lot less waste with this method -- then you take it and put it in the next reactor and burn it .
and we &apos;re starting to take the waste that already exists in these kühlbecken or trockenbehältern to the reactors . that &apos;s our startbrennstoff .
so , what &apos;s a problem that we put in our filling , and so that the müllvolumen will dramatically reduce the process of this process .
but while you &apos;ve talked about the world of these world , you have about these possibilities .
where is the greatest interest , what really do it ?
bg : well , we haven &apos;t picked up a place , and there &apos;s a lot of interesting things for everything that &apos;s called &quot; nuclear &quot; in the name , and people in the company were in russia , india , china -- i was here and talked about how this fits for the energieagenda .
i &apos;m optimistic . you know , the french and japanese have been doing something .
this is a sort of a variante of a thing that was done .
this is a important step forward , but it &apos;s like a faster reactor and some countries have this built , so everyone who has done fast reactor , a kandidatat , for our first .
in your imagination , what is it that you can do in your life ?
bg : well , we need one of these skalierbaren , stromgenerierenden things that are very cheap , we have 20 years for invent and then for 20 years .
this is like the kind of deadline that we &apos;ve got to have the umweltmodelle that we have to do .
and , you know , terrapower , if everything goes well , and that &apos;s a big wish , it could be easy .
and luckily , there are dozens of companies today , and we need hundreds of them , the same , if their approaches work , for the funding for their pilots , can be able to make it .
and it would be the best if it can do multiple , because then you could use a mixture .
so , in every case , we need a solution .
and so , the big possible breakthroughs , is this the biggest thing you know ?
bg : a energiedurchbruch is the most important thing .
this would be without the umweltherausforderung , but it &apos;s much more important .
in the nuclear sector , there are other innovative companies .
you know , we don &apos;t know how good work , but there &apos;s the modulare method , that &apos;s a different approach .
there &apos;s a liquid reaktortyp that seems something difficult , but maybe that &apos;s what it does .
and so , there &apos;s a lot of energy , but the beauty of that is that a million times a million times a million times as a ein , and therefore , if you can deal with the problems and that &apos;s mostly the radiation , the footprint and the cost , the impact , the impact , the impact , in a own way , in a country
if it doesn &apos;t work , what &apos;s going on ?
we need to introduce notfallmaßnahmen to try to make the erdtemperatur stable ?
bg : if you come in this situation , it &apos;s like you &apos;re eating too much , and it &apos;s a heart attack , and what you do is you need a herzoperation or something like that .
there &apos;s a forschungsrichtung called geoengineering , which is looking at various techniques to verzögern warming , so that we will give 20 or 30 years longer to get ourselves .
this is just a versicherungsmethode .
you hope we don &apos;t need it .
some people say , you don &apos;t want to work at insurance because you might be faul that you &apos;re going to eat , because you know that you &apos;re going to save the herzoperation .
i don &apos;t know if the smart is , if you take the importance of this problem , but there &apos;s a conversation in geoengineering that you should have that , if you have to be able to get it faster , or that innovation takes longer than we expect .
klimaskeptiker : do you have a or two sentences for you to convince you ?
bg : well , unfortunately , the skeptiker are in very different camps .
those who make scientific arguments are very little .
do you say that there are negative effects that have to do with the clouds , which are shifting things ?
there are very , very few things that you can tell at all , which you have a chance in a million .
this is a similar thing to do with aids .
you make the mistake now , and you pay a lot of that much later .
and that &apos;s why , if you have all kinds of dringenden problems to invest in something that you &apos;re not so clear about -- and that &apos;s the investment is not that clear . in fact , the ipcc doesn &apos;t necessarily be the worst scenario , and there are people in the rich world , looking at the board , and say , that &apos;s not a big
the fact is that these uncertainty should make us feel .
but my dream here is that if you can make it economic , and the other words , the skeptics , you know , is not going to say that it &apos;s not a carbon dioxide , i wish it &apos;s not that it &apos;s going to do , but i &apos;m going to accept it because it &apos;s cheaper than the previous method . &quot;
and this would be their answer to the björn lomborg argument that if you use all of this time and energy to solve the co2 , all the other goals suffer , the armutsverringerung that are fighting malaria and so on , that it &apos;s a stupid resource of resources to invest money , while there are better things we can do .
bg : well , the real spending of the research -- let &apos;s say the u.s. should spend 10 billion a year more than you do today -- that &apos;s not so dramatic .
below that other things don &apos;t suffer .
you then get too big geldsummen , and you can disagree with sensible people if you have something that &apos;s not economic , and try to finance that . it &apos;s a lot of waste .
it &apos;s because you &apos;re very short in front of a kostendurchbruch and funded just the learning curve . i think we should try to be more things that have the potential to be much more expensive .
if you get the abstrich that you get , you can get a very high energiepreis , then you can keep the rich up .
i mean , every one of us could spend five times a lot of our energy without doing its lifestyle .
for the bottom , it &apos;s a disaster .
and even lomborg thinks .
his new masche is now , &quot; why is research not going to work out ? &quot;
he &apos;s still going to be , because of his former stories , with the skeptiker-camp , but he understood that this is a very lonely group , and that &apos;s why he &apos;s going to bring it to the forschungsargument .
and this is a gedankengang that i think is appropriate .
the research , it &apos;s just nuts , just like little bit of support .
bill , i think i &apos;m talking about all of the people here , when i say , i really hope your wish will be true . thank you very much .
bg : thank you .
a few years ago , here at ted , peter skillman , named peter skillman , named a design-wettbewerb called the marshmallow-herausforderung .
the idea is pretty simple . vierer-teams , the größtmögliche freistehende structure with 20 spaghetti , about three times , is about a meter of string and a marshmallow .
the marshmallow has to be on top .
and , even though it really seems , it &apos;s really hard , because it &apos;s really easy to work very quickly .
and so i thought this was an interesting idea , and i turned it into a design-workshop .
it was a huge success .
since i &apos;ve done about 70 workshops of the world , with students , engineers and architects , even with ctos of the fortune-50-unternehmen , and there &apos;s something about this task that allowed deep sensations to the nature of collaboration and i want to share some of them with them .
normally most people start to do their own task .
you talk about it , you think about what it will look like , it &apos;s rangeln to make it happen .
then they invest a little bit of time in planning and organization . they &apos;re drawing and lay out of spaghetti .
they &apos;re investing in the zusammenbau of the zusammenbau structures in the zusammenbau .
and finally , just before you don &apos;t have time , someone takes the marshmallow and you &apos;re putting it down on the top , and step back and &quot; ta-da , &quot; -- admire her work .
but what happens , almost always , is that the &quot; ta-da &quot; is going to be a &quot; uh-oh , &quot; because the weight of the marshmallows is actually verbiegt and einstürzt .
there are a bunch of people who have much more uh-oh &quot; -momente &quot; than others , and under the worst are fresh bwl-absolventen .
you lie , you &apos;re cheating , you &apos;re confused and they &apos;re really making dürftige .
and of course , there are teams who have a lot more ta-da , and under the best , fresh students of the kindergartens .
and this is pretty amazing .
as peter told us , they &apos;re not just to the highest towers , but also the most interesting structures of all .
what you might be wondering is , how does this happen ? why ? what about those ?
and peter tells you , &quot; none of the children spend the head of the spaghetti gmbh . &quot;
they don &apos;t invest in time .
there is another reason .
and that is that bwl-studenten are trained to find a real plan , ok .
and then realize it .
what happens when you put the marshmallow on the top , you don &apos;t have time and what happens ?
it &apos;s a crisis .
sounds familiar , what ?
what &apos;s going to do is that they &apos;re doing the marshmallow and build a prototype , and they did a successful prototypes , and the marshmallow on the top , so they mehrfach the possibility to repair baufällige prototypes .
konstrukteure , that &apos;s how to recognize this kind of collaboration as a core of a iterativen .
and with each trial , the children get immediate feedback and what &apos;s not .
so the performance is working with prototypes , a lot of -- but let &apos;s see how different teams are .
the average for most of the is about 50cm , bwl-studenten , half of them , lawyers are doing something more , but not much , more than adults are better than adults .
who is the most successful ?
architects and engineers , fortunately .
the foot is the highest one i saw .
and why ? because they understand triangles and sich-selbst-verstärkende geometric patterns are the key to build on building structures .
ceos are something about average , but it &apos;s going to be interesting .
you &apos;re going to be a exekutive administrator on the team , you &apos;re going to get significant better .
it &apos;s incredible . you see around and see &quot; this team will win . &quot;
you can predict that . why is it going ?
because they have special skills of prozessbegleitung .
they lead the process , they understand it .
and this team , regelt and watch the work of the team , the performance will improve significant .
and specialized skills and prozessfähigkeiten and their combination leads to success .
if you have 10 teams , the typical thing , they get about 6 that have stable structures .
i was trying to try something interesting .
i thought we &apos;re going to put the pokereinsatz .
so i offered a $ 10000 prize for the winner for the winner .
what do you think about this design-studenten ?
what was the result ?
this happened . not a team had a stable structure .
if anybody had built a 2,5cm of construction , he would have been carried the price home .
so , isn &apos;t it interesting that high wetteinsätze have a strong effect ?
we went through these practice with the same students .
what do you think ?
now they understood the benefits of the &quot; prototyping . &quot;
so , from the same , bad group of one is the best .
they &apos;re producing the highest construction in the least time .
so there are tief-greifende lessons for us to be about nature and success .
you might ask : why would someone actually invest to make a marshmallow-challenge ?
the reason is , i &apos;m helping digital tools and processes to help teams , cars , video games , and visual effects .
and what the marshmallow-challenge is doing is , they help to identify hidden assumptions .
because frankly , each project has its own marshmallow .
the challenge offers a common experience , a common language , or more , to build the right prototype .
and this is the value of this experience , this kind of simple exercise .
and those of you who are interested in , can be besuchen .
it &apos;s a blog , where you can see how you build the marshmallows .
there &apos;s a schritt-für-schritt-anleitung there .
you find crazy examples of the world , how people optimize the system and raffinieren .
there are also weltrekorde .
and the most important lesson , i think , is actually the construction of the construction .
it requires that we all set our senses , and that we think we &apos;re using our thinking , as our feelings and our do , in the challenge that we face .
and sometimes a small prototype of this experience is all it needs to take us from a &quot; uh-oh &quot; -- to get a &quot; ta-da &quot; moment .
and that can make a big difference .
thank you .
we &apos;re going to do this as a machine here .
a big machine , a cool , machine machine , and this is a machine machine .
and everyone in this room has to go in .
and you can go to the past , you can go into the future ; you can &apos;t stay here in here and now .
and i ask myself what you would choose , because i &apos;ve been asked my friends in last time , and they wanted to go to the past .
i don &apos;t know . they wanted to go back to time before there were cars or twitter or &quot; america seeking the american . &quot;
i don &apos;t know .
i &apos;m convinced you &apos;re kind of drawn to the nostalgie .
and i understand that .
i &apos;m not part of this group , i have to say .
i don &apos;t want to go into the past , and that &apos;s not because i &apos;m a abenteurer .
it &apos;s because there are not that possibilities on this planet , they &apos;re going forward .
so i want to go into this machine , and i want to go into the future .
this is the greatest time that you ever have on this planet , no matter how scale you build : health , wealth , mobility , opportunities , declining krankheitsraten .
there was never time like this .
my ur-großeltern died of all of them as they were 60 .
my grandparents were asking this number to 70. .
my parents are 80 to the fersen .
so , there should be a nine at the beginning of my todeszahl .
but it &apos;s not even people like us , because this is a bigger thing than that .
a child that &apos;s born today in new delhi can expect to live as long as the richest man on the planet 100 years ago .
think about it . that &apos;s an incredible fact .
and why is this ?
smallpox . smallpox killed billions of people on this planet .
they &apos;ve geformt the demographics of the earth in a way , as it has never been any war .
they &apos;re gone . they &apos;re gone .
we have bezwungen them .
in the rich world , diseases that millions of us still have a generation ago , we still have a risk of yet .
diphterie , röteln , kinderlähmung ...
does anybody know what this is ?
vaccines , modern medicine , our ability to feed billions of people , that &apos;s the successes of the scientific method .
and from my view , the scientific method is a scientific way , to try and see if it works , it &apos;s going to change if it doesn &apos;t , one of the greatest achievements of humanity .
so this is the good news .
and unfortunately , this is the whole good news , because there are some other problems , and they &apos;re often mentioned .
and one is that despite all of our achievements , one billion people in this world are hungry every day .
this number goes up , and it gets up very quickly , and that &apos;s a shame .
and not only that , we &apos;ve used our imagination to make this world a lot of verwüsten .
drinking water , urbares land , rainforests , oil , gas , they &apos;re going to disappear , and that &apos;s soon , and if we don &apos;t go out of this chaos , we &apos;re going to go away .
so the question is : can we do that ? i think it &apos;s like .
i think it &apos;s clear that we can produce food that will feed billions of people without the land that they live in .
i think we can supply this world with energy that doesn &apos;t break them at the same time .
i really believe that , and no , that &apos;s not a wunschdenken .
but this is what i think at night awake -- one of the things that i wake up at night at night . we have never needed scientific progress as well as now , never , that we haven &apos;t yet .
and we &apos;ve never been able to make it reasonable vernünftig , as we can .
we &apos;re at the door at the door , amazing events on many areas , and yet i really think we have to go back hundreds , 300 years ago the enlightenment , to find a time where we fought progress , where we &apos;ve got more fronten to more than that .
people are hüllen themselves in their faith , so that they can &apos;t free them .
not even the truth is going to free them .
and listen , everybody has a fairly to his opinion , even quite a fairly of its opinion to progress .
but you know what you &apos;re not right ?
they don &apos;t have a right to their own facts . &apos; tschuldigung , they don &apos;t have .
and i took a while to find that .
about a decade ago , i wrote an article about impfungen for the new yorker , a little article .
and i was amazed to find resistance , to resistance toward what , at the end of the end , the most effective health in health care in the history of humanity .
i didn &apos;t know what i should do , so i did just what i always do , i wrote a paper and i went on .
and soon , i wrote a article about gentechnisch food .
the same thing , only bigger .
people were playing nuts .
so i wrote a article , and i couldn &apos;t understand why people thought it would be &quot; frankenfood , &quot; why they believed that molecules were in a certain place of a random kind of übergriff on the field of nature .
but you know , i do what i do . i wrote the article , i kept on .
i mean , i &apos;m a journalist .
we type , we pass , we &apos;re going to eat , that &apos;s okay .
but these things were worried about me , and i couldn &apos;t figure out why , and eventually i found it .
and this is because these guys who were nuts me didn &apos;t even have any fanatiker at all .
these were people &apos;s umsichtige people , people , anständige people .
they were just like the people in this room .
and that got me so mess .
but then i thought , you know what , let &apos;s be honest .
we &apos;re at a point where we don &apos;t have the same relationship to progress , like the old days .
we &apos;re talking about zwiespältig .
we &apos;re talking about ironic about this , with little anführungszeichen about this , &quot; progress . &quot;
okay , so there are reasons for that , and i think we know what causes of these .
we have trust in institutions , in authority , and sometimes in science , and there &apos;s no reason why it shouldn &apos;t be .
you can just call a few names and people get to understand .
chernobyl , bhopal , the challenger , vioxx , mass destruction , the us-präsidentschaftswahl 2000 .
i mean , you know , you can choose your own list .
there are questions and problems with people we believed they were quite quite , so they were skeptical .
ask ask , ask evidence , demand that you ask .
take nothing to do .
but now , it &apos;s : if you get evidence , you need to take this evidence , and we &apos;re not good at it .
and i can say that the reason we &apos;re in an epidemic of fear , as i never saw you and i hope will never see again .
about 12 years ago , a story was published , a terrible story that the autismus-epidemie with the masern , mumps , and röteln vaccine .
very frightening .
there were many studies done to see if that was true .
and there &apos;s been a haufenweise of haufenweise studies . this is a serious issue .
the data came in .
the data came in from the united states , from england , from sweden , from canada , and they all were in the same , no correlation , no connection , no connection .
it doesn &apos;t make any difference . it doesn &apos;t make any difference , because we believe in the anecdotes , we believe what we see , what we see is what makes us feel real .
we don &apos;t believe in a bunch of documents from a regierungsangstellten that gives us data , and i understand that , i think we &apos;re all doing that .
but you know what ?
the result of that was devastating .
climate change for this fact : the united states is one of the only countries in the world where the impfrate of the masern are falling down .
that &apos;s skandalös , and we should be embarrassed .
it &apos;s terrible .
what happens is that we could do that .
well , i understand that . i do .
because anybody here &apos;s got a masern ?
has one in the audience ever seen anyone who die of the disease ?
not very often .
in this country , not in this country , but the 160.000 time in the world last year .
this is a lot of deaths through masern , 20 per hour .
but because this is not happening here , we can verdrängen it , and people like jenny can be walking around and the botschaften of the platforms like tv and larry king live .
and they can do it because they don &apos;t connect the cause and correlation .
you don &apos;t understand that these things seem to be equal , but almost never the same thing .
and this is something we need to learn , and it &apos;s very fast .
this guy was a hero , jonas salk .
he befreite us from one of the worst of humanity .
not fear , no qualen , kinderlähmung , puff , disappeared .
the guy in the middle don &apos;t do that .
he &apos;s called paul offit .
he &apos;s just developed a rotavirus-impfstoff with a couple of other people .
he can save the lives of 400- , 500,000 children a year in the developing world .
pretty good , isn &apos;t it ?
now , that &apos;s good , except that paul herumläuft and talking about vaccines and tells how valuable they are , and that people should just stop jammern .
and that &apos;s actually saying that .
so , paul is a terrorist .
when paul talks in a public space , he can &apos;t tell the bewaffnete wächter .
he gets calls back home because people like to tell him that they know where his children go to school .
and why ? because paul did a vaccine .
i don &apos;t need to say , but vaccines are essential .
take them away , and they go back , terrible diseases , and that &apos;s happening .
we now have a masern .
and that gets worse , and pretty soon children will die again , because that &apos;s just a question of numbers .
and they &apos;re not just dying of the disease .
what about kinderlähmung ? take that . why not ?
a kommilitonin of mine wrote me a couple of weeks ago , and i said i &apos;m a little bit of schrill .
nobody has ever said it before .
she wouldn &apos;t get her child to kill her kinderlähmung . no case .
fine .
why ? because we don &apos;t have a kinderlähmung . and you know what ?
we had no kinderlähmung in this country .
today , i don &apos;t know , maybe , in lagos , someone in lagos , i went to an airplane and fly by los angeles , right now , he &apos;s a state of ohio .
and in a few hours , he lands , and he &apos;s going to land a car , and it comes to long beach , and he will visit one of these fantastichen ted-dinner tonight .
and he doesn &apos;t know he &apos;s infected with a lähmenden disease , and we don &apos;t know that , because that &apos;s how the world works .
this is the planet that we live in . don &apos;t do it as if it &apos;s not .
we love to lie in lying . we love that .
did you all have taken your vitamine in this morning ?
echinacea , a little antioxidantium that helps them to go .
i know they did that because half the americans make it every day .
they take the stuff , and they take alternative to cure , and it doesn &apos;t make any difference , how often we find that they &apos;re useless .
the data shows that all the time .
they are making their urine . they never do that .
that &apos;s okay , you want to pay 28 billion dollars for dark urine .
i &apos;m totally stimme to you .
dark urine . dark .
why do we do this ? why do we do this ?
well , i think i understand -- we hate the pharmaindustrie .
we hate a strong government . we don &apos;t have trust in the system .
and we shouldn &apos;t . our healthcare system is .
it &apos;s cruel to millions of people .
it &apos;s absolutely amazing cold and seelentötend itself to us that can afford it .
so we &apos;re going to walk away , and where are we going to go ?
we &apos;re walking into the poor of the placebo-industrie .
that &apos;s great . i love the placebo-industrie .
but you know , this is really serious , because stuff is crap , and we &apos;re spending billions of dollars for it .
and i have all kinds of little requisiten here .
none of it -- gingko , betrug , echinacea , acai , i don &apos;t even know what this is , but we spend billions of dollars for it .
and you know what ? if i say that , people screaming around and say , &quot; what do you care ? let &apos;s do the people , what they want .
that &apos;s how they feel good . &quot;
and you know what ? they &apos;re wrong .
because it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s the gesundheitsminister , who says , &quot; hmm , i &apos;m going to not take the record of my experts to mammography , or any krebs-quacksalber who wants to treat his patients with kaffe-einläufen .
if you &apos;re going to take off to this path , where belief and magic replace evidence and science , you can get to a place you don &apos;t want to be .
they &apos;re going to thabo to thabo mbeki in south africa .
he took 400,000 of his people because he was about that red beete , knoblauch and zitronenöl are much more effective than the antiretroviral drugs we know that they can break the course of aids .
hundreds of thousands of deaths in a country that is worse than any other person that &apos;s going to be geplagt .
don &apos;t tell me that these things don &apos;t have consequences .
they have them . they always have them .
now , the most hirnloseste epidemic we &apos;re in right now is this absurde struggle between the befürwortern gentechnisch food and the bio-elite .
this is a idiotische debate . it &apos;s got to stop .
it &apos;s a debate about words , about metaphors .
that &apos;s ideology , not science .
all we eat , every reiskorn , every branch , every single rosenkohl , was changed by the people .
you know , there was no mandarinen in the garden .
there was no cantaloupe-melonen .
there were no weihnachtsbäume . we did it all .
we did it in the last couple of years .
and some of it has worked and some of it .
we &apos;ve got rid of what &apos;s not working .
now we can make it more accurate , and of course , there are risks , but we can do something like vitamin a in rice , and that &apos;s what millions can help , millions of people to increase their lives .
you don &apos;t want to do this ?
i have to say , i don &apos;t understand .
we tend to be gentechnisch the way .
why do we do that ?
now , what i &apos;m constantly hearing is : too many chemicals , pesticides , hormones , monokultur , we don &apos;t want to have a huge amount of the same fields that &apos;s wrong .
we don &apos;t want to patent companies .
we don &apos;t want to own companies to own seeds .
and you know what my answer to all this is ?
yes , they &apos;re right . we fix this .
it &apos;s true , we have a huge amount of value , but that &apos;s not science .
it has nothing to do with science .
it &apos;s a fairly , morality , patentkram .
you know that science is not a company .
it &apos;s not a country .
it &apos;s not even an idea ; it &apos;s a process .
it &apos;s a process , and sometimes it works , and sometimes it doesn &apos;t work , but the idea that we should not allow science to do their work , because we &apos;re afraid of a real sackgasse , and it &apos;s keeping millions of people from the ground .
you know , in the next 50 years we have 70 percent of food to grow more food than the moment . 70 percent .
these investment in africa over the last 30 years .
shame . shame .
you need it , and we don &apos;t give them .
and why ? it &apos;s a gentechnisch .
we don &apos;t want to encourage people to eat this kind of verrottete stuff like maniok .
and the maniok is something that &apos;s eating half a billion people .
it &apos;s like a potato .
it &apos;s just a bunch of calories . it &apos;s a mies .
it doesn &apos;t have nutrients ; it doesn &apos;t have a protein , and scientists are building all of this .
and then people could eat the food and wouldn &apos;t be blind .
they wouldn &apos;t starve , and you know what ?
that would be nice . it wouldn &apos;t be chez panisse , but it would be nice .
and all i can tell is why do we fight this ?
i mean , let &apos;s ask ourselves , why do we fight this ?
because we don &apos;t want to be genes ?
it &apos;s not about genes , gene . it &apos;s not about chemicals .
it &apos;s not about our ridiculous passion for hormones , our beharren of our beharren , better food , no food .
it &apos;s not about rice krispies , it &apos;s about getting people alive , and it &apos;s going to be very highest time to understand what that means .
because you know what ?
if we don &apos;t do that , if we continue to do that , we &apos;re going to make ourselves a little guilty about what we do , i think , not guilty , to be high-tech , high-tech .
there &apos;s no other description for what &apos;s happening here .
it &apos;s selfish , it &apos;s ugly , it &apos;s not worthy of our own , and we really need to stop that .
so , after this incredible funny conversation , you might want to say , &quot; do you want to go into this ridiculous machine and the future ? &quot;
anyway , i want to definitely .
now , in the present moment , you &apos;re in the present , but we have an incredible opportunity .
we can put these machine machine on everything we want .
we can hinbewegen them where we want to hinbewegen them , and we &apos;re going to move where we want to go .
we have to lead these conversations , and we need to think , but if we go into the machine machine and go into the future , we &apos;re going to be happy to have that .
i know we can , and as far as it affects me , it &apos;s something that the world needs now .
thank you .
thank you .
i &apos;ve been interested in the placebo-effekt for some time , and it might seem strange that a magician is interested in this , because you look at it as i &apos;m like , &quot; a deception that will be a real thing when someone is just solid enough . &quot;
in other words , zuckerpillen have shown a measurable impact , which is because the person thinks what happens with her , or a pharmazeutische or a kind of ... in the schmerzmanagement , for example , there is , if the patient is only solid , there &apos;s a measurable effect in the body called the placebo-effekt .
a deception is going to be a little bit of real because someone knows it .
so we can also understand each other , i want to show you a basic , simple trick .
and i &apos;m going to show you how he works . this is a trick that has been at least since the 1950s in every child for children .
i even learned it from the cub scout magic of the 1970s in the 1970s .
i &apos;m going to take it for you and explain it .
and then i &apos;ll explain why i &apos;ll explain it .
so , look what happens .
the knife that they can study is my hand that they can study .
i &apos;m going to just hold the knife just like my hand .
i &apos;m going to push my own up .
and to make sure that nothing in my mind , or out of it , i &apos;m just going to get my wrist right here .
so you can see that , in this way , you can &apos;t see that there &apos;s no time . as long as i get out here , nothing can go into my own ärmel or come out .
and the goal here is just easy .
i &apos;m going to open my hand , and hopefully , if everything goes well , the knife will hold through my bare physical magnetismus .
it &apos;s actually sitting in your place that i can shake it without the knife with the knife .
nothing goes into my own , or comes out , not trickserei , and you can study everything .
ta-da !
now , this is a trick that i often get a little kids who are interested in magic , because you can learn a lot about deception when you &apos;re closer , even though it &apos;s a very simple trick .
probably many of you here know this trick here .
and he works like this .
i hold the knife in my hand .
i say i &apos;m going to umschließe my wrist to make sure that nothing in my mind disappears or out of it , and that &apos;s a lie .
the reason i festhalte my wrist is that it &apos;s the real secret of illusion .
and that &apos;s where i &apos;m going to put my hand out of you , so you can see them from the back , this finger here , my zeigefinger , just from where he was in a position that he &apos;s going to be ausgestreckt .
great trick ?
there &apos;s someone in the back of the back that was not a childhood .
so , he &apos;s here . right .
and when i &apos;m umdrehe , the fingers changes its position .
and now you could talk about why , why is a deception , why you don &apos;t know that there are just three fingers down here , because the mind and the way that he &apos;s processing information is not important , one , two , three , but it &apos;s a group .
but that &apos;s not what it &apos;s really about , and then i open my hand .
of course , it &apos;s going to be stuck there , but not through the magnetismus of my body , but through a trick , through my zeigefinger , which is now there .
and if i close my hand , the same thing happens by zurückdrehe me through this movement is hidden up to zurückbewegt .
i take that hand away . and here is the knife .
this trick can demonstrate your friends and neighbors . thank you .
now , what has this to do with the placebo-effekt ?
one year ago , i read a study that really umgehauen me .
i &apos;m not a doctor or a researcher , and that &apos;s why i was an amazing thing for me .
and it turns out , if you offer a placebo in a white pill , in the form of a aspirintablette , it &apos;s just a round , white pill that have a specific amount of measurable .
but if you give the shape you &apos;re going to take the placebo , you change in a smaller pill , and you paint and you paint that blue and you shape a letter to it , it actually is actually measurable .
and that , though none of these are any kind of pharmazeutische ... it &apos;s just zuckerpillen .
but a white pill is not as good as a blue pill .
what ? that really ausflippen me .
but it turned out that it &apos;s not all .
if you take a kapseln , it &apos;s more effective than the tabletten of any form .
a colored capsule that &apos;s yellow in one end and the other red is better than a white capsule .
and the dosierung plays a role .
a pill twice a day is not as good as three pills -- i can &apos;t remember the exact statistics now . i &apos;m sorry .
the key thing is , the key thing .
and the dosierungen is also playing a role .
and the shape plays a role .
and if you want to have the ultimate placebo-effekt , you have to grab a needle .
right ? a syringe with a wirkungslosen -- a couple of milliliter of a wirkungslosen substance that you &apos;re going to be able to get into a patient .
this creates a very strong image in your head . it &apos;s much stronger than a white pill .
this chart is really , i &apos;m going to show you another time when we have a projektor .
so the fact is that the white pill are not as good as the blue pill , which doesn &apos;t work as well as a capsule that doesn &apos;t work as well as the needle .
and none of it has some really pharmazeutische property , it &apos;s just our belief that we can make a stronger impact .
i wanted to know if i could use this idea for a magic trick .
i suppose something that &apos;s obvious a deception , and it &apos;s really going to make it look .
we know from that study that you have to grab a needle , if it &apos;s going to go to the thing .
this is an 18 inch long , and it &apos;s very , very spitz , and i &apos;m going to start with you a little bit of a little bit of sterilisieren .
this is really my meat . it &apos;s not damians spezielles meat .
this is my skin . this is not a special effect from hollywood .
i &apos;m going to stick this needle into my skin and take through through you , you &apos;re going to leave it again .
if you &apos;re going out , if you &apos;re easily fallen , i showed this one last night in the hotel room , and some people i didn &apos;t know , and that woman has become almost ohnmächtig .
so i propose if you &apos;re going to be very bad , you &apos;ll take the next 30 seconds away , or , you know , i &apos;m going to make the first heiklen part here .
you can see it in the same , you can also get wegsehen if you want .
so , it &apos;s going to be , right here , where my meat is , the bottom part of my arm , i &apos;m just going to make a little einstich .
sorry . do you do this crazy ?
and now , just a little bit through my skin and on the other side , again .
now we &apos;re actually in the same situation that we had in the messertrick .
about .
but now you can &apos;t count my fingers , or ?
so , i &apos;m going to show you . this is one , two , three , four , five .
well , yes .
i know what people think when you see this .
they say , &quot; okay , it &apos;s not that stupid and durchsticht itself to talk for a few minutes . &quot;
well , i &apos;ll show you .
what does this look like ? pretty good .
yeah , i know .
and the people behind them say , &quot; okay . i didn &apos;t see it right . &quot;
people in the nebenräumen are coming in .
let me show you close to you .
this is really my skin . this is not a special effect from hollywood .
that &apos;s my meat , and i can herumdrehen it .
sorry . if you get out of it , you look away , don &apos;t look at all .
the people in the back , or the one that later , you know , you &apos;ll see a video at the time , and they &apos;ll say , &quot; well , this looks pretty impressive , but if it was real , he would -- you see , here &apos;s a hole and there , if it really was really , it would be bluten . &quot;
okay , let me give you a little bit of blood for you .
yeah , here it is .
normally i would take the needle now .
i would clean my arm and show you that there are no wounds .
but i think , in this frame , and with the intention of making a little bit a real one , i &apos;m going to just leave the needle and go out of the stage .
we will still meet a couple of times the next few days .
i hope you &apos;ll be happy to it . thank you .
everybody &apos;s talking about happiness today .
i &apos;ve got some people who are counting the number of books that have been published with &quot; happiness &quot; in the title in the last five years , and they gave them to about 40 , and there were a lot more .
there &apos;s a tremendous wave of interest in happiness among researchers .
there &apos;s a lot of glücks-coaching .
everybody would love to make people happier .
but despite all this tide of work , there are several cognitive ones that kind of fallen it , which is almost impossible to think about happiness .
and my talk today is mainly going to act about these cognitive falling .
and this is true for laien , who think about your own happiness , and it &apos;s true for scientists who think about happiness , because it turns out that we are just as much as any other .
the first one of these is a widerstreben , zuzugeben .
it turns out that the word &quot; happiness is simply no useful word , because we apply it to lots of different things . &quot;
i think there &apos;s a certain meaning that we could just narrow it , but in the big and whole , this is something we need to give up , and we will think of the complicated perspective on what makes well-being .
the second case is a verwechslung of experience and memory , basically , it &apos;s between happiness in his life and happy to be about his life or happy with his life .
and these are two very different concepts , and they &apos;re both zusammengeworfen of happiness in the notion of happiness .
and the third is the konzentrations-illusion , and that &apos;s the unfortunate fact that we can &apos;t think about a fact that we can think about a fact that affects well-being without the meaning .
i mean , this is a real cognitive event .
there &apos;s just no way to get it right .
now i &apos;d like to start with one example of someone who reported a story of one of my lectures , which was a story , &#91; unclear &#93; he said he had heard a symphony , and it was absolutely gorgeous music , and at the end of the recording , there was a fürchterliches kreischendes sound .
and then he added , really , quite emotional , that ruined the whole experience .
but that didn &apos;t .
what it ruined was the memories of the experience .
he had the experience .
he had 20 minutes of music .
she didn &apos;t count because he was a memory of memory ; the memory was ruined , and the memory was all he had to keep .
what really tells us is that we could think about ourselves and about other people , in the sense of two species of the self .
there &apos;s a erlebendes self that lives in the present and knows the presence , capable of experiencing the past , but just the present .
it &apos;s the erlebende self that the doctor &apos;s doctor -- you know , when the doctor asks , &quot; does it hurt when i &apos;m going to get you here ? &quot;
and then there &apos;s a erinnerndes self , and the erinnernde itself is that , the mitzählt and the story of our lives , and it &apos;s the one that the doctor is to tell by asking the question , &quot; how have you felt lately ? &quot;
or , &quot; how did your journey been to compromise ? &quot; or something like that .
these are two very different units that erlebende itself and the erinnernde itself , and the two to be verwechseln is part of the durcheinanders of happiness .
now , the erinnernde itself is a storyteller .
and this starts really , really , with a basic reaction to our memories -- it starts to begin .
we &apos;re not just telling stories when we make us tell stories .
our memory tells us stories that means what we can keep from our experiences of our experiences is a story .
and let &apos;s start with an example .
there &apos;s an old study .
these are real patients that are doing a painful procedure .
i &apos;m not going to go into the details . she &apos;s not painful today , but she was painful when this study was done in the 1990s .
they were asked to report their pain in their pain .
and here are two patients . these are their records .
and they &apos;re asked , &quot; who are the two more suffered ? &quot;
and this is a very simple question .
patient b has a clear suffered . his darmspiegelung was longer , and every minute of pain , the patient a had had a patient , and more .
but now there &apos;s a different question : &quot; how do these patients do so do they feel ? &quot;
and here &apos;s a surprise .
and the surprise is that patient a much worse erinnrung of the darmspiegelung had a patient , for example , had a patient .
the stories of the darmspiegelungen were different , and because it &apos;s a very important part of the story , as it ends .
and none of these stories is very erbaulich or great -- but one of them is that very much , is this clear .
but one of them is clearly worse than the other .
and the one that is the worse was , where the pain was at its peak at its peak . it &apos;s a bad story .
how do we know that ?
because we &apos;ve asked these people to their darmspiegelung , and also much later , &quot; how bad was the whole thing ? &quot;
and she was much worse for a , for a , for b in the erinnrung .
now , this is a direct conflict between the erlebenden self and the erinnernden itself .
in the view of the erlebenden self , b clearly had an worse time .
now , what you could do with a patient , and we actually did clinical experiments , and it &apos;s been done , and it works , you could actually extend the darmspiegelung of a patient a , you just put the tube in it without the rütteln .
this will lead the patient , but only a little bit less than a little bit .
and if you do that for a few minutes , you have a bewirkt that is the erlebende of a bad thing , and you &apos;ve made that the erinnernde person is a much better , because now , a patient a has given a better story about their experience .
so what drew a story ?
and that &apos;s true for the stories that provides the memory of us , and it &apos;s also true for the stories we invent .
so , what a story of these story is they are umbrüche , significant moments and end .
and end up are very , very important , and in this case , the end .
well , the erlebende itself lives his life on the time .
it &apos;s got moments of the erlebens , one after the other .
and they ask , what happens to these moments ?
and the answer is really simple . they &apos;re lost forever .
i mean , most of our lives -- and i have the case of what i mean -- you know , the psychological presence is true for about three seconds long , which means you know , there &apos;s about 600 million of them in a month . most of you don &apos;t leave behind .
most of them are completely ignored by the erinnernden itself .
and yet , you know , you know , the impression that you should count that what &apos;s happening during this moments of the erlebens is what &apos;s going on .
it &apos;s the finite resource we use while we &apos;re in the world .
and as we consume it would seem to be important , but that &apos;s not the story that behält the erinnernde itself .
so we have the erinnernde self and the erlebende self , and they &apos;re really quite different .
the biggest difference between them is to be about time .
from the perspective of the erlebenden itself , if you have a holiday , and the second week is just as good as the first one , then the zweiwöchige vacation is twice as good as the einwöchige vacation .
and this is how it doesn &apos;t work for the erinnernde itself .
for the erinnernde itself , a zweiwöchiger vacation is hardly better than the einwöchige vacation , because there &apos;s no neuen to be added .
they haven &apos;t changed the story .
and in this way , time is the critical variable that makes a erinnerndes self from a erlebenden self , and time has very little influence on this story .
now , the erinnernde self makes more than to remind and stories .
it &apos;s actually that , if you have a patient , because if you have a patient , you say two darmspiegelungen at two different surgeons , and decide which he &apos;s supposed to vote , then the one who has the memory that &apos;s less bad , and that &apos;s the surgeon that will be chosen .
the erlebende self has no voice in this choice .
actually , we don &apos;t choose between experiences . we choose the memories of experiences .
and even when we think about the future , we don &apos;t normally think about our future as an experience .
we think about our future as a vorausgesehene memories .
and basically , you can look at this , you know , as a tyrannei of the erinnernden itself , and you can think of the erinnernde itself as one , which kind of schleppt the erlebende self through experiences that doesn &apos;t need the erlebende itself .
i have the impression that when we &apos;re doing a holiday , that &apos;s a very often case , that means we &apos;re doing vacation weitestgehend on the service of the erinnernden itself .
and this is a little hard to justify , i think .
i mean , how do we feel about our memories ?
this is one of the explanations that is given to the dominance of the erinnernden itself .
and when i think about it , i think about a holiday that we &apos;ve done a few years ago , the very best vacation i ever had , and i think quite often about the relationship of how often i think about other people &apos;s relationship .
and i probably have my memories of this journey of dreiwöchige journey , i &apos;d say about 25 minutes in the last four years .
now , if i ever opened the folder , i had 600 pictures , i had spent another hour .
now , these are three weeks , and that &apos;s the most important one and a half hours .
there seems to be a unstimmigkeit .
now , i might be a little extreme , you know , how little appetite i have on the memory of memories , but even if you give more of them , there &apos;s a real question . why do we give memories so much weight in the weight of the weight that we give in experiences ?
so i want you to think about a thought thought .
imagine your next vacation , you know that at the end of the urlaubs , all of your images are going to be vernichtet and you get a amnestisches drug that you will remember nothing .
now , would you vote the same vacation ?
and if you would choose a different vacation , there is a conflict between your two types of self and you have to think about how you decide this conflict and it &apos;s really not obvious , because if you think about time , you get an answer , and if you think about memories , you might get a different answer .
so why we choose the urlaube that we choose is a problem that makes us a choice between the two species of the self .
now , the two types of self , two words , are two terms of happiness .
there are actually two concepts of happiness that we can use , one per self .
so you can ask : how happy is the erlebende ?
and then they would ask : how happy are the moments in life of the erlebenden itself ?
and they &apos;re all -- happiness for moments is a fairly complicated process .
what are the emotions that can be measured ?
and by the way , we &apos;re now able to be able to get a pretty good idea of happiness on the time .
if you ask the happiness of the erinnernden yourself , it &apos;s a very different thing .
this is not about how happy a person is alive .
it &apos;s about how happy or delighted the person when this person thinks about their lives .
very different term .
anybody who &apos;s not different these terms will be unterscheidet the exploration of happiness , and i &apos;m also part of a bunch of researchers that have been doing the exploration of happiness long , and that &apos;s what they did in the same way .
the distinction between happiness of the erlebenden self and happiness itself has been recognized in the last few years , and now you &apos;re going to try to measure the two separat .
the world &apos;s place has a worldwide survey where more than half a million people have been asking about what they think about their lives and about their experiences , and there were other effort in the direction .
so in the last few years we started to learn about the happiness of the self .
and the main lesson that we have learned is that they &apos;re really different .
you know how happy someone is alive , and that teaches you not much about how happy he lives and vice versa .
just to give you a sense of correlation , that correlation is about .5 .
what that means is that if you hit someone and you would say , oh , your dad is a zwei-meter-mann , how much would you know about your scale ?
well , they would know something about their size , but there &apos;s a lot of uncertainty .
they have so much uncertainty .
if i tell you that somebody &apos;s going to be eight to a scale from 10 , you have a lot of uncertainty about how happy he is with his erlebenden self .
so correlation is low .
we know something about what happiness is determined .
we know that money is really important , goals are very important .
we know that happiness is mainly being happy to be happy with people we like , spend time with people who like that .
there are other pleasure , but that &apos;s dominant .
so if you want to maximize happiness of the self , you will end up doing very different things .
the conclusion from what i said here is that we &apos;re really not thinking about happiness than a ersatz of well-being .
it &apos;s a completely different term .
now , a very short , another reason we can &apos;t think about happiness , is that we don &apos;t look at the same things when we think about life and actually , if we &apos;re in fact .
so if you ask the simple question , how happy people in california are not going to get the answer .
if you ask this question , you think that people in california must be happier if they say , in a state , we &apos;re going to be in a state .
and what happens is that if you think about life in california , you think about the difference between california and other places , and that difference is , we say , in climate .
well , it turns out that climate is not very important for the erlebende self , and it &apos;s not even important for the nachdenkliche self that decides how happy people are .
but , because the nachdenkliche self is responsible , can you end up -- some people could go to california .
and it &apos;s sort of interesting to what happens to people who are willing to california in hope .
now , your erlebendes self won &apos;t be happier .
we know that .
but one thing will happen . you will think they &apos;re happier , because if you think about it , you &apos;ll remember how terrible the weather was in ohio , and you &apos;re feeling that you &apos;ve made the right decision .
it &apos;s very hard to think about well-being , and i hope i &apos;m giving you a sense of how hard it is .
thank you .
thank you . i have a question to you .
thank you .
now , when we were talking about a few weeks ago , i told me that there was a pretty interesting result that came out of this particular survey .
is this something that you can share with us , because you &apos;ve got a few minutes left ?
daniel kahneman : sure .
i think the most interesting thing we found in the survey of a survey is a number that we had absolutely not expected to find .
we found this in terms of happiness in the erlebenden itself .
and if we looked at how emotion vary .
and it turns out that under a income of 60,000 dollars a year , for americans , and this is a very large sample of americans , about 600,000 , but it &apos;s a big representative of what &apos;s been a income of 600,000 dollars in the year of 600,000 dollars in the year .
60,000 .
dk : 60,000 .
60,000 dollars a year are unhappy , and they become more happy , the poorer they become .
we get a absolutely flat line .
i mean , i rarely seen so flat lines .
what happens is that money doesn &apos;t have a erlebnis-glück , but lack of money is about to beschafft , and we can measure this misery very , very clearly .
in the sense of the other self , the self itself , you get a different story .
the more money you make , you make the happier you are .
that &apos;s not true for emotion .
but danny , in the entire american effort , it &apos;s all about life , freedom , the pursuit of happiness .
if people take this befund seriously , i mean , it seems to be in the head of places everything we think , for example , in terms of steuerpolitik and so on .
is there a chance that politicians , in general , would have a befund befund like this , and that would be based on politics ?
dk : you know , i think that there &apos;s an honor for the role of the glücksforschung in politics .
the recognition will be slow to the united states , no question , but in the united kingdom , you &apos;re just going to happen in other countries .
people are , in fact , recognize that they should think about happiness when they think about politics .
it will take a while , and people will argue whether they want to explore erlebnis-glück , or whether they want to explore lebens-bewertung , so we have to lead this discussion quite quickly .
how you increase happiness is very different , as you think , and whether you think about the erinnernde self or whether you think about the erlebende self .
this is going to change politics , i think , in the next few years .
in the united states , you &apos;ve got to measure the erlebnis-glück of the population .
this is going to be , i think , in the next one or two decades of the national statistics .
well , it seems to me that this is going to be , or at least the most exciting political debate will be to be able to be following over the next few years .
thank you for invention of economics economics .
thank you , danny kahneman .
i &apos;m jane , i &apos;m designing video games .
i &apos;ve been going to have been online-spiele for 10 years , and my goal for the next decade is , it &apos;s just to make the world to save the world in the reality , as you &apos;re saving in online-spielen .
i have a plan for that . i want to convince more people , including all , more time playing playing and playing games .
we &apos;re currently spending three billion hours a week a week .
some of you might think , &quot; this is a whole lot of time for games . &quot;
maybe a lot too much time when you think about how many problems we need to solve in the real world .
but actually , my research at the institute of the future is , is exactly the opposite .
three billion hours a week are not nearly enough to solve the most significant problems in the world .
in fact , i &apos;m convinced that if we want to survive the next century on this planet , we need to increase this time .
i &apos;ve calculated that the time that took time to be 21 billion hours of play a week .
now , this seems to be a little bit more abwegig , so it can be able to work with problems like hunger , poverty , climate change , global conflict and obesity , i think we need to try to play games online for at least 21 billion hours a week to the end of the next decade .
no , i &apos;m really serious .
why ? this picture is pretty exactly why i think games are so essential for survival of the human species in the future .
this is a porträt of photographer named phil .
he wanted to capture the feelings of play . so he was building a camera in front of the players .
this is one of the classical expressions of play .
if you &apos;re not a player , you may not get some of the kind of nuancen in this picture .
you probably see this sense of urgency , a bit of fear , but also , äußerste focus , very vertieft , to solve a really difficult problem .
if you &apos;re playing , you see a couple of the nuancen that are looking up in the top of the top of the top , and the mouth are a sign of optimism . the eyebrows show surprise .
this is a player that &apos;s on the edge of a sogenannten sieges .
oh , you know that . ok . fine . so we &apos;ve got a couple of players here .
a epischer victory is a result that is so positive , that they didn &apos;t know that it was possible .
it was almost beyond the imagination .
and if you reach it , you &apos;re shocked that you &apos;re actually capable of doing something like that . this is a epischer victory .
this player is a moment ago , a epischen victory .
and this is what we need to see on millions of faces of problemlösern around the world , if we take the barriers of the next century , the face of which the face of all widrigkeiten widrigkeiten are on the edge of a epischen sieges .
well , unfortunately , we &apos;re looking at this face in real life when we face hard problems .
i call it &quot; in life i &apos;m bad &quot; and it &apos;s actually my face , see ? yes ? ok .
that &apos;s me , i &apos;m , i &apos;m going to make this &quot; in life , &quot; i &apos;m bad .
this is a graffiti in my former home in berkeley , california , where i was studying in my ph.d. , why we &apos;re better than in real life .
this is a problem that many players have .
we think we &apos;re not as good as in reality .
and i don &apos;t just think less well , even though that &apos;s about it .
we &apos;re reaching in spielwelten . i mean good at the relationship with motivation , to do something more , inspired to collaboration with each other .
if we &apos;re in a spielwelt , i think that many of us are going to turn into our best version , anytime and immediately , and immediately , you can &apos;t help solve the problem , as long as you needed to try it again .
and in reality , if we &apos;re failing , if we &apos;re hitting the obstacles we &apos;re often feeling differently .
we feel overwhelmed . we feel defeated . we feel threatened , perhaps depressed , frustrated or zynisch .
we never have these feelings when we play games , they don &apos;t have them .
and that &apos;s what i wanted to do as a graduate student .
why is it impossible to think , you could not just achieve anything ?
how can we transmit these feelings from playing into reality ?
so i looked at games like world of warcraft that offers the ideals of the ideals of collective problem .
and i &apos;ve found a couple of things that are possible to make the most possible possible in online-welten .
so first , if you &apos;re going to get into one of these online-spiele , especially in world of warcraft , there are a lot of different characters that are willing to take a weltrettende mission , and it &apos;s instantly .
but not just any mission , but a mission that fits perfect to your current level , right ?
so they can do this .
they never get a task that they can &apos;t solve .
but always on the edges of their capabilities , so they have to get a lot of their hands . but there &apos;s no unemployment in world of warcraft .
you &apos;re not sitting around and you &apos;re dreht . there &apos;s always a little bit important to do .
and there are plenty of employees .
where you go , hundreds of thousands of people working with them to help off their own future mission .
we don &apos;t have that in real life , that feeling that there are a fingerschnipsen of mitarbeiter .
and also , this is the most exciting story , this inspiring story of why we &apos;re there and what we have to do .
and then we get this whole positive feedback .
they have determined by &quot; level high &quot; and &quot; + &quot; oder &quot; or &quot; + &quot; + . &quot;
that constant feedback doesn &apos;t exist in real life .
so , when i leave this stage i don &apos;t have a talk , and i say , a crazy idea , + crazy idea .
i don &apos;t get this feedback on real life .
so , the problem of kooperations-online-welten like world of warcraft is that it &apos;s so satisfying , at the very end of the edge of a epischen sieges , that we prefer to spend our whole time in these spielwelten .
they &apos;re just better than the reality .
until today , all the world of warcraft-spieler have spent millions of years spent the virtual problems of azeroth .
that &apos;s not necessarily a bad thing .
it may sound a bad thing .
but to see it in context , 5,93 million years ago , our first primatenvorfahren began to walk up .
so the first step of the primate .
ok , so if we talk about how much time we spend with games , it just makes sense , when you &apos;re going to be in terms of the time on the scale of human development , which is extraordinary .
but also , it turns out that by using these all the time to play , actually change what we are in the position of people .
we develop ourselves to collaborative , and we are being creatures .
that &apos;s the truth . i think it &apos;s a lot of that .
look at this interesting statistics that recently became a researcher researcher carnegie university university , which is the average young person in a country with huge spielkultur verbringt verbringt with online-spielen to the 21st of the 21st .
so , 10,000 hours , for 10,000 hours , is a very interesting number , for two reasons .
first , for kids in the united states , 10.080 hours are the exact gesamtzeit that they spend in school , from five grade to the degree of high school -- never missing .
so we have a complete parallelbildungsweg of the young people , in the same way , to learn what it means to be a good player , like everything else you learn in school .
and maybe some of you have the new book of malcolm malcolm , &quot; überflieger . &quot;
so , you know his theory of success , the theory of the success of the 10,000 hours .
it &apos;s based on the great research that the research research is that if we spend 10,000 hours of the age of any subject to the 21st of us , we &apos;re going to master in this .
we &apos;re going to be so good at doing whatever the most important people in the world .
so what we have here is a full generation of young people who are meister-spieler .
so the big question is , &quot; what are the player doing good ? &quot;
because if we could figure that out , we had never been able to give it a gewesenes human potential .
so many people we have now in the world who spend at least one hour a day on online-spielen .
these are our meister-spieler . 500 million people who are extraordinary in &quot; something . &quot;
and the next decade we have another billion players that are extraordinary in whatever .
if you haven &apos;t heard it yet .
the spieleindustrie developed konsolen , which save energy and work on mobilfunknetzen , instead of the breitband-internet , with the player around the world , especially in india , china , brazil online .
you expect a extra billion player in the next decade .
so we have a total billion player .
so i started thinking about what it is , what these games are doing to us .
here &apos;s the four things i found . first : dringlichkeits-optimismus .
ok , imagine the kind of extreme selbstmotivierung .
dringlichkeits-optimismus is the desire to do immediately , to do something , a hürde , together with belief that we have a begründete hope for success .
and so , many people always believe that a epischer victory is possible , and it &apos;s always worth trying to try and do it .
players are not sitting around .
players are masters in the spiders of the most poets of social networks .
there &apos;s a lot of interesting studies that show that we like people , after we &apos;ve played with them , even if they beat us out .
the reason for that is that there &apos;s a lot of trust to play with someone .
we trust that someone with us who have time to spend that the rules are going to be eingehalten that we have the same goal and to stay with the spielende .
so the zusammenspielen allows the rise of the ties , trust and each other .
as a result , we build stronger social relationships .
glückselige productivity . fantastic !
you know , there &apos;s a reason why the durchschnitts-word of warcraft-spieler 22 hours a week plays , sort of as a teilzeitjob .
the reason is that if we play , we actually are happier to work hard than if we don &apos;t relax or nothing .
we know that we are as human beings , when we do hard , significant work .
and the players are always ready to work hard when they get the right job .
and ultimately , the epische meaning .
and players love it to be a part of awe gebietender missionen .
this is a hintergrundinformation , to put this in the right . you know all wikipedia , the world &apos;s greatest , the world .
the second largest wiki of the world , with almost 80,000 einträgen , is the world of warcraft .
five million people use it every month .
they are zusammengetragen more information about world of warcraft on the internet than about any other subject in every other other &apos;s other .
they &apos;re creating a epische story .
they create a epische source of knowledge about the world of warcraft .
ok , so these are four years of bringing to a single outcome . players are super-mächtige , hopeful individuals .
it &apos;s people who believe that they can change the world .
and the only thing is you think you can change the virtual worlds , but not the real .
that &apos;s the problem i &apos;m trying to solve .
edward castronova is a volkswissenschaftler .
his work is brilliant . he &apos;s looking at why people spend so much time and energy and money in online-welten .
and he says , &quot; we &apos;re not going to be seen less than a massenemigration in virtual worlds and online-spielumgebungen . &quot;
and that &apos;s an economist . so it &apos;s logical .
and he &apos;s saying ...
not as i ... i &apos;m making games , i &apos;m a little bit of a überschwänglich .
so he says that makes sense , because player can reach more in online-welten than in real life .
they can be really knüpfen in games as real life . they get more feedback and reward in games than in real life .
so , he says , it &apos;s absolutely obvious that player is more time in the virtual world than the real world .
i first got to do that , that &apos;s logical .
but it &apos;s definitely not a optimalsituation .
we need to start to turn the real world into a game .
my inspiration comes from an event that 2,500 years of zurückliegt .
there are these ancient cube , from schafsknöcheln . you know ?
and this amazing spielecontrollern gave schafsknöchel .
and so , they were , in sort of , the first of people developed spielgeräte .
and if you &apos;re familiar with the werken of the old greek greek herodotus , you might be familiar with this story . the story about how and why games were invented .
according to the herodotus , games , more würfelspiele , in the kingdom of lydien , in a famine , invented .
they were supposed to be angeblich that the king of lydien decided to take a crazy idea .
people were suffering . people were fighting .
it was an extreme situation . it took an extreme solution .
so they invented , according to the herodotus , the würfelspiel and the vereinbarten strategy , and they would eat a day . the next day you would play .
and they would be so much in the würfelspiel , because games are so fascinating and surrounded us with befriedigender , glückseliger productivity , they would forget that there was nothing to eat .
and then the next day you would play . and the next day you would eat .
and according to the herodotus , they survive for 18 years of eating their famine by eating a day and played the next one .
as well , i think we &apos;re going to play games today .
we &apos;re going to make games to get the world &apos;s suffering .
we &apos;re going to make games to avoid everything that doesn &apos;t work in the real world , especially in real life , and we bring what we need .
but it doesn &apos;t have to be the end .
that &apos;s the exciting .
according to the herodotus , after 18 years , the famine was not better , so the king decided to anzusetzen a last würfelspiel .
they shared the kingdom in two .
they were playing a würfelspiel , and the best got to be able to get to a epischen adventure .
they went out and they went out to look for a new home , and they had just been leaving so many people to survive , and we looked for the rest of a region they could flourish .
this sounds crazy , right ?
but latest dna-beweise show that the etrusker that later , the roman empire , the same dna has the same dna as the old lydier .
and so scientists recently come to the notion that herodotus &apos; crazy story actually is true .
and geologists found evidence of a global abkühlung that was almost 20 years of explaining the famine .
so this crazy story could vote .
you might have actually saved your people through play by having 18 years in games , and then they had these eingebung and so much about the other , they learned that they were saved the entire civilization .
so , we can .
we &apos;ve been playing since 1994 .
this was the first strategiespiel in real time of the world of warcraft-serie . that was 16 years ago .
they played for 18 years , we played it for 16 years of warcraft .
i &apos;m saying we &apos;re ready for our own episches game .
so , they sent half of their civilization to the quest to look for a new world , so i take my 21 billion spielstunden per week .
we should be able to get that half of us spend an hour a day with play , until we solved the problems of the real world .
i know you &apos;re going to ask , &quot; how do we solve problems of real world in games ? &quot; and i have my work at the last few years at the institute of the future .
we have this banner in our office in palo , in palo , it &apos;s drückt out of how we should understand the future .
we don &apos;t want to tell the future before .
what we want to do is to create the future .
we want to make the best possible outcome . and then we make people empower to take this idea into reality .
we &apos;re providing the epische of the world &apos;s siege , and we give people the opportunity to reach them .
i &apos;m going to show you a very short of three games that i &apos;ve designed to try to get people to get the epische in their own future .
this is &quot; the world without oil . &quot;
the game is by 2007 .
it &apos;s a online-spiel that you have to get through a ölknappheit .
the ölknappheit is invented , but we have enough online-inhalte to be realistic for them , and they &apos;re actually going to be anmelden for the game , and then , if you &apos;re going to be anmelden , you &apos;ll tell you where you live , and then you get nachrichten-filme in real time that you &apos;re not having food , how transport is , whether you &apos;re aufstände
we &apos;ve tested this game with a 1.700 players in 2007 , and we &apos;ve been accompanied them over the last three years .
and i can tell you it was a verändernde experience .
no one wants to change his life because it &apos;s good for the environment or because we should .
but if you &apos;re in an epischen adventure and you say , &quot; we &apos;re going to get oil out . &quot;
this is a fascinating adventure that you &apos;re going to .
find out how to survive . most of our players have beibehalten the game of gelernten habits .
so we put a greater , more higher goal for the next time , more higher than a ölknappheit .
we &apos;ve developed the game &quot; superstruct &quot; at the institute of the future .
so , what &apos;s a supercomputers is that people have only 23 years on the planet .
this is a supercomputer called &quot; global aussterbungs- sensibilisierungs-system , &quot; of course .
and the call to player , to be able to get up , we &apos;re almost like a &quot; jerry-bruckheimer &quot; -film .
you know jerry bruckheimer-filme , where it &apos;s the &quot; dream-team &quot; -- they have astronauts , the scientist , the ex-sträfling and only together they can save the world .
but in our game , instead of just five people , say , everyone is in the dream-team , and it &apos;s our task to create the future of energy , food , health , security and the future of social justice .
8,000 players played the game for eight weeks .
they found 500 of incredible creative solutions that they can read when they &apos;re googlen .
and the last game we put on the third march , and it &apos;s a game in collaboration with the world bank .
when you finish the game , you get from the world bank , the award of social umgestalter , &quot; to 2010 .
we &apos;re working with universities in all sub-saharan africa , and we invite them to learn social education .
we have a comic book . we have &quot; level high &quot; for regionales , wissensvernetzung , sustainability , vision and memory .
i &apos;d like to invite you all to share this game with young people all over the world , especially in entwicklungsgebieten , who benefit from that , together to imagine their own social companies to save the world .
i &apos;m going to end .
i want to ask you .
what do you think is going to happen next ?
we have all these fantastic players , we have games that show us what we can do , but we haven &apos;t yet saved the real world yet .
well , i hope you agree with me that player are human resources that we can use to work in real life , and games have a big meaning for change .
we have these entire superkräfte , glückselige productivity , the ability to create , very close social networks , dringlichkeits-optimismus , and the desire for epischer meaning .
i really hope that we play together a lot of games to survive on this planet a second century .
and i hope you &apos;ll design and play with me .
when i vorausschaue into the next decade , i &apos;m sure i &apos;m sure that we can create any vorstellbare future , and we can play all kinds of games .
so i say , let &apos;s start the weltverändernden games .
thank you .
i &apos;d like to tell you something that i &apos;ve noticed a couple of months ago , a piece of article for italian magazine .
i always have my synonym-wörterbuch at writing , but i was done with the process of the text before , and i realized that i never had a life of life in my life , which means the word &quot; disabled &quot; really means .
i read you the post .
&quot; disabled , &quot; verkrüppelt , helpless , nutzlos , verstümmelt , verstümmelt , zugerichtet , abgetrennt , abgetrennt , abgetrennt , impotent , impotent , gehandicapt , gehandicapt , gehandicapt , aus , kaputt , kaputt , siehe , siehe , siehe , siehe , siehe .
antonyme : healthy , strong , powerful . &quot;
i read this list of a friend loud , and i had to laugh , it worked so ridiculous , but i just came up to &quot; zugerichtet , &quot; and i couldn &apos;t get to read and i had to stop and then collect me from this überfallartigen wortflut and the emotional shock of emotional shock .
of course , this was an ausgefranstes , old synonym-wörterbuch . i just thought that the copy has to be pretty old .
but actually , it was a copy of the early &apos; 80s when i was just going to school in the elementary school , and i started building my sense outside my family building and form , in terms of other children and the rest of the world around me .
and god was not using a synonym-wörterbuch at the time .
i would take this point seriously , i would take this point seriously , which someone like me to perceive as a person , their lives can be positive in any way , but today i &apos;m going to have celebrated the opportunity and adventure i &apos;ve experienced .
so i immediately , immediately , i took the power of 2009 , and i expect i to find a ansprechenderen piece here .
here &apos;s the aktualisierte version of this eintrags .
and it &apos;s not a lot better .
in particular , the last two words i &apos;ve been erschüttern me is &quot; ganz &quot; and &quot; healthy . &quot;
but it &apos;s not just about words .
it &apos;s about what we think about people who describe these words .
it &apos;s about the values that are in these words and how we construct these values .
our language impacts our thinking and how we see the world and people around us .
many altertümliche societies , including the greeks and the römer , really believed that the aussprache of a fluchs has a big force , because what you can do is manifestieren .
so , what do we want to do -- a disabled person or a powerful person ?
just to look at a man , you know , to call a child , you can &apos;t have it , einzuschränken you and you want to have beliefs .
wouldn &apos;t it be nice to open doors ?
a man who opened the doors for me was a pediatrician at the a.i. dupont institute in wilmington .
he &apos;s called dr. pizzutillo . a italo-amerikaner whose name , as you can think , most americans couldn &apos;t say correctly , so he was called dr. p. .
and dr. p. was always wearing very colorful flies and was just like the work with children .
i found the time i spent in this hospital just great -- to my physiotherapie .
i had to just be wiederholen , you know , i had to have an übungen übungen , and i had to make an unendlich , elastischen -- that you know , to build my bein-muskeln , and i hated those bänder more than anything else . i hated them . i was verflucht her . i hated them .
and imagine , i &apos;ve actually been struggling to negotiate with dr. p. and so , to stop this practice , natürllich without success .
and one day he looked at me at one of my practice -- these practice were just ermüdend and gnadenlos -- and he said to me , &quot; wow , aimee , you &apos;re a strong , kraftvolles and young girl , you &apos;re going to tear one day one of those .
and if you can make it , i give you a hundred dollars . &quot;
and this was , of course , a simple trick of dr. p. , so i didn &apos;t want to do the practice that i didn &apos;t want to do with the prospect that the reichste five year-old girl in the clinic &apos;s in the second floor , but he actually made me to see my daily übungs-horror with new eyes , so it became a new and vielversprechendes experience
and i ask myself today , how much his vision of me was a strong and kraftvolles girl , my own self , and i could imagine , to see me as a nature of strong , powerful and powerful human being .
this is just one example of a lot of how adults can make the imagination of a child .
but as you can prove , as the most zitierten examples of the synonym-wörterbüchern , our language doesn &apos;t allow us to imagine something that we would all wish : to allow everyone to see ourselves as a powerful person .
our language will change the social changes that we &apos;ve been given in many cases of a technological change .
now , of course , you can say , &quot; my legs , the laser-chirurgie for sehbehinderungen , and artificial hüftgelenke for the aging body that will allow people to use all their possibilities and beyond the boundaries that they set out of their own destiny , not to speak to social media platforms , menschen their own personal way , and definieren their own way to aussuchen groups .
so , perhaps this technological change , the way that the other truth , is that there &apos;s always a different truth , which is that every human being able to give something a very besonderess and very powerful , and that the human ability to adapt , our biggest plus .
the human ability to adapt -- this is an interesting story , because people are always asking me to tell me about how i umgehe with widrigkeiten umgehe , and i &apos;ll be a little bit more likely to say that this sentence has never been gepasst for me , and i always felt very uncomfortable about the questions of people , and i think i &apos;m starting to understand
this sentence is about the idea of how success or happiness depends on the challenge of being able to master a challenge without the associated experience , and as if my life was so successful , because i could be able to get the possible fallen of a life with a prosthetic , or whatever people can see me with my disability .
but the truth is that we change . of course we &apos;re not how to think of the challenge , whether you &apos;re physical , emotional or even both .
and i &apos;m saying that that &apos;s good .
widrigkeiten are not a obstacle that we need to be umkurven to make sure of our lives .
widrigkeiten are just in our lives .
and i tend to get widrigkeiten as a shadow .
sometimes i realize that he &apos;s very present , sometimes he &apos;s barely seeing , but it &apos;s constantly in me .
and i want to have no impact on the impact , or the most of the kampfs of a human being .
there are widrigkeiten and challenges , and they &apos;re just alllzu and each person is different about it . but the question is not whether we &apos;re going to come with widrigkeiten or not , but how we get it out of it .
so we &apos;re not just responsible for that people who love us , to preserve schicksalsschlägen , but to prepare for good to get out of it .
and we don &apos;t really like to make our kids a favor when we feel that they can &apos;t adapt .
you have to separate two things : to be the medical fact , an amputiert , and for the other social opinion , i &apos;m not disabled or not .
and to be honest , the only real real and bleibende disability i had to have to sit with , is that the world is constantly , she can describe these definitions .
in our desire , the people who are at our heart and they should communicate the cold hard truth about their medical projections or even a forecast of life that they expect , we need to be careful that we &apos;re not going to be able to actually make any of them .
maybe the current concept that &apos;s just looking for what is broken in one , and how we fix it , for each one of a larger disability than the pathologie .
if we don &apos;t treat people and wahrnehmen and anerkennen all of his forces and the possibility , and we can recognize the natural struggle that you might have to lead , another disease .
we degradieren a man who has value for our society .
so we have to look beyond the patologie and focus on all the area of human possibilities .
but most importantly , it &apos;s between the perception of our unzulänglichkeiten and our great erfindergeist , a connection .
we should not abwerten these herausfordernden times , or verleugnen , we should not try to avoid them , or not to avoid them , we should go and get them out of the carpet , but it &apos;s about finding the widrigkeiten opportunity .
it &apos;s probably more about the point of thinking that we don &apos;t necessarily have to overcome widrigkeiten , but that we &apos;re open to the schopf , to take them on the schopf , to use a kampf-ausdruck , and maybe even dancing with it .
and perhaps we can do it as something natural , stimmiges and useful and feeling that it doesn &apos;t feel like that in your presence .
this year we celebrate the 200 , birthday of charles darwin , and when he wrote about evolution 150 years ago , darwin , in my eyes , is very true in the human character .
i would say it &apos;s so umschreiben : not the most powerful of its way , and not the intelligenteste of its kind , but the one who can adapt to the best .
conflict comes creativity .
not just from darwin &apos;s work , we know that the ability to survive and aufzublühen , from the struggle of the human mind , is to turn through conflict .
so again , change and anpassung , the greatest capabilities of the human beings are .
and maybe we don &apos;t know what we &apos;re going to be when we &apos;re going to be cut out of the wood that we &apos;re going to be in .
it may be the sense of widrigkeiten , a sense of the ichs , a sense of our own power .
we can give ourselves a little bit .
we can give a new meaning that goes beyond the severe .
maybe we can see widrigkeiten as a change .
widrigkeiten are for a change that we haven &apos;t adapted to have .
i think the biggest damage we &apos;ve done ourselves is to believe that we should be normal .
let &apos;s face it -- who is normal ?
there is no normal normal .
it &apos;s the usual . the typical one . but not the normal . and would you know that poor , gray person really want to know if they really existed ?
i think i don &apos;t think .
it would be great if we could have this paradigm of normalität against a different of the possibilities or the strength , to be able to make it even more dangerous , but we can release the forces of very many , and they invite to bring their very special and valuable skills to society .
and anthropolgen found that we people have people to have a gefordert to be useful and to contribute to a contributions .
there &apos;s evidence that the neanderthal had 60,000 years ago , older years ago , and people with severe physical injuries with getragen and that &apos;s happened because the lebenserfahrung in the überlebenskampf of these people are valuable for society .
they didn &apos;t have a broken and useless ; they were treated as something special and a valuable .
a couple of years ago , i went to the city where i grew up in a lebensmittelmarkt in the northeast of pennsylvania , and i was standing in front of a scheffel tomato .
it was summer , and i had shorts .
and i hear , like a guy behind me says , &quot; well , if it &apos;s not aimee . &quot;
and i &apos;m turning around and see this older man . i had no idea who he is .
and i said , &quot; excuse me , sir , i know we ? i can &apos;t remember them . &quot;
and he said , &quot; well , you may not remember me .
when i first saw her , i pulled her out of her mother &apos;s belly .
oh , so that .
and of course , it &apos;s got click .
this was dr. kean , a man i knew only from my mother &apos;s mother about this day because i , of course , was a very typical birthday , on my birthday two weeks .
and the doctor for pränatale medical school was on a holiday , and so my parents knew the man who brought me to the world at all .
and because i was born without wadenbeine , and my feet were looking at them , and i just had some toes on this and some toes at the other foot , he was the überbringer , that foreign was the bad news .
he said to me , &quot; i had to tell you your parents , you never would walk , and never be beweglich like other children or that you never could live a professional life , and i just lie to lie . &quot;
i found that he was collected by my entire childhood , i had a buchstabier-wettbewerb class , whether i &apos;d been in a buchstabier-wettbewerb class at the time of the second grade , whether i was in the parade with the pfadfindern in the parade , whether i had my scholarship or one of my sportlichen siege , and he used these clips to teach his students , medizin-studenten from
and he called this part of his kurses , the x factor , the potential of the human .
you can &apos;t just emphasize enough , how critical that factor of the quality of life can be .
and dr. kean told , he said , &quot; i learned that kids , if they don &apos;t always get a different time , and even if you get a little bit of help , if you &apos;re kids who are überlässt , children can achieve very much . &quot;
you see , dr. kean has changed his thinking .
he had understood that the medical diagnosis , and how someone is about it , two different things .
and i also have changed my thinking over time , when she asked me at age 15 years , could i have getauscht my prostheses against meat and bones , i would have no second .
i really wanted to work normal at that time .
if you ask me today , i &apos;m not sure that i &apos;m sure .
and this is happening because i &apos;ve experienced something with my legs , and not despite this experience .
and maybe that change could happen , because i &apos;ve met so many people who opened me doors instead of meeting people who were struggling to me or me to give me an idea .
look , it really takes one person that shows you how you can manifestieren your forces , and you &apos;re through .
if you can allow someone to activate your own , internal forces , and the human mind is so empfangsbereit -- if you can do that , and for someone to open up a door for someone to be a very good teacher .
they &apos;re bringing them to open doors .
the real meaning of the worts &quot; educate &quot; in the word &quot; educe . &quot;
it means something that is a hervorzubringen , that in one is the potential to be potential .
again , what potential do we want to do ?
in the &apos; 60s , the u.k. was done a case case , and then they were transformed into gesamtschulen .
they call this &quot; streaming trials &quot; in the united states we call it &quot; tracking . &quot;
the students are divided into grades .
and the a student , they &apos;re getting mündlich , they get better teachers , and the better teachers are , and so on .
you then have given a dreimonatigen period of students , and they were very good , &quot; the grade &quot; well , they said they were asse , that they were very smart , and after these three months they really wrote einser .
and of course , it &apos;s zerbricht to hear the heart that the other way the umgekehrt was told the einser-schülern was just enough .
and it was also the same three months that it was .
but only those who were still in school -- except for the students who had gotten the school .
so , in the very crucial study , the teachers were not eingeweiht .
the teacher didn &apos;t know that something was changed .
they just said that they were the einser-schüler , and that the students are the same way , and they &apos;re taught to them and they &apos;re treated them .
the only real disability is a gebrochener mind that has broken , has no hope anymore . he doesn &apos;t have any more schön. to find our natural , kindliche neugier. , our most powerful capacity of imagination .
but if we can help to support the human mind , continue to hope , even and other people around themselves , to find ourselves and be more curious and phantasievoll , we really make our forces positive .
if a mind has these qualities , we can create a new reality and new design strategy .
i want to end with a poem that was written by a poet named jacques dembois , and the poem is called &quot; god , who knows only four words , &quot; &quot; every child knows god , not the god of verbote , not the god of verbote , but the god who knows only four words and repeat these all the time , and he &apos;s always ,
come , dance with me . thank you .
how would you want to be better than you &apos;re at the moment ?
suppose i said that , through a few changes , of your genes , a better memory could be -- more , more accurate and faster .
or want to be more powerful , stronger , more force .
do you want to be more attractive and more confident ?
how would it be to live longer in good health ?
or maybe you &apos;re one of those who always sehnten for more creativity .
what would you like most ?
which would you like to have if you could have one ?
creativity .
how many people would vote for creativity ?
raise your hands . let me see .
a couple of them . probably about as many as the creative people have here .
that &apos;s very good .
how many would choose for a good memory ?
a couple more .
how about fitness ?
a few less .
what about longevity ?
ah , the majority . the lsehe i like to do .
if you could have one of them , it would be a very different world .
is it all just a einbildung ?
or is it possible ?
evolution has been a andauerndes subject here on the ted conference , but today i want to give you a doctor &apos;s view of the subject .
the great genetiker in the 20th century , t.g. dobzhansky , who was also a kommunikant in the russian church church , once wrote a paper called &quot; nothing in biology doesn &apos;t make sense except in the lichte of evolution . &quot;
now , if you &apos;re one of those who are not accepting the evidence that biological evolution , this would be a very good point to turn your hörgerät , take your personal kommunikationsgerät -- i give you a erlaubnis -- and maybe you can see a look at a kathryn book that &apos;s about being wrong , because nothing in the other process of that speech will make you
but if you accept biological evolution , just consider this : is it just about the past , or is it about the future ?
is it for other geltend , or does it also be ?
this is another sight of the tree of life .
in this picture , i put a bush as a center of the verzweigungen in all directions , because if you look at the edge of the tree , all the existing spezien of these branches in evolutionary terms , they had success : they survived ; it &apos;s been able to have its environment , fitness and strength .
the human part of this busches , far at the end , is , of course , what we &apos;re most interested in most of .
we cut from one common ancestor to modern chimpanzees about six or eight million years ago .
in this period , maybe 20 or 25 different spezien of the world .
some of them have come and went .
we have been here for about a 130.000 years .
it seems like we &apos;re fairly remote from the other parts of the tree of life , but actually , for the most part , the basic mechanisms are the same mechanisms of our cells .
and you realize that we can pull out of it and the mechanisms of a common bacterium can produce the protein of the human genome that is used to treat diabetiker ?
this is not like humaninsulin ; this is the same protein that &apos;s a chemical ununterscheidbar of what &apos;s coming from the pancreas .
and what we &apos;re talking about bacteria is that , you know , that each of us in our gut will more bacteria than what cells is doing the rest of our bodies ?
maybe 10 times a bit .
i mean , think about the antonio damasio , after her , thinking about the bacteria ?
our gut is a wonderful gastfreundlichen environment for these bacteria .
it &apos;s warm , it &apos;s dark , it &apos;s feucht , it &apos;s very comfortable .
and you will all be nutrients that you could only want to be in your own effort .
it &apos;s a lighter way for bacteria , with no gelegentlichen unterbrechungen of the unbeabsichtigten , jeodch forced to the end of the outcome .
but otherwise , they &apos;re a wonderful environment for these bacteria , as you are important for their lives .
they help the verdauung of the essentiellen , and they protect them against certain diseases .
but what will come in the future ?
are we in a kind of evolutionäres balance in form of a species ?
or are we going to be something else -- something that might be adapted to the environment ?
now , let &apos;s take a step back to the time of the big bang , the earth , the solar system , about four billion years ago -- the first evidence of living things , perhaps three to four billion years ago , the earliest of mehr-zelligen organisms , perhaps so much as 800 or a billion years -- and then the human species that are actually shaped in
in this huge , unvollendeten symphony of the universe , life on earth is only just a short of a human animal , like a single individual , and human life , a small notenverzierung .
that &apos;s what we were .
this is also , as well as the unterhaltungswert of this speech , that &apos;s why i hope to enjoy the d of the ass .
now , when i was a neuling of college , i had my first biologiekurse .
i was fascinated by the elegance and beauty of biology .
i fell in love with the power of evolution , and i put a very basic solid : where there is a very basic life of life in einzelligen organisms , each cell , and all the genetic information in the cell will continue to move on both tochterzellen .
but at the time , as a mehrzelligen organisms , things began to change .
sexual reproduction enters into the picture .
and all the important thing about the introduction of sexual reproduction , the genome is going to be entbehrlich , the rest of the body will be entbehrlich .
in fact , you could say that the unausweichlichkeit of the death of our body in the evolution of the gleichen is happening to the same moment as sexual reproduction .
now i have to say , if i was a college-student , i thought , okay , sex / death , sex / death , death of sex -- it seemed quite reasonable at the time , but with every year , it has come to my zunehmenden of the zunehmenden .
i &apos;ve come to understand the feelings of george burns , who in las vegas vorführte his show in the &apos; 90s .
and one night , there &apos;s a pat in his hotelzimmertür .
he opens the door .
it &apos;s a beautiful spärlich bekleidetes showgirl .
she looks at him and says , &quot; i &apos;m here for super-sex . &quot;
&quot; that &apos;s wonderful , says , &quot; george , &quot; i &apos;m going to take the soup . &quot;
i came to see as a doctor , i was going to help the goal of this as the goal of evolution -- not necessarily , but not only .
i tried to preserve the body .
i wanted to keep ourselves healthy .
i wanted to make health a disease .
i wanted us to live a long and healthy life .
evolution is all about the weitergabe of the genome to the next generation , anpassung and survival generation after generation .
from a evolutionary standpoint , you &apos;re like , you know , and i designed as a booster rockets to send the genetic fracht into the next level of orbit to fall into the ocean .
i think we would all think of the mood that the woody would make all of the way to understand , and he said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to be able to achieve my work .
i want to reach it by not die . &quot;
evolution is not necessarily means to prefer the longest lives .
it doesn &apos;t necessarily necessarily zwangsläufig the biggest , the most powerful or the fastest , and not even the smartest .
evolution priviligiert the creatures that are anpassen the best of their environment .
it &apos;s the only test that we can survive and success .
and the reason the ocean is bacteria that are thermophil , and it &apos;s going to survive the hot steam , and it would survive , if fish were there , there were a vacuum fish that have fish , they were able to make a bewohnbare environment .
so , what does that mean when we look at what &apos;s happening in evolution , and how we think about the space of people in evolution , and especially how we vorausschauen into the next stage , i would say there &apos;s a series of possibilities .
the first is that we &apos;re not going to move forward .
we &apos;ve reached a kind of balance .
and the reason for that is that , first of medicine , we &apos;ve done it , we &apos;ve done a lot of genes that have been otherwise rausgewählt and had been removed from the population .
and second , we have our environment as a species , so that we &apos;ve managed to adapt to us , and we adapt to them .
and by the way , we went and we go around and we vermischen around so much that they can &apos;t say that that is necessary for the evolution , to stattzufinden .
a second possibility is that it will be a evolution of traditional art , of course , to be on the forces of nature .
and the argument , here , is that the wheels of the evolution are slow , but they are unerbittlich .
and so far , the isolation goes , if we &apos;re a species of a species , it will be isolierung and changes of the environment that can produce evolution in a natural way .
but there is a third possibility , a verlockende , fascinating and terrifying possibility .
i call it neo-evolution -- the new development that doesn &apos;t just have , of course , but led to , and decided to be a individuen. of the decisions that we do .
now , how did it happen ?
how could it be possible that we do this ?
let &apos;s start looking at reality that people today are making decisions about their offspring .
they are , in some cultures , the choice to have more men than women .
it &apos;s not necessarily good for society , but it &apos;s what the individual and the family is going to decide .
so if it &apos;s not only possible , if you can &apos;t just choose your child &apos;s child , but also to make genetic anpassungen to cure the disease and prevent disease .
what if you could make the genetic changes to remove diabetes or alzheimer &apos;s disease or to eliminate the risk of the risk or a schlaganfälle ?
would you not want to make these changes in your genes ?
if we vorausblicken , these kinds of changes are going to be increasingly possible .
the human genome project started in 1990 , and it took 13 years .
it cost 2,7 billion dollars .
so the next year , when it was finished , they could do the same for 20 million dollars in drein to four months .
today , you can sequence a sequence of three billion pairs of human genome to a price of about $ 20,000 , and in the room of about a week .
it won &apos;t take long to be until the reality is that it will be 1,000 dollars of human genomes , and it will be increasingly available for everyone .
one week , the national academy of engineering for francis arnold &apos;s prize prize , two scientists who developed independently of each other , who developed the natural process of evolution to work faster and to lead proteins in a more efficient way -- which is called &quot; direct evolution . &quot;
a couple years ago , the lasker-preis yamanaka yamanaka was awarded to his research he took a adult hautzelle , and the manipulation of just four genes , the cell to come back to a pluripotenten cell stem cell cells -- a cell potentially to become any cell in your body .
these changes are in the coming .
the same technology that makes the human insulin in bacteria can make viruses that are not only protecting itself , but also to serve the immunität against other viruses .
whether you believe it or not , it &apos;s an experimental study in gang with vaccine against influenza that has been grown into the cells of a tabakpflanze .
can you imagine a good thing that comes from tabak ?
this is now all reality , and the future will be more possible .
so then , you can only imagine two other little changes .
you can change the cells in your body , but what if you could change the cells of your nachfahren ?
what if you could change the sperm and the frisch , or the fresh befruchtete egg to give your kids a better chance to give your life to a gesünderes life -- reduce diabetes , beseitigen the risk of cancer ?
who doesn &apos;t want to make healthier ?
and then the analytischen technology , the same engine of science can make the difference to prevent disease , could enable us to adopt verabschieden , hyper-kapazitäten -- that better memory .
why don &apos;t have the schlagfertigkeit of a ken jennings , especially if you can expand it with the next generation of the watson-maschine ?
why not have the fast muskelfasern that will allow you to run faster and longer ?
why no longer live ?
these are going to be unwiderstehlich .
and if we &apos;re at a place where we can pass it to the next generation , and we can adopt the characteristics of the characteristics that we want to be transformed by alt-stil evolution to neo-evolution .
we &apos;re going to have a process that requires 100,000 years , and we can take it to thousands of years -- and maybe even more than the next 100 years .
these are decisions that are their grandchildren , or their grandchildren , will be able to deal .
do we use these decisions to form a society that is better , the more successful , is more friendly ?
or will we make a different characteristics that we want to have for some of us and not for others of us ?
will we become a society of dielangweiliger and uniformierter , or more robust and vielseitiger ?
these are the kinds of questions we have to face .
and most of all , we will ever be able to develop the wisdom and the wisdom of the wisdom we need to make these decisions ?
in good like in evil , and early in the early ones , the early ones , these decisions are going to be on us .
thank you .
i want you to imagine now , a portable robot that gives you to give you a übermenschliche skill , or another , the rollstuhlfahrern helps to stand up and go up and go up and go up and go up and go up and go up and go up and go up and go up and go up and go up and go up and go up and go
we call these robots in berkeley berkeley .
they &apos;re not something else that they put in the morning and give them extra strength , and that will increase their speed and help them to keep their balance .
this is actually the real animal of human and machine .
but not just that -- they can join with it and connect with the universe and other devices out there .
this isn &apos;t just a crazy idea .
now to show you what we &apos;re working on , we &apos;re beginning to talk about the american soldiers that carries about 100 pounds on his back , and it &apos;s the demand that they should carry more equipment .
of course , this leads to a few major complications -- rückenverletzungen , 30 percent of it -- chronic rückenverletzungen .
so we thought we would take this challenge and create a exoskelett that would help us deal with this problem .
so let me now introduce you to now -- or the human universal load .
soldier : with the hulc-exoskelett , i can carry 200 pounds of terrain terrain , for many hours .
and his design design allows it to be deeply hocken , to be able to go and do extremely wendige movements .
it feels what i want to do where i want to go , and then i &apos;m going to increase my strength and resilience .
we &apos;re as far as we can imagine our industriepartner of this device , this new exoskelett in this year .
so it &apos;s true .
now , let &apos;s take our look at the rollstuhlfahrer , something that i &apos;m passionate about .
there are 68 million people who are in the world in the world .
that &apos;s about one percent of the population .
and that is actually a conservative estimate .
we &apos;re often talking about a very young person with spinal cord spinal cord spinal cord rückenmarksverletzungen , in the blütezeit of their lives -- &apos; 20s , &apos; 30s , &apos; -- -- of the destiny , and the wheelchair is the only option .
but it &apos;s also about the population population whose number of people are vervielfacht .
and so pretty much the option -- if it &apos;s about a hirnschlag , or for other complications -- is the wheelchair .
and so , by the way , it &apos;s been since 500 years since , for the way , since i have to say , very successful .
so we thought we could begin with this to a completely new chapter in mobility .
so let me now introduce you to now , this is a rückenmarksverletzung erlitt that has a rückenmarksverletzung erlitt , which has a rückenmarksverletzung , which has no longer been able to walk for 19 years and now .
thank you .
as i said , amanda carries our elegs .
it has sensors .
it &apos;s fully non-invasiven sensors on the crutches , the signals that are zurücksenden on our onboard-computer , which is attached to your back .
and here &apos;s also batteriepackungen , the motorantrieb is on their hüften , as well as they move on their kniegelenken , they move forward in this pretty geschmeidigen and very natural way .
i was age 24 years old and bestform when a monströser purzelbaum while a skiabfahrt paralysierte .
in a fraction of a second , i lost every feeling and any movement under my beckens .
not long after that , a doctor &apos;s medical doctor , and he said , &quot; amanda , you &apos;ll never go again . &quot;
and this was 19 years ago .
he steel every fünkchen hope from my consciousness .
anpassungsfähige technologies have since then ermöglich me , learning , again , again , ski , climbing up and even riding with the hands of wheel .
but nothing was invented that would leave me , until now .
thank you .
as you can see , we have the technology , we have the platforms to meet and discuss with them .
it &apos;s in our hands , and we have the whole potential here to change life , of future generations -- not just for the soldiers , or for amanda here and all the rollstuhlfahrer , but for everyone .
thank you .
at home in new york , i &apos;m a boss of the entwicklungsabteilung of a nonprofit organization named the robin .
if i don &apos;t bekämpfe poverty , i &apos;m bekämpfe as a gehilfe of a feuerwehr-hauptmanns in a volunteer volunteer .
now , in our city , in volunteer a hochqualifizierte berufsfeuerwehr , you have to be pretty early on the brandstelle to be able to get away .
i remember my first fire .
i was the second volunteer for the brandstelle , so i had a pretty good chance to get it .
but it was still a race against the other volunteer to reach the verantwortlichen hauptmann and figure out what would be our tasks .
when i found the hauptmann , he had just a very serious conversation with the hausbesitzerin , which surely had one of the worst days of her life .
it was the middle of the night and she stood in the schlafanzug and barfuß under a screen outside in the strömenden rain while her house was in fire .
the other volunteers that got a little bit of a little , who had come to me -- we call him lex -- did the hauptmann first , and was asked to go to the house and save the dog of the hausbesitzerin .
the dog ! i was sprachlos .
there was any lawyer or a vermögensverwalter , who now could tell people that he was going to make a brennendes house to save a living organism , only because he was faster than me .
now i was the next .
the hauptmann winkte mich me .
he said , &quot; well , you need to go into the house .
you have to go up to the top of the fire , and this woman must get a couple of shoes . &quot;
i swear to it .
now , not exactly what i &apos;d like to hope , but i went off -- the stairs up , the hallway along the way , on the real feuerwehrmännern , which was actually done so pretty much that was going to be in the bedroom to bring a few shoes .
i know what you &apos;re thinking , but i &apos;m not a hero .
i carried my prey back down , where i met my erzfeind and i met my beloved dog .
we put our value out to the hausbesitzerin , where , no surprise , he would get more attention than mine .
a few weeks later , the feuerwache had a letter of the hausbesitzerin , where they were working for the tapferen use of their house .
one of the most significant , geschätzte , someone had to put their shoes a pair of shoes .
and in my career , in my career , at the nebenberuf , i &apos;m a zeuge student , as a volunteer , i &apos;m a zeuge of generosity and kindness to the big scale , but i also see acts of altruism and the muts of individual .
and you know what i learned ?
they &apos;re all important .
so if i can see in this room , and people who have either achieved a success or on their way , i want to offer you to be a memory : wait for you .
don &apos;t wait for a difference in the life of a different person until you &apos;ve reached your first million .
if you have something , you &apos;re going to give it .
and then they put it in a suppenküche room , room , put a park in the neighborhood .
be a mentor .
not every day , we can offer us a chance to save lives of a human being , but every day , the possibility of being able to change one .
so they &apos;re going to put off . save the shoes .
thank you .
bruno guissani : mark , mark , come back .
thank you .
i &apos;m going to come back from a community that knows the secret of humanity .
one place where women lead the zepter , with sex , &quot; hi , &quot; and the game determines the day -- where it &apos;s a serious issue .
and no , it &apos;s not burning or san francisco .
ladies and gentlemen , your verwandtschaft .
this is the world of the wild bonobos in the congo of congo .
bonobos are together with chimpanzees our closest living relative .
that means we have a common ancestor , a evolutionary grandmother , who lived around six million years ago .
well , chimps are known for their aggressivität .
but unfortunately , we &apos;ve been doing this aspect of the narrative of human evolution .
but bonobos , the other side of the coin show us .
while chimpanzees , furcht , einflößenden kerlen are led to the bonobo-gesellschaft of ermächtigten females .
and they really came up with what &apos;s up , because this leads to a very toleranten society that the fatal violence is not seen .
but unfortunately , bonobos are the least known among the primates .
they live in the deep in the kongolesischen , and they &apos;re just difficult to open .
congo is a paradox -- a country of extraordinary biodiversity and beauty , but also the heart of darkness , but the schauplatz of a violent argument that has been wütet for decades and almost so many of life has been involved as the first world war .
it didn &apos;t surprise that these destruction also survive the survival of the bonobos .
and fleischhandel and the decline of the baumbestandes lead to you can &apos;t even fill a stadion bonobos , and even there are no sure we &apos;re not to be honest .
and yet , in this country of violence and chaos , you can hear a verborgenes laugh , you know , the trees are erschüttert .
who are these relatives ?
we know them as &quot; love instead of war , &quot; because they have häufigen , also , bisexuellen sex , with wechselnden partners , and rules like conflict and social security .
i don &apos;t say that , that would be the answer to all the humanitarian problems -- because the bonobos is made up of more than the kama sutra .
bonobos -- like humans -- love to play their lives long .
play doesn &apos;t just mean .
for us , and it &apos;s fundamentally spiel for the attachment of relationships and the care of tolerance .
and we learn trust and the rules of the game .
it &apos;s increasing creativity and resilience , and it &apos;s all about the creation of diversity -- diversity of interactions , diversity of behaviors , diversity of compounds .
and when you watch bonobos at the game , you see the evolutionary origins of human lachens , dance and rituals .
game is the kitt that beieinanderhält us .
now , i don &apos;t know how you play , but i want to show you some unique footage that i just want to show you .
first a ballspiel on bonobo-art -- and i don &apos;t think about fussball .
so here we see a young female and males in a verfolgungsspiel .
look at what she &apos;s doing .
this could be the evolutionary source of : &quot; she &apos;s got it in the eggs . &quot;
just that i think it &apos;s more like him , not true .
yeah .
so , sexspiele are spreading , both both bonobos and people .
and this video is really interesting , because it &apos;s really interesting -- and this video is really interesting , because it shows the ideenreichtum that you bring new elements to play -- like the hoden -- and also , how the game both trust both trust and also fördert -- while it &apos;s doing a lot of fun for the same time .
but the game is a formwandler .
play is a formwandler , and it can take many forms of which some are more quiet , phantasievoll , curious -- maybe to discover the erstaunen .
and i want to show you that &apos;s a fuku , a young female , and she plays with water .
i think , just as you &apos;re playing alone , we &apos;re loten the limitations of our inner and outside worlds .
and it &apos;s this playful curiosity that makes us explore and interact , and the unexpected bits that we create are the real nährboden of creativity .
this is just a little vorgeschmack of the insights that bonobos give us in our past and present .
but it also true a secret for our future , a future where we need to adapt to rising challenges , with greater creativity and druch .
the secret is that the game is the key to these skills .
in other words , play is our anpassungsjoker .
to adapt us to a unbeständige world , we need to play .
but are we going to make the best of our spieltrieb ?
play is not silly .
but essential .
for bonobos and people , they don &apos;t have life for teeth and claws alone .
just when it &apos;s hardly appropriate , it might be at the end of it .
and so , my primatenkameraden , let &apos;s take this gift of a gift and play together , while we kreativität creativity the kameradschaft and the wonder of the wonder .
thank you .
i want you to imagine two couples , in the same day , at the same day , at the same moment , every single baby &apos;s baby -- okay .
so two pairs , every single zeugt one baby .
now i don &apos;t want you to spend a lot of time , because if you think about the whole time , you &apos;re not going to listen to me .
now , imagine that for a moment .
and in this scenario , you can imagine that in a case , the sperma will carry a y chomosom , which is the x chromosome of the eizelle .
and in the other case , the x carries a x chromosome that is true x x chromosome .
both are überlebensfähig , both of them .
we &apos;re still going to come back to these people later .
most of my activities , i have two more hüte .
i &apos;m a hat , for a hat , i &apos;m in the history of the anatomy .
i &apos;m a studierte student , and i &apos;m studying how people with anatomy umgingen -- meaning human body , animal body -- like you with körperflüssigkeiten umgingen , with körperkonzepten , how you thought about bodies .
the other hat i &apos;ve been wearing in my work is the activist , as a patientinnenanwältin -- or , as i say , as a ungeduldige , lawyer -- of people who are patients by doctors .
in this case , i &apos;ve been working with people who have körpertypen , who ask social norms .
so , for example , i &apos;ve been working with people who are siamesische twins , two people in a body .
i worked with people with zwergenwuchs -- so people who were smaller than a common .
and i &apos;ve been working with intersexuellen people whose gender is their gender -- so people who don &apos;t have the average male or female körpertypen .
and as a general term , we can use the word &quot; intersexualität . &quot;
intersexualität comes in many different forms .
i just give you a couple of examples of the kinds of geschlechtsvarianten types of geschlechtsvarianten that don &apos;t equal to the male or female .
in a case , you might have somebody with a xy chromosomenbasis , and the sry gene des gen , the protogonaden that we have fötalen to have to grow up .
and that &apos;s why the hoden is in the fötalen state .
but because that individual is missing the receptors to detect the testosterone , the body does not react to the testosterone .
and this is called androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so , much testosterone , but not a reaction .
as a result , the body evolved to be more typical of the typical of the other .
when the child is born , they look like a girl .
she &apos;s a girl . she &apos;s raised as a girl .
but it &apos;s usually until you achieve puberty and grow your breast and develop , but not you get your period , until someone gets that there &apos;s something different here .
and they do a few tests , and they find that instead of eierstöcken and the other , in fact , hoden in itself , and that they have a y chromosome .
and it &apos;s important to understand that you could actually think that person , for a really male person , but they &apos;re not really .
women , like men , have something that &apos;s called a adrenalindrüsen .
they are in the back of our body .
and the nebennieren are making a androgene , which are virilisierende hormones .
most women , like i -- i think i think is a typical woman -- i don &apos;t know my real frau , but i think i probably have the typical -- most women like i actually talk to androgene .
we produce androgen , and we talk to androgene .
the episode is that someone like me , actually , like i have a brain that was exposed to more androgenen than a woman who was born with hoden and a androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so gender is really complicated ; intersexuelle is not just in the middle of gender -- in a sense , you can be distributed across the entire range .
one more example , a few years ago , i received the call of a 19 year-old man who was born as young , he was a boy , he had a girlfriend , he had sex with his girlfriend , lived as a man , and he had just found that he had eierstöcke and a gebärmutter .
he had an extreme form of an natural nebennierenrindenhyperblasie .
he has xx chromosome , and in the womb , his nebennieren was so strong , that they were essentially making a male hormonumgebung .
and as a result , his genitalien were ausgeprägt , his brain was exposed to the typischeren male part of the hormonenspektrums .
and when he was born , he saw a boy -- no one was able to see something .
and it wasn &apos;t until he was 19 years old , he got enough medical problems , actually , because he was menstruierte , that the doctors found that he was in the inner female .
okay , just a quick example of a variante of intersexualität .
some people with xx chromosomes , they &apos;re developing something called ovotestis , which is the eierstockgewebe of hodengewebe umhüllt .
we don &apos;t know exactly why this happens .
gender can be in many different ways .
the reason kids with this kind of body -- whether it &apos;s zwergenwuchs or siamesische twins , it &apos;s intersexuell -- from surgeons often being adapted to the norm , is not because this is a physical health of advantage .
in many cases , these people are completely healthy .
the reason why they often do a lot of different interventions are done by surgical interventions because they threaten our social categories .
typically our system is based on the idea that a certain anatomische ausprägung has a specific identity .
so we have the idea that a woman is called a female identity ; it &apos;s called a black person , means , angeblich , an african anatomy in terms of their own story .
so we have this horrible , vereinfachende idea .
and if we &apos;re faced with a body that actually represents something very different , that &apos;s really confused by these kategorisierungen .
so we have a lot of romantic ideas in our culture .
and our nation is really based on a very romantic concept of individualismus .
now you can imagine , what is amazing that when children are born , the two people in a body are ?
i &apos;ve been having most of the excitement in last time , the südafrikanische läuferin läuferin semenya was asked last year whose gender was asked in the leichatlethik world in berlin .
so many journalists called me the question : &quot; what test are you going to do , which tells us whether or a männlich semenya or a male ? &quot;
and i had to tell journalists that there &apos;s not that test .
we know that gender is complicated enough that we have to admit that nature is not zieht between male and female , or between male and intersexuell and female and intersexuell ; tastächlich , we are the ones that are the trennlinie of the world .
so we have a situation where we have the more time we continue to continue , we have to say to be so much more comfortable that these categories that we held for stable anatomische categories , which are very simple , very simple , zuordnungen , much more unschärfer than we thought .
and this is not just in terms of gender .
it &apos;s true in terms of race , which is a lot more complicated than our terminologie has allowed to be .
we &apos;re going to betrachtungen in all sorts of different areas .
we &apos;re going to push to the fact that we have at least 95 percent of our dna with chimpanzees .
what should we start with the fact that we can &apos;t tell you about a few different from them ?
while we move our science on and further , we are increasingly moving into a zone of the unbehagens , where we need to recognize that the simplistischen categories that we probably had too simple .
we see this in all sorts of different parts of the human life .
one of the areas that we see in the beipiel , in our current culture , in the today &apos;s united states , are fighting over the beginning and the end of life .
we have hard conversations about what kind of a body will become , so that he &apos;s quite a fairly right to the kind of life .
we have very hard to deal with today -- maybe not as much as it was in medicine -- about the question when someone died .
our ancestors never had to fight with the question of when someone was dead .
they have a feather to be a feather , and if they moved , they haven &apos;t buried them .
if she didn &apos;t moved , you &apos;ve buried it .
but today we &apos;re in a situation where we &apos;re going to take people to take away from people and transplant them .
and as a result , we got a chance of the struggle with the really difficult question , when someone is dead , and that brings us into a really difficult position , where we don &apos;t have any kind of simple categories .
now , you might think that the whole thing of categories would be really happy to me .
i &apos;m a political progressiv , i &apos;m verteidige people with unusual bodies , but i have to admit , it makes me nervous .
to realize that these categories are really much more insecure than we thought , makes me feel .
and it makes me feel more about the way that democracy is .
so to tell you about this anspannung , i first have to take away that i &apos;m a big fan of the world .
i know they were rassisiten , i know they were sexisten , but they were great .
i think they were so tapfer and strong , and so radically , what they did was i &apos;d like to look at the schmalzige musical 1776 1776 , and it &apos;s not because of the music that is absolutely forgotten .
it &apos;s because of what &apos;s happened to the gründungsvätern .
the main fathers were from my view of the original environmental activists , and that &apos;s why .
what she was doing was a anatomisches concept , and they were ersetzten it through another different , which was radically and beautiful , and 200 years of maßgeblich .
as you all remember , our gründungsväter lehnten the concept of the monarchy , and the monarchy was based on the reason , in a very , very vereinfachten notion of anatomy .
the herrscher of the old world had no idea based on dna , but they had a concept of the geburtsrechts .
they had a concept of blue blood .
they were the notion that people who had political power should have this political power because of the vererbten blutlinie from a grandfather to son and so forth .
so , the gründungsväter wiesen that idea and they were ersetzten them through a new anatomisches concept , and this concept said that all humans were created .
they nivellierten the spielfeld and decided that anatomisch , the common gene , it &apos;s not the differences , and that was a very radically .
now they did it for part because they were part of a aufklärerischen system , where two things in common .
democracy grew up , but at the same time , the science grew .
if you look at the history of the gründungsväter , it &apos;s clear that many of you were very interested in science , and you were interested in a concept of a naturalistischen world .
they went away from explanations übernatürlicher , and it &apos;s a wiesen thing , like a übernatürliches concept , back , where the transmission is based on a very vagen basis of geburtsrecht .
they moved to a naturalistischen concept .
and if you look at the unabhängigkeitserklärung of the world , you &apos;re talking about nature and the god of nature .
they &apos;re not talking about god and nature &apos;s nature .
they &apos;re talking about the power of nature to tell us who we are .
and as part of it , they verschafften us a concept that was about anatomischen .
and so they really prepared the future movement .
they didn &apos;t think about it , but what they did for us was great .
so what happened after that ?
for example , women who anstrebten the wahlrecht , the concept of the gründungsväter , which says that if you have the anatomische difference , and they said , &quot; that we have a gebärmutter and eierstöcke , as a difference is not significant enough that we should not have the wahlrecht , the right to own property , etc . , etc . &quot;
and women argumentierten the success .
next came the successful civil rights movement , where we saw people like sojourner truth , who were spach , &quot; am i not a woman ? &quot;
we find men in the marschierenden line of the bürgerechtsbewegung , who say , &quot; i &apos;m a man . &quot;
again , people &apos;s different skin color , who are berufen , in anatomische , anatomischen differences , again .
we see the same thing in the behindertenrechtsbewegung .
and of course , the problem is that , as we start to look at all the common , we have to start asking why we sustain certain trennungen .
now , you know , you want to maintain certain trennungen , anatomisch , in our culture .
i want to give you a fish that i don &apos;t like to give the same rights as a human .
i don &apos;t want to say that we should be able to move away from the anatomy .
i don &apos;t want to say that 5-jährige should have the right to have to have their consent to sex or to get married .
so there are some anatomische trennungen that make sense to me , and that we think , i think , should be .
but the challenge is to try to figure out what it is and why we keep it and whether it &apos;s meaningful .
so , let &apos;s go back to these two creatures that are gezeugt at the beginning of the talk .
we have two beings , both of the middle of 1979 , in the same day in the same day .
let &apos;s imagine that one of you , mary , three months of verfrüht , was born on the one june of 1980 .
heinrich , on the other hand , is born to the geburtstermin , so he &apos;s born on the one march of 1980 .
just because of the fact that the maria was born by three months of verfrüht , they had all sorts of three months before heinrich -- the right to have sex , to choose the right to drink .
and heinrich has to wait for all of these , not because he &apos;s actually a different kind of biological age , just because of the zeitpunktes of his birth .
we find other merkwürdigkeiten about what their rights are .
heinrich , because you think it &apos;s male -- although i don &apos;t tell you that he &apos;s the mit -- because you think he &apos;s male , he can now move , what the maria don &apos;t have to worry about .
maria , though , can &apos;t perceive the same thing in all the states that heinrich in all states , and that &apos;s a pretty good thing to get married .
heinrich can married a woman in every state , but maria can only marry a woman in a few states today .
so we have these permanent anatomischen categories that are problematic and fragwürdig in many ways .
and for me , the question is , what will we do because our science is going to make this progress in the realm of the anatomy , that we have to admit to that we have to admit that a democracy that is based on anatomy is based on anatomy ?
i don &apos;t want to give science , but at the same time it feels sometimes that science is in its own .
so where do we go ?
it seems like our culture would take a kind of pragmatic stance : &quot; well , we need to move somewhere somewhere , so we move it somewhere . &quot;
but a lot of people are getting into a very strange position .
so for example , texas is decided to get a little bit to marry that you don &apos;t have a y chromosome , and a woman is married that you have a y chromosome .
now , in practice , people are not tested for their chromosomes .
but it &apos;s also very bizarre , because of the story i told you about the androgenrezeptor-defekt .
if we look at one of the founding of modern democracy , dr. martin luther king , he offers us in his &quot; i have a dream of a kind of solution . &quot;
he says , we should not be able to judge people to &quot; their skin color , but according to the quality of your character , &quot; and we go beyond anatomy .
and i want to say , &quot; yeah , that sounds like a really good idea . &quot;
but how do you do this in practice ?
how do you judge people because of their charaktereigenschaften ?
i also want to point out that i &apos;m not sure we should be so sure that we should be so verteilen about people in relation to people , because i have to admit that i know a series of golden retriever that probably make more likely than some people i know .
i want to make sure that i &apos;m probably a few bright labradorhunde know that fähiger are fundiertere , more intelligent and more powerful decisions about their sexual relations than some of the 40-jährige i know .
so how should we be able to put the question of the character &apos;s properties ?
it turns out it &apos;s a really hard thing .
and one part of me is , what if the content of a personality would be something that would be in the future , could be made visible ?
do we really want to go to this direction ?
i &apos;m not sure where we go .
what i know is that it really seems to think about the idea that the united states is really leading to think about questions about democracy .
in our effort to our effort to do democracy , we &apos;ve done our things right , and i think we would be doing our things in the future .
we have no idea , like , in iran , where a man who is sexuell sexually to other men &apos;s death , and it &apos;s being bestraft by death , because he &apos;s willing to be a geschlechtsumwandlung , which means he can stay alive .
in the states , we don &apos;t exist .
i &apos;m happy to say we don &apos;t have these states -- a surgeon i spoke about a few years ago , who had zwillinge twins with themselves to separate them , partly to make a name .
but when i was telefonierte him , and he asked him why he did these interventions -- it was highly riskante surgeries -- his answer was that in his country , these children would be very bad , and that &apos;s why he had to do it .
i said , &quot; well , did you have a political basis in erwägung rather than to separate them ? &quot;
the united states offer incredible opportunities to allow people to be those who are , without that they will change the state of the state .
so i think we need to be leaders .
well , just to finish , i want to notice that i talked to the fathers very much .
and i want to think about the possibility that could look like democracy , or looked , if we had the mothers involved .
and i want to say something that is a bit radical for a feminist , and i think that there might be different ways that there might be different ways of the kind of insight that are from different kinds of anatomy , insbesonders when people apply a gruppendenken .
for years , since i was interested in intersexualität , i &apos;m interested in research in the field of research research .
and one of the things that i really found interesting is the difference between men and women in respect to how they think and operating in the world .
what we &apos;ve learned from studies is that women , on average -- not every -- but on average -- more of this is more complex social relationships and care for people who are vulnerable within the group of vulnerable , to give very much attention .
and so , if we think about it , we have an interesting situation to us .
and years ago , when i was a graduate student , i was asking myself to ask me one of my studienbetreuer , who was my interest in feminism -- i looked at a feminist , so it &apos;s still -- a really , really , really curious question .
he said , &quot; tell me what is feminismus . &quot;
and i thought , &quot; well , this is the kind of the question i &apos;ve ever heard .
feminism is about stereotypes about gender , which is why not a feminismus is a female story .
but the more i thought about his question , i thought , i thought there could be something weibliches in feminismus .
it &apos;s meant to be there , it could give something , on average , making women different brains of male , which makes us a aufmerksamer for social relations and aufmerksamer for the schutzbedürftige .
so , where the main population was extremely bedacht , to find out how individuals could be protected from the state , is possible that if we put more mothers in this concept , we more than just how to protect , but how we &apos;re able to care for each other .
and maybe it &apos;s where we have to go to the future , if we have democracy about anatomy -- less about the individual bodies to think about the individual body , and to think more about relationships .
so that if we try to make a perfektere connection , we think about what we can do for each other .
thank you .
i &apos;m a jessi , and this is my suitcase .
but before i show you what i have in that , i &apos;m going to make a very public confession , and that &apos;s , i &apos;m obsessed with outfits .
i love it , to each opportunity to find another farbenfrohes , verrücktes outfit , and also photograph and to be able to get to you in the last time .
but i don &apos;t buy anything new .
i get all my clothes in a second hand , on flohmärkten and in second-hand-shops .
ooh , thank you .
second-hand-shopping allows me to reduce the impact of my garderobe on the environment , and also in my wallet .
i meet all kinds of great people , for usually , for good purpose ; i &apos;m looking at quite unique ; and it &apos;s going to buy a lot of stuff to my own personal schatzsuche .
i mean , what am i going to find today ?
is it going to have my scale ?
i &apos;m going to like the color ?
is it going to cost less than 20 dollars ?
if all the answers sounds loud , i feel like i won .
i come back to my suitcase , and i &apos;ll tell you what i &apos;ve been doing for this exciting week here at ted .
i mean , what does someone bring to that so many outfits ?
so i &apos;m going to show you exactly what i brought .
i brought seven to my unterhosen , and that &apos;s all .
and for a week , for a week , everything i &apos;ve done in my suitcase .
i made sure i would like everything i could carry , if i was first to palm springs .
and since you &apos;ve not heard about me , this is the woman who &apos;s here at ted in her underwear , which is , i found a couple of things .
and i &apos;m going to show you my outfits for this week .
sounds that good ?
as i do that , i &apos;m going to leave you some of the lessons that i &apos;m thinking or not , from that learning process , has learned nothing new .
let &apos;s start with sunday .
i call this the hot tiger .
you don &apos;t have to spend a lot of money to look good .
you can almost always look like a 50 dollars .
all of this kind of stuff , including the coat has 55 , and it was the most expensive thing i carried in this whole week .
monday : color is a little bit of a kraftvolles .
it &apos;s almost impossible to be bad to be bad if you &apos;re wearing hellrote pants .
if you &apos;re happy , you &apos;re going to pull other happy people .
tuesday : all right , anpassung is going to be completely überbewertet .
i spent a lot of my life , trying to try to be myself , and to adapt me at the same time .
be just who you are .
if you surrounded with the right people , you &apos;re not just going to understand it , you &apos;ll also estimate it .
wednesday : embrace your inner child .
sometimes people say , i would say , i &apos;ve got a verkleiden &apos; girl , or i remember her siebenjährige .
i &apos;d like to smile and say , &quot; thank you . &quot;
donnerstag : confidence is the key .
if you think you &apos;re looking at something good , it &apos;s almost safe .
and if you think they &apos;re not good enough , they &apos;re probably right .
i grew up with a mother that taught me the day for day .
but only when i got 30 , i really understood what that means .
and i &apos;m going to summarize this for you .
if you believe that you &apos;re inside and the outside are a wonderful person , then there &apos;s nothing you can &apos;t carry .
so there &apos;s no excuse for someone here in this audience .
we should be able to do anything we want .
thank you .
friday : a universal truth -- five words : golden pailleten , fit to everything .
and finally , saturday : a own unique , personal style is a great way to tell the world something about one , without having a word to say .
it was always proven to me , and over and over this week , people came to me , just because of what i wore . and i had great conversations .
obviously , that &apos;s not going to fit all in my tiny suitcase .
so before i go home to brooklyn , i &apos;m going to donate it all back .
because the lesson i &apos;ve been trying to learn is that i try to learn that &apos;s a week of what it &apos;s going to be .
i don &apos;t have to get these things to get emotionally , because the same thing is , in the same way , it &apos;s going to be a different kind of crazy , farbenfrohes , strahlendes , that just wait for me , if i love a little bit in the heart and search .
thank you very much .
thank you .
good day , everybody together .
i have something i want to show you .
think of this as a bildpunkt , as flying fliegenden .
this is what we call in our lab , wahrnehmbares design .
let me tell you a little bit about it .
now , if you take this picture -- i &apos;m originally italian , and every young in italy is growing in the picture in the room , but the reason i &apos;m showing you that in the formula one in the past decades , something very interesting was happening in the past decades .
now , a while ago , it was that if you wanted to win a formula to a race , then you took your budget and put your money on a good driver and a good car .
and when the car and the driver were good enough , they won the race .
now , now , if you want to win a race , you actually need a race , you know , what the car is monitoring in real time , a couple thousand sensors , the information from the car , that information is then on the system , and then use that car to send decisions and use things to change things in real time while information .
this would be , in ingenieurteams , call a echtzeit-kontrollsystem .
and basically , it &apos;s a system that &apos;s made of two parts -- a spürenden part and a reagierendenteil .
what &apos;s interesting now is the echtzeit-kontrollsysteme start in our lives .
our cities have been , in the last few years , are equipped with networks and electronics .
they become computers in the free .
and as computers in free , they start to react in other ways , and they &apos;re going to be perceived and driven .
when we &apos;re herrichten cities , it &apos;s actually a big deal .
and by the way , i want to mention that cities are only two percent of the earth &apos;s land , but 50 percent of the world &apos;s population is there .
they &apos;re 75 percent of the energiekonsums -- cause to 80 percent of co2 emissions .
so if we &apos;re doing something with cities , it &apos;s a big thing .
so , over the cities , all of this sense of view and driving the objects in the objects of the everyday life .
this is an exhibition that has a paola antonelli for moma , in the year , in the summer .
it &apos;s called &quot; that &quot; and &quot; talk to me . &quot;
now , all our objects , our environment , start to talk to us .
in a certain sense , it &apos;s almost as if any atom is out there , a sensor and a antreiber .
and that &apos;s radically radically the interaction that we have people out of our environment .
in a way , it &apos;s almost like the old dream of a michelangelo ...
you know , as a michelangelo shaped the moses , it means that he &apos;s taking the hammer at the end and threw him up , and you can still see a little spot of the untendrunter -- and said , &quot; perché non parli ? why don &apos;t you ? &quot;
now today , our environment begins for the first time , to respond to us .
i &apos;m just going to show you some examples -- again , with the idea of our environment and power .
let &apos;s start with the sense of the sense .
now the first project i want to introduce you is in truth one of the first of our lab .
it was a viereinhalb and a half years ago .
and what we did was actually using a new kind of network that was used across the world -- this is a mobiltelefonnetz -- and using the anonymous and aggregierte information from this network that &apos;s going to be collected by the betreiber to understand how the city works .
the summer was a happy summer -- 2006 .
it was a italy who won the fußball-weltmeisterschaft .
some of you will remember it was italy for france , and then finally zidane , the kopfstoß .
and no matter , italy has won in the end .
now , look at what happened on this day , just when the activity is happening in the network .
here you see the city .
you see the kolosseum , the fluß tiber .
this morning , before the game .
you see the timeline .
in the old afternoon , people here and there , the phone calls are and moving .
the game starts -- silence .
france makes a gateway . italy is a gateway .
halbzeit , people make a short call , go to the bathroom .
second halbzeit . end of the normal .
first , verlängerung , second .
zidane , in a moment of kopfstoß .
italy wins . yeah .
now , in that night , all of the center went to the center to celebrate .
they saw the big ausschlag .
the next day , all of the way to the center of the siegerteam and the prime minister at the same time .
and then everybody went down .
you see the picture of the space of the platzes massimo , where the way that the römischen of the people go to celebrate -- to have a big party , and you see the ausschlag at the end of the day .
now , this is just one example of how we can feel the city today , in a way that we couldn &apos;t do a few years ago .
another example of another example of that , you know , it &apos;s not about people , but to consume things that we use .
now , today we know everything about where our things come from .
this is a map that shows you all the chips that make a mac computer , as they came together .
but we just know little about where things go .
so , in this project , we actually designed some little markers to track the garbage while it goes through the system .
so we started with a few volunteers that we started with a few of the volunteers that we &apos;ve helped to do with a year , in seattle , to highlight the things that they &apos;re wegwarfen -- different kinds of things , as you can see -- things that you &apos;re going to throw away .
then we have the little chips , the little brands , to be geklebt to the garbage and we &apos;re going to get it out .
so here are the results that we &apos;re getting right now .
from seattle ...
after a week .
and with this information , we realized there &apos;s a lot of ineffizienzen in the system .
we can make the same things in fact with less energy .
the data was not available before .
but this is a lot of unnützer transporte and more complicated things .
but the other thing is that we believe that if we see every day , the cup that we throw away , it doesn &apos;t simply go away from the planet .
and the plastic bottle that we throw away every day is still there .
and if we were going to show that people , we can move a change behavior .
so that &apos;s the reason that project .
my colleague at mit , assaf biderman , could you even more about the sense of the sense and the many other wonderful things you can perceive with , but i &apos;d like to talk to the second part of the way we discussed at the beginning , and this is the betätigung of our environment .
and the first project is something that we did a couple of years ago in zaragoza , spain .
it started with a question of the bürgermeisters that came to us and said that spain and südeuropa was a beautiful tradition to use in public places as part of the architecture .
and the question was , how could you connect technology , new technology with it ?
and one of the ideas that were ermittelt at the mit of a arbeitskreis was , imagine these tubes , and valves , magnetventile , valves that open and close .
they &apos;re causing what a wasservorhang of water is like .
and if these bildpunkte fall , they can write that , they can read patterns , images , text .
and you can approach it , and it will open up to let them go out and see them in this picture .
well , we introduced the mayor of belloch .
it really enjoyed him .
and we got a building to design a building at the entrance to the expo .
we called it the digital water .
the whole building was all of water .
there are no doors or windows , but if you &apos;re approaching it , it will open up and let it go .
the roof was also covered with water .
and if it &apos;s a windig , if you want to reduce the device , you can actually get the roof .
or you could close the building and the whole architecture is , like in this case , you know , that days when you put the roof , you get images of people who were there and say , &quot; you &apos;ve destroyed the building . &quot;
no , they didn &apos;t have the building destroyed , it &apos;s just that architecture is almost disappears .
and you see here , the building works .
you see the person who asks what &apos;s going on inside the inside .
and this is me , when i tried to test the sensors that opened the water , not get nass .
now , i should tell you what happened one night as all the sensors .
but actually , it was still more fun in this night .
all the children from zaragoza came to the building , because the way they were played with the building was very different .
no longer a building opening up to make them , but a building that still had breaks and holes in the water , you had to jump to the nass .
and this was , for us , very exciting , because as architects , engineers , engineers , as designers , we always think about how the people use things we design .
but reality is always unexpected .
and this is the beauty of creating things that are used and interact with people .
now , here &apos;s a picture of the building with the physical bildpunkten , the bildpunkten of water and the projections .
and this is what we &apos;ve got to think about this project , which i &apos;m going to show you now .
so imagine that these bildpunkte could really start to fly .
imagine you could have little helicopter flying through the air , and each of you with a little bildpunkt with wechselndem light -- almost like a cloud that can move through the space .
here &apos;s the video .
imagine a helicopter you saw before you saw others , completely in sync with each other .
you can have these cloud .
you can have a kind of flexiblen display or display like this -- a gleichmäßige formation in two dimensions .
or , in three dimensions , where it changes , what changes the light is not the position of the bildpunkte .
they can play with different ways .
imagine the screen could just appear in different formaten or sizes , in different auflösungen .
but then this could be just a 3d cloud of bildpunkten that you can walk and through the you move through you that you can look at lots of directions .
and you can see a real flyfire-steuerung , the herabsinkt to form a gleichmäßiges v .
if you turn the light on , it looks like this . so , as we saw it before .
imagine every single person being controlled every single person .
it could have every single bildpunkt that comes from people , from the movements of the people or so forth .
i want to show you something first here .
we &apos;ve worked with roberto bolle , one of the best balletttänzer of our time -- the étoile at the metropolitan theater in new york , and the scala in milan -- we took his movements in 3d and using it as a pulse for the flyfire .
and you can see roberto dancing .
on the left-hand side , you see the bildpunkte , the different eingefangenen sensations .
it &apos;s a echtzeit-3d-scan and a bewegungsaufnahme .
so they can feel the whole movement .
you can do that all the time .
but then , if we all have the bildpunkte , they can play with it and play with color and drehbewegung .
that &apos;s what we want to use as a possible pulse for the flyfire .
i want to show you the latest project that we &apos;re working on .
it &apos;s something we &apos;re working for the olympics in london .
it &apos;s called the cloud -- the cloud .
so , the idea is , again , what we &apos;re doing is , again , that we &apos;re doing people with people to do something and the environment -- almost as we call it , wolkenbewegung , as we call a scheunentor , but with a cloud .
imagine that every one can give a little donation for a bildpunkt .
i think that the remarkable thing that happened over the last few years , the last decades is that we have changed from a physical to a digital world .
that &apos;s all digitized , knowledge , and it makes it available through the internet .
nowadays , we can first -- and the campaign , we have the campaign , the campaign showed this -- can we change the digital world of networks to change the physical world .
this can be , in our case , that we use it to design and to create a symbol .
that &apos;s what &apos;s built in the city .
but tomorrow , it can take us to ask the challenges -- think about climate change or co2 emissions -- how can we change from the digital world to physical physics ?
so the idea is that we actually do the people with , in which they together , collectively .
the cloud is again a cloud , in the same way , in the same way , a cloud of particles .
and these particles are water , while our cloud is a cloud of bildpunkten .
it &apos;s a physical piece in london , but with bildpunkten .
you can move inside and make different kinds of experiences .
you can actually look at them , the most important moments for olympia 2012 and the other , and it &apos;s as a kind of connection to community .
so both , the physical cloud in the heavens and you can go to the top of the wie new berggipfel .
you can get inside .
and a kind of digital leuchtturm in the night -- but as a allerwichtigstes , a new kind of experience for everyone who wants to go to the top .
thank you .
as an artist , i &apos;m really important to the relationship .
through my work , i try to express that people are not separate from nature and that everything is connected .
the first time i was almost 10 years ago in antarctica , where i saw my first eisberge .
i &apos;m ergriff awe .
my heart , i &apos;m going to see my heart , i was schwindelig , while i was trying to grab what was standing in front of me .
the eisberge around me was almost 60 meters out of the water , and i could just wonder that this was a schneeflocke on a different schneeflocke year after year .
eisberge are born as a kalb or a gletschers , or by breaking out of eisschollen .
every iceberg has its own individual personality .
they interact in a very clear way with their environment and their experiences .
some of them are weigern , and they &apos;re klammern until the bitteren end , while others don &apos;t stand and zusammenstürzen in a anfall passion .
when you look at a iceberg , you think you &apos;re easily , you &apos;re isolated , apart and alone , as we humans often see .
but the truth is far away from it .
so , as a iceberg melting , i &apos;m going to make it a vorzeitliche atmosphere .
and while the iceberg ice , it puts mineralstoffreiches drinking water that feeds a lot of life .
i &apos;ll take my footage of this eisberge as if i was making portraits of my ancestors , in the conscious mind that they were in these individual moments of time , and never exist again .
it &apos;s not a death when you melt ; it &apos;s not a end , but a fortführung of your pfades along the life cycle .
one part of the ice in the eisbergen that i &apos;m photographiere is very young -- a couple of a thousand years old .
and part of the ice is more than 100,000 years old .
the last images i &apos;d like to show you show is a iceberg that i &apos;ve photographiert in greenland in greenland .
it &apos;s rarely really witnessed a rollenden that &apos;s actually going to be .
so here you see it .
on the left-hand side , you &apos;re looking at a little boat .
this is about five meters long .
so , you &apos;re looking at the shape of the iceberg , and where it &apos;s in the wasserlinie .
you can see here , he starts to roll , and the boat has moved to the other side , the man standing there .
that &apos;s the average size of a grönland-eisbergs .
it &apos;s about 120 feet out of the water , or 40 meters .
and this video is real time .
and just like this , the iceberg shows you a different side of his personality .
thank you .
my life is really extraordinary to be truly blessed by working on some amazing projects .
but , in the coolest i &apos;ve ever worked on , it was this guy .
his name is tempt .
tempt was one of the leading graffitikünstler of the 80s .
then , one day , he came back and he said , &quot; paps , my legs kribbeln . &quot;
and that was the outbreak of the outbreak .
tempt is completely paralyzed today .
he can only use his eyes .
i stood across it .
i have a company that makes design and animations , so it &apos;s a complex part of what we admire and look at the world in the world .
so we decided to learn tony -- tempt -- and to support this thing .
i met with his father and his brother and said , &quot; we &apos;ll give you this money .
what are you going to do with it ? &quot;
and his brother said , &quot; i want to talk to tony .
i just want to go back to him and i said , &quot; wait a minute , is that not -- i &apos;ve seen stephen hawking -- can &apos;t communicate all the paralyzed people through these devices ? &quot;
and he said , &quot; no , just if you &apos;re going to be the higher gesellschaftsschicht , and a remarkable insurance , you can really do that .
normal people are not available to these devices . &quot;
and i said , &quot; how does it communicate ? &quot;
anybody has seen the film &quot; schmetterling and &quot; taucherglocke &quot; ?
so they communicate -- so they &apos;re walking along their fingers .
i &apos;m going to say , &quot; very archaisch , how can that be ? &quot;
so i came with the need to just look at the need , just a check and instead i put a check out of the leiseste i had to einlösen it .
i &apos;m going to verpflichtete myself and i &apos;m going to be verpflichtete to his brother and his father -- and the words , &quot; well , my suggestion is this : tony &apos;s going to talk , we &apos;ll get a machine and we &apos;ll find a way that he can make his art again .
because it &apos;s a farce that someone who &apos;s still wearing it , it can &apos;t communicate . &quot;
so i spoke to a conference several months later .
i met these people from grl , graffiti research lab and they have a technology that allows them to project a light on each surface and then drawing on a laserpointer that &apos;s known the negative area .
so they &apos;re going to be around and they make kunstinstallationen like this .
they say that all things that are shown up there will follow a life cycle .
it starts with the geschlechtsteilen , then the schimpfwörter , the bush-verleumdungen and finally , people actually do art .
but there was always a life cycle in your presentation .
so i went home and i was eating the night and i was eating her wife and we thought , &quot; well , second time there is this technology that you can use your eyes to control things , to find a way that tempt can drive a laser , so he can make a laser , so he would be great . &quot;
this was the beginning of the journey .
and about two years later , about a year later , a lot of organization and a lot of things , and forth , we &apos;ve reached some things .
one , we have the insurance to eingerannt the doors , and actually , we have a machine that he can communicate with -- stephen hawking-maschine .
that was incredible .
and he &apos;s really extremely funny -- i call him yoda , because you talk about it , or you get an email , and you think , &quot; i &apos;m so unwürdig , this guy is incredible . &quot;
and also , we have seven programmers from all the world -- literally from all the corners of the world -- to us home .
my wife , my children and i moved to the garage , and this hackers and programmers and verschwörungstheoretiker and anarchisten have taken over our house .
and many of our friends thought we were beautiful , to do that , and we zurückkämen and all the images on the walls would be graffitis .
but for about two weeks , we &apos;re programmed , we went to the strandpromenade in venice , my children were involved , my dog was also , and we created this .
it &apos;s called eyewriter , and you can see the description .
this is a cheap sonnenbrille that we bought on the strandpromenade of the city , something that was kupferdraht and a couple of things from the local store and the elektronikhandel .
we took a ps3-kamera , they took them on a led-licht , and now we have a device available to the free -- you can build it , we put the code free , the software can be able to download it free .
so we have created a device that &apos;s completely free from constraints .
no insurance can be querstellen .
no hospital .
each gelähmte can actually communicate with his eyes alone .
thank you .
thank you very much , that was incredible .
so at the end of the two weeks , we went back to tempts room .
i love this picture , because it &apos;s the room of someone else , and that &apos;s his room .
now , this is all this rummel of the great unveiling .
and after a year of planning , two weeks , nudelparties and durchgemachten nächten , tony drew for seven years after seven years .
and this is a remarkable picture , because this is his life support system , and he &apos;s going to see his life support .
we have geneigt his bed to see it can see out .
we set up a set of a set of a wall against the hospital before the hospital .
and he drew the first time , for the first time , in the family family of his family and friends -- and you can only imagine what a sense of a parking lot .
so , in the parking lot , we had to get it out in the parking lot , so we felt as part of the sprüher-szene .
and at the end , he sent us an email with this : &quot; for the first time , i drew something .
i feel that i was left under water , and finally someone picked up for the bottom and i pulled my head up and i could breathe . &quot;
is that not overwhelming ?
that &apos;s something like our kampfschrei .
and that keeps us in the table and we continue to continue to evolve .
and we need to improve a lot of that machine .
it &apos;s an amazing device , but it &apos;s a zaubertafel .
and someone who has such a künstlerisches potential , deserves so much .
so we &apos;re in the process of finding how to make it better , faster and stronger .
since that time we &apos;ve been given all the species of recognition .
we won a couple awards .
think , you think , it &apos;s free , none of us deserves .
it &apos;s all from our own pockets .
so the awards were , &quot; oh , that &apos;s fantastic . &quot;
armstrong twitterte over us and then , in december , has been honored to us as one of the 50 of the world in 2010 , which was really great .
the coolste is -- and this is the full circle -- that this april , when the geffen moca in downtown los angeles will be an exhibition , called &quot; the kind of the streets . &quot;
and there are probably the hardest of the härtesten of the straßenkunstszene , banksy , shepard fairey , caws -- all these guys are going to be there .
tempt will be part of the show , which is pretty abgefahren .
so basically , i &apos;m about , if you look something that &apos;s impossible , then you can make it .
everything in this room was impossible -- this stage , this computer , this microphone , the eyewriter -- everything was impossible at some point .
make it possible -- you all here .
i &apos;m not a programmer , and i never had a programmer , and i &apos;ve never got a little bit and i &apos;ve got and surrounded with amazing people so we could put something on the legs together .
and this question is every one of you , and every single day , you have something that you have to do , that &apos;s going to make you a little bit about what &apos;s going to be done , if not now , when ? and when not i , who then ?
thank you .
so i write for children , and i &apos;m probably most of the gelesener kinderbuchautor .
and i always tell people i don &apos;t want to come and so a scientist .
you can have a farmer , or in leather , but no one has ever chosen a farmer .
today i want to share with you and i &apos;m talking about the offenbarungen .
well , an epiphany , for usually , is something that you find because you &apos;re going to fall down somewhere .
you &apos;re about block and it &apos;s taken it as a revelation .
this is a painting of a circle .
one of my friends has done it -- richard bollingbroke .
it &apos;s the kind of complicated circle that i want to share with you today .
my circle started in the &apos; 60s in high school in stow , in a state of state , where i was the klassenschwuchtel .
i was the one who was beaten every week in the green green and blue , until a teacher saved my life .
she saved my life by letting me use the toilet in the lehrerzimmer .
and they did it .
she did it for three years .
and i had to go out of town .
i had a thumb , i had 85 dollars , and it hit me to san francisco in california -- i found a lover -- and then in the &apos; 80s , i found it to be a work of aids-organisationen .
about three or four years ago , i got a call from this teacher and woman , who said , &quot; i have to see them .
i &apos;m sad that we &apos;ve never learned to know each other as adults .
if you can get to a ohio , please come together with the man i know that you &apos;ve found it .
and i should mention that i bauspeicheldrüsenkrebs , and i want you to go through . &quot;
well , the next day we were in cleveland .
we looked at them , we laughed , we were crying , and we knew they had to be in a hospice .
we found one for them , we took them , and we took them to them , and we gave them eight to their family , because it was necessary .
it was something we knew .
and just as the woman who wanted me to know as adults , i met myself , they turned into a box of asche and was put in my hands .
what happened was that the circle closed , it was a circle , and the revelation i talked about .
the revelation is that death is part of life .
she saved my life , and my partner and i saved her .
and you know , this part of life takes everything that needs the rest of life .
it needs truth and beauty , and i &apos;m so glad that this is what i mentioned today .
he needs to have -- it needs to be , love and pleasure , and it &apos;s to be to give these things .
thank you .
imagine a big explosion , as you &apos;re going to grow up to 1,000 meters .
you can imagine an airplane full of smoke .
imagine a triebwerk , the klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack .
this sounds fear .
now i had a unique place that day ; i was sitting on top of 1d .
i was the only one who could talk to the flugbegleitern .
so i looked at them in the same , and they said , &quot; no problem , we &apos;ve got a couple of birds . &quot;
the pilot had the machine already gewendet , and we haven &apos;t been so far away .
you could see manhattan .
two minutes later , three things happened at the same time .
the pilot set up the machine after the hudson river .
that &apos;s usually not the route .
he turns on the triebwerke .
imagine a geräuschloses aircraft .
and then he said three words -- the words i &apos;ve ever heard .
he says , &quot; bereitmachen , &quot; to the world .
i didn &apos;t have to talk to the bordpersonal .
i could see it in your eyes , there was horror , the life was at the end .
i want to share with you three things that i &apos;ve learned about that day .
i learned that in a moment everything is different .
we have these lebensplan , we have these things that we want to do in life , and i thought about all the people i wanted to pass and i didn &apos;t do , all the fences i wanted to , all the experiences i wanted to do .
while i was thinking about it later , i realized a saying , &quot; i &apos;m going to collect bad wine . &quot;
because if the wine is there , and the person is there , i open it up .
i never want to move a little bit of life .
and this urgency , this goal , has really changed my life .
the second thing i learned about this day -- and this was when we verfehlten the george washington bridge , so pretty much about haaresbreite -- i thought , human , there &apos;s one thing i really bereue .
i had a good life .
in my own humanity and my mistakes , i decided to become better , in everything i &apos;m going to do .
but in my humanity , i gave my ego of ego .
and i &apos;m going to spend the time i wasted on bedeutungslose things , with people who mean something .
and i thought about the relationship with my wife , to friends , to people .
and then , when i was thinking about it , i decided to verbannen negative energy from my life .
it &apos;s not perfect , but it &apos;s much better .
i don &apos;t have a couple of years to gestritten my wife .
it feels great .
i &apos;m not trying to have more , right ; i &apos;m going to make myself happy .
the third thing i learned about -- while the internal clock is beginnnt , &quot; 15 , 14 , 13 ... &quot;
you see the water .
i said , &quot; please flieg the air . &quot;
i don &apos;t want this thing to do in 20 pieces , as you know from a dokumentationen .
as we were abstürzen , i had this feeling , human , to die of dying .
almost like that , we &apos;re going to prepare our lives for life .
but it was really sad .
i didn &apos;t want to go ; i love my life .
and this sadness of the brain is really , in a thought , which is that i wish to just wish one thing .
i just wish i could grow up my children grow up .
about a month after that , i visited a piece of my daughter -- erstklässler , not much künstlerisches talent .
... not .
and i feiere , i &apos;m going to cry like a little child .
and in the world , everything made sense of me .
i realized then by the time i connected the dots to each other that it &apos;s only about being a great father .
more than anything , everything else , is my only goal in life , a good father .
i was a miracle that i was not to die in this day .
i got another gift , which is to look at the future and come back and live differently .
and my call to all of us today , is this : imagine that you &apos;re going on in your flight -- please not -- but imagine it ; and how would you change ?
what would you do to do it , you know , because you think they would be there for always ?
how would you change your relationships and the negative energy in it ?
and more than anything else , are the best parents they can only be ?
thank you .
the idea behind the stuxnet computer-wurm is pretty simple .
we don &apos;t want iran to build the bomb .
the most important thing to make is the development of nuclear weapons is the uran-anreicherungs-einrichtung in natanz .
the gray boxes you see here are echtzeit-kontrollsysteme .
so if we have to work , the systems that are controlling the systems , which control the drehzahlen and the valves , we can actually create a lot of problems with the engine .
these gray boxes are not laufen ; they &apos;re based on a completely different technology .
but if we can do that , an effective windows-virus on a laptop is used by a wartungsingenieur device to put these gray box , then we &apos;re in business .
and that &apos;s the planning behind the stuxnet .
so we &apos;re starting with a windows-dropper .
the nutzdaten are going to go into the gray box , beschädigen the centrifuge , and the iranian kernenergie-programm verzögert verzögert on the auftrag .
this is a piece of kinderspiel , right ?
i want to tell you how we found that .
when we started our research at six months ago , we started to have a sechs of what the purpose and purpose of this was .
the only thing we knew is very , very complicated , which is the most windows- part , the most part of the dropper- , he made a unzähligen day- of day- .
and it seemed to be a little bit of vorzuhaben , with these gray boxes , these echtzeit- kontrollsystemen .
and the erregte of our attention , and we started a project project where we infected our environment with stuxnet infected , and we studied this .
and then something funny happened .
stuxnet was like a laborratte that didn &apos;t like our cheese -- schnüffelte , but didn &apos;t want to eat it .
that didn &apos;t make sense in my mind .
and after we had been experimenting with various kinds of cheese , i was going to have this gezielter attack .
completely , looking at a particular goal .
the dropper streift , in the gray box , are activated on the gray box , when a special configuration was discovered , even if the special program that you have to get on that goal is trying to get .
and if not , it doesn &apos;t do anything .
so , this really got my interest , and we started working with it , almost around the clock , because i thought , well , we don &apos;t know what the goal is .
it could say , for example , an us- american power station , or a chemieanlage in germany .
so we should be pretty soon to figure out what the goal is .
so extrahierten and dekompilierten , we dekompilierten the angriffs- code , and found that he &apos;s aufstrukturiert in two digital sprengköpfe -- a smaller and a larger .
and we also realized that they were very professional , by people who were obviously available to all the information .
they knew any bits and bytes they had to attack .
probably , you know , you know , the schuhgröße of the maschinenbedieners .
so they knew everything .
and if you &apos;ve already heard that the dropper of stuxnet complex and high-tech is , let me tell you , the nutzdaten are a science for themselves .
it &apos;s much more than anything we &apos;ve ever seen .
here &apos;s a clip from this angriffs- code .
we &apos;re talking about this -- about 15,000 lines code .
it looks pretty like the altmodische assemblersprache .
and i want to tell you how we were able to be smart to be smart .
so , what we were looking for was the first thing we were looking for was systemfunktions- , because we know what this cause .
and then we looked for timern and datenstrukturen and trying to bring them to the real world -- with potential targets in real world .
so we needed theories about these goals that we could prove or widerlegen .
and to make these theories , we call ourselves in memory that it &apos;s definitely um sabotage , it has to be a hochwertiges goal , and it &apos;s a very likely to be in iran because most infections have been reported .
now , in this area , there are not several thousand goals .
basically , it &apos;s going out to the buschehr nuclear power and the urananreicherungsanlage in natanz .
so i said to my assistant , &quot; i &apos;m bringing a list of all experts for zentrifugen and power power out of our kundenstamm . &quot;
and i called them and they would take their knowledge to compare their expertise to what we found in the code and the data .
and that worked very well .
so , it was possible to bring us to the little digital sprengkopf with the rotorsteuerung .
so the rotor is this moving part inside the orbit , these black objects that you see .
and if you &apos;re manipulated the speed of this rotors , you actually have the capacity to crack the rotor , and eventually even letting it explode .
what we &apos;ve discovered is that the goal of the attack actually was to make it slow and incredibly incredibly , and obviously , to try to try to try and try to try to try and try to try to try to get out of the trial , so that they &apos;re not able to get to it fast fast .
the great digital sprengkopf -- we got a insight through that we looked at very specific data and datenstrukturen .
so for example , the number of 164 is very heraus out of that code ; you can &apos;t miss it .
i started to durchzuarbeiten science , and it &apos;s been built by scientific literature , and found that they &apos;re strukturiert in what &apos;s called kaskaden , and each kaskade contains 164 zentrifugen .
so that made sense , it fit together .
and it was better .
these zentrifugen in iran are divided into 15 of what they call levels .
and guess what we found in the angriffscode ?
almost identical structure .
so again , that fit really well .
and this gave us a lot of confidence to what we &apos;re studying .
now , don &apos;t get me wrong , that wasn &apos;t just like that .
these results were done by several weeks of work .
and we just ran into a sackgasse and we had to get new .
but what we found is that both digital sprengköpfe in reality , and the same goal , but from different directions .
the small sprengkopf takes a kaskade , and überdreht the rotoren and verlangsamt it and the big sprengkopf tritt with six kaskaden in interacting and manipulated .
so , in large and whole , we &apos;re very confident that we actually have determined what the goal is .
it &apos;s natanz , and it &apos;s just natanz .
so we don &apos;t have to worry about other goals of the stuxnet .
and this is something really cool stuff that we &apos;ve discovered -- actually gehauen me out of the socks .
and down there is the gray box , and above there you see the zentrifugen .
now , what &apos;s done is that these are the eingehenden values from sensors -- so for example , from drucksensoren and vibrationssensoren -- and it &apos;s stellt legitimen code that &apos;s still done with the attack with the falschen data .
and actually , this falschen is the falschen data from stuxnet before .
so it &apos;s just like in hollywoodfilmen , where the verfolgungsjagd is fed the überwachungskamera videoaufnahmen of aufgenommenem videoaufnahmen .
that &apos;s cool , isn &apos;t it ?
so the idea here is obviously not just the maschinenbediener in the room .
in fact , it &apos;s much more dangerous and more powerful .
the idea is to überlisten a digital sicherheitssystem .
we need digital sicherheitssysteme to where a human maschinenbediener can &apos;t respond fast enough .
so , in a power station , if the big wave of mass is fast , you need to open up entlastungsventile within milliseconds .
of course , this can &apos;t be done by a human maschinenführer .
so , in this point , we need digital sicherheitssysteme .
and if you &apos;re in the risk of the risk , then really bad things happen .
the power plant can explode .
and neither the maschinenführer , nor the sicherheitssystem will notice .
this is scary .
but it gets worse .
and what i &apos;m saying now is very important .
think about it . this attack is generisch .
he doesn &apos;t have anything to do with zentrifugen , with urananreicherung .
so , for example , he would work for example -- in a power station or a automobilfabrik .
it &apos;s generisch .
and you don &apos;t have to -- when the angreifer -- you don &apos;t have to put the nutzdaten on a usb- stick , as we saw it at stuxnet .
you could also use ordinary wurm- technology to the spread .
you have to get it as far as possible .
and if you do that , you end up getting a cyber- massenvernichtungswaffe .
that &apos;s the consequence we need to ask .
so unfortunately , the biggest number of goals for the attacks are not in the middle east .
they &apos;re in the united states , in europe and japan .
so all these green areas , these are the zielreichsten environments .
we need to ask the consequences , and we &apos;re going to start preparing for us .
thank you .
i have a question .
ralph , it was very much reported that people think that the mossad is the hauptorganisation behind it .
is that also your opinion ?
okay , you want to know that ?
yeah . okay .
i think the mossad is involved , but the driving force is not israel .
so the driving force is the cyber- power .
there &apos;s only one and this is the united states -- fortunately , to happiness .
because otherwise , our problem would be even bigger .
thank you for a heidenangst eingejagt . thank you .
i spent the last few years to place myself in situations , which normally are very difficult , and at the same time , is kind of dangerous .
i went into prison -- hard .
i worked on a kohlebergwerk -- dangerous .
i filmed in kriegsgebieten -- difficult and dangerous .
and i spent 30 days , nothing to eat this -- i &apos;m going to be doing this at the beginning , a little bit difficult in the middle , very dangerous at the end .
actually , i &apos;m exposed to the most part of my career in a career looking at fürchterlichen situations , and all of this is just to look at social power as well as it is , and i &apos;m interesting to a way of a way that you can enjoy and make it available for the audience .
so when i knew i was going to come here to look at a tedtalk , and looking at the world of branding and sponsoring , i knew i would do something a little different .
some of you may have heard that i put an ad on ebay a couple of weeks ago .
i was going to send some facebook-nachrichten , some twitter-nachrichten , and i gave people the possibility to bring the namensrechte to my tedtalk in 2011 .
really , some of the happy people and companies , for-profit and non-profit , they got the unique opportunity -- because i &apos;m sure chris anderson will never let this happen -- the namensrechte on the talk that you &apos;re just seeing at the moment that neither had a title or not many clues , which was going to be .
so what you get is : your name here : my tedtalk , you know , you don &apos;t know what the subject is going to be , and the only of the content you could ever fly for the ears , especially if i put her company with participation .
but it &apos;s even apart from that , it &apos;s a very good media opportunity .
you know how many people look at these tedtalks ?
a whole bunch .
this is just the arbeitstitel .
so despite this warning , i knew that anybody would buy the namensrechte .
now , if you asked me this one year ago , i wouldn &apos;t have been able to tell you that with certainty .
but in the new project i work with , my new film , we &apos;re studying the world of marketing , advertising .
as i said , i was going to go in a couple of very terrible situations over the years , but nothing was willing to prepare me , nothing could be rüsten to go to something that &apos;s so hard and so dangerous as with these guys in a room .
you know , i had the idea for a movie .
what i want to do is a film about product placement , marketing and advertising , with the whole film funded by product placement , marketing and advertising .
and the movie is called &quot; the greatest ever sold . &quot;
so what happens in &quot; the greatest movie sold &quot; is that everything from above to the bottom , from the beginning to the end , is totally tagged with brands -- from the titelsponsor you &apos;re going to see in the movie , that &apos;s the brand of the brand .
so this brand , the qualcomm stadion , the staples center .
these guys will be connected to the film in infinity -- always .
and so the movie will look at this whole idea -- that &apos;s what ? in eternity , for always ?
i &apos;m a redundante person .
that was more to the american .
it was &quot; in infinity , for always . &quot;
but we &apos;re not just going to have the brand x as a titelsponsor , but we &apos;re sure we &apos;re going to make any possible category in the movie .
we might sell a shoe , and he &apos;s going to be the greatest shoe that you ever carried .
the greatest car you &apos;re ever on , of &quot; the greatest movie ever sold &quot; the greatest drink you &apos;ve ever had , a focus of &quot; the greatest movie sold . &quot;
so the idea is , besides showing that brands are part of life , actually , to get them to finance the film ?
and we actually show the whole process of how it works .
the goal of the whole film is transparency .
you &apos;ll see the whole thing in the movie of statten .
so this is the whole concept , the whole film , from beginning to end .
and i would be happy to be happy if the ceg would help me realize this .
you know , it &apos;s funny because i first heard it first , it &apos;s the ultimate respect for the audience .
i don &apos;t know how to be empfänglich people .
you have a perspective -- i don &apos;t want to use &quot; angle , &quot; because this has an negative konnotation -- but you know how to evolve ?
how much money is required to realize that ?
1.5 million .
i think it &apos;s hard to meet you , but i think it &apos;s worth it to any very , very well , to address some really known brands .
who knows when the movie comes out , we might see a horde vollidioten .
what do you think the answer is going to be ?
the answer will be probably probably , &quot; no . &quot;
but is it a hard thing about the film or a hard thing to do ?
and jk : both .
so , meaning not that optimistic .
so , my lord , can you help me ? i need help .
i can help .
okay .
fantastic .
we need to think about what brands .
yeah .
if you look at the people who you have to do with it .
there are some places that we can turn to .
put the camera out of the camera .
i thought , &quot; imagine the camera , &quot; that we wanted to lead a hintergrundgespräch .
it turns out that it was actually meant , &quot; we want to do nothing with the film . &quot;
and just as disappeared as these companies , one after the other .
no one wanted to do something with the film .
i was amazed .
they didn &apos;t want to do anything with the project .
and i was confused , because i thought , the whole concept , the idea of advertising is to present your product as many people as possible , as many people as possible .
especially in the world today , this interface of new and old media and media media , it &apos;s not the idea of being in this new exciting vermittlungsinstrument that the masses will bring that message .
no , that was what i thought .
but look , the problem was that my idea had a fatalen error , and that was the case .
actually no , that wasn &apos;t even the mistake .
that would have been no problem at all .
that would have been okay .
but what this picture is , is a problem .
you see , if you &apos;re in the google-suche of the google-suche , this is -- this is one of the first images that appears in the mind .
i really like your way , sergey brin .
this was the problem : transparency -- free of deception and tücke , just to explore and durchschauen , immediately , charakterisiert , charakterisiert , and the access to information , especially , in terms of geschäftspraktiken -- the last line is the biggest problem .
you know , we &apos;re currently listening to a whole bunch of transparency .
our politicians say it , our president says , even our ceos are saying .
but if it &apos;s far that it &apos;s going to be done , it &apos;s going to change anything .
but why ? well , transparency is fear -- like this strange bear that still brüllt .
she &apos;s unvorhersagbar -- like this strange landstraße .
and it &apos;s also a very risky thing too .
what else is that risky ?
a whole bowl of cool food .
that &apos;s very risky .
so when i started talking to companies and tell them that we wanted to tell this story , they said , &quot; no , we want you to tell a story .
we want you to tell a story , but we just want you to tell our story . &quot;
you see , when i was a child , and my father caught me in lying -- and there he is , and he &apos;s sitting with this eye -- he would say , &quot; my son , there &apos;s three versions of the story .
there &apos;s your version , there &apos;s my version , and there &apos;s the real version . &quot;
so you can see , with this film , we wanted to tell the real version .
but there &apos;s a company , an authority was willing to help us -- and it &apos;s also because i knew john bond and richard kirshenbaum for years -- i realized that i had to do it alone , i had to deal with the mittelsmann and i had to go to the companies with my team to companies .
so what you started to see , or what i started to understand -- was that when you start talking about these companies , the idea of how your brand is going to be understood , a umfassendes problem .
i have friends , the big , giant hollywood-filme , and i have friends who are doing little independent-filme .
and my friends , the big , giant hollywood-filme , say that the reason their movies are so successful , the markenpartnern they have .
and then my friends , who are doing small independent-filme , &quot; well , how are we going to compete with these big , big hollywood-filmen ?
and the movie is called &quot; the greatest movie ever . &quot;
so , how do we see the ban in the movie ?
whenever i put myself on the way , and always when i open the medizinschrank , you &apos;ll see ban deodorant .
and every time i interviewe someone , i can say , &quot; are you fresh enough for this interview ?
you &apos;re far ? you &apos;re a little nervous .
i want to help you calm down .
so maybe you should be a little bit of this in the interview . &quot;
and then we offer one of these great düfte .
either &quot; floral fusion &quot; or a &quot; paradise winds , &quot; they &apos;ll have choice .
we &apos;re going to be equipped for men and for women , for women , roll-on , or a stick , whatever .
this is the kurzfassung .
now i can answer all of your questions and give them a ausfühliche .
we &apos;re a smaller brand .
so , as you talked about the smaller movies , we &apos;re a herausforderer .
so we haven &apos;t have a budget like other brands .
so , like this , you know , remember , people remember ban -- that &apos;s kind of why we &apos;re interested .
so what words would you describe to describe ?
ban is blank .
that &apos;s a great question .
woman : überlegene technology .
technology is not the way to describe something that is going to be doing under the achseln .
we &apos;re talking about bold .
i think , &quot; well , &quot; well , &quot; well , &quot; is a great word that this category is really , really , to a positive , in contrast to &quot; fighting smell and humidity . &quot;
it keeps you fresh .
how can we keep them longer longer -- better fresh , more fresh , three times .
these things have a positivere effect .
and this is a millionen-konzern .
what about me ? what about the druchschittstypen ?
i have to talk to the guy on the road , which is like me , otto-normal-verbraucher .
you should tell me something about my brand .
how would you describe your brand ?
hmmm , my brand ?
i don &apos;t know .
i really like nice clothing .
woman : &apos; 80s revival &quot; in skaterpunk , except for the waschtag .
well , what is the brand gerry ?
unique .
i think the genre , the style i have , is probably &quot; dark glamour . &quot;
i like many black colors , lots of grautöne and such a stuff .
but normally i have a accessoire , like sonnenbrillen , or a jewelry and a kind of stuff .
woman : if dan would be a brand , he would probably be a classic man .
and so , you know , the brand i &apos;m here is , i would say , lässige fly .
woman 2 : part of the part of part , part of the part of the part of the part of the part of the part of the part . i don &apos;t know .
man three : i &apos;m the schmusetyp .
i sell schmusetiere around the country , worldwide .
so i think that &apos;s my brand .
this is my brand in my little , verzerrten industry .
mann 4 : my brand is fedex because i was ausliefere .
mann 5 : brand gescheiteter alkoholsüchtiger schreiberling .
is that ?
lawyer : i &apos;m a anwaltsmarke .
i &apos;m tom .
now , we can &apos;t all be the tom-marke , but i often see the interface of dark glamour and lässiger .
and what &apos;s noticed is that i needed an expert .
i needed someone who could get into my head , someone who really could help me understand what you call the &quot; markenpersönlichkeit . &quot;
and so i found a company called the olson zaltman in pittsburg .
they have companies like nestle , febreze , hallmark , helped discover these markenpersönlichkeit .
if you could do it for those , you could also help me .
you &apos;ve brought your images , yes ?
i have that . the first picture is a picture of my family .
tell me a little bit about how that &apos;s connected to your thoughts and feelings about them .
these are the people who form my worldview .
tell me about this world .
md : this world ? i think the world is the world that you live in -- how people around you , the friends , the family , the way you live lives , the work and the way .
all these things come and start from a place , and for me , and they start with my family in west virginia .
so what &apos;s the next thing you want to talk about .
the next one . this was the most beautiful day of my life .
what is the subject to the thoughts and feelings about you ?
it &apos;s like i want to be .
i like things that are different .
i like things that are weird . i like weird things .
tell me about the &quot; why &quot; -phase -- what do you get us ?
what is the machete ? what are the puppenstadium you are right now ?
why is it important , neuzustarten ? what represents the red ?
tell me a little bit about this part .
a little bit more about them , that &apos;s not them .
which other metamorphosen have gone through ?
... this doesn &apos;t have to be afraid . in which kind of achterbahn are you ?
eeeeee ! no , thank you .
thank you for your patience .
yeah . well .
yeah , i don &apos;t know what to get out of it .
there &apos;s a lot of crazy things going .
the first thing i saw was that the idea that your markenpersönlichekti is two separate , but sich pages -- the morgan spurlock-marke is a achtsame .
the add to add very well .
and i think there &apos;s almost a contradiction .
and i think some companies are just going to focus on a strength , instead of both .
many companies tend to -- and this is the human nature -- things that you don &apos;t know , you &apos;re afraid of being frightened of these elements , and that you will welcome these , and you turn them into something positive , and that &apos;s a geschickter schachzug .
what other brands are doing ?
the first one is a classic apple .
and you can also see this , target , the wii , mini by the mini coopers and jetblue .
well , there are verspielte brands and brands brands , these things that come and go , but a verspielte , achtsame brand is a pretty strong thing .
a achtsame , verspielte brand . what is your brand ?
if anybody ask you to describe their markenidentität , your markenpersönlichkeit , how would you ?
you &apos;re a up-attribut ? are you something that &apos;s going to bring blood in wallungen ?
or are they more like a down-attribut ?
are you something that &apos;s a little bit more calm , more conservative ?
up-attribute are things that are playful , fresh like the fresh prince , zeitgemäß , abenteuerlich , ausgefallen , ausgefallen flynn , wendig and agile , profan , herrisch , magisch and mystisch .
or are they more like a down-attribut ?
are you achtsam and mondän like 007 ?
are they established , traditionally , pflegend , beschützend , compassionate , like tv ?
are they reliable , stable , familiär , safe , geborgen , holy , bedacht , and the way the dalai lama or yoda ?
over the movie , we had more than 500 companies that were up and down-firmen and the &quot; no &quot; said because they were not part of the project .
they didn &apos;t want to do anything with this movie , because they didn &apos;t have control , no control over the end product .
but then , 17 markenpartner who were willing to try to give out to this control that wanted to make people business and verspielt and verspielt , as i , and finally , to tell us stories that we normally wouldn &apos;t have to tell -- stories that would never help to support a werber .
they were befähigten to tell us the story of the neuromarketing , so how we tell the story in this movie , that you use mris to make the lustzentren of the brain , both advertising and films .
we went to sao paulo , where außenwerbung had been banned .
in the entire city , there &apos;s no anzeigentafel , no poster , no flyer , nothing .
and we went to school in school where companies are going to make their way in the verarmte schools in the very america .
and the incredible thing for me is that the projects i get most of the feedback , or where i &apos;ve had the greatest success , the ones that are , i &apos;m going to do with things , i &apos;m going to do with things .
and this is what these brands have done .
because they umgingen the mittelsmann , they umgingen the agencies , and they said , &quot; the don &apos;t really have your interest in mind . &quot;
i &apos;m going to negotiate with an artist right in the world .
i &apos;m going to work with him and make something completely different , something that people make for a think that our world view will challenge .
and how did that for you ? what it was successful ?
now , the film , when the film , we had the film to go to film festival , we can see it .
the premiere was the last time in january , and since then -- and this is not even the whole thing -- there were 900 million aufrufe of this film .
it &apos;s actually a zeitraum period of two one / two weeks .
this is just online -- not press , no television .
the film didn &apos;t yet have been ausgeliefert .
there &apos;s no one online online . no streaming .
he &apos;s not come out in other countries .
well , finally , the film has been really big momentum .
and this is not bad for a project where almost every werbeagentur of the werbeagentur we talked about , to leave their clients .
one thing i found , i think , is that if you take your chance to take your chance , take risks that are in these risks .
i think if you keep people from it , then you get them closer to failing .
i think that if you train your employees to avoid risks , you &apos;re prepared for a profit to get a profit .
i feel that we need to encourage people to get risks .
we need to encourage people to have no fear to have a fear that they might have .
finally , in progress , we should be welcome to the fear .
we should be put the bear in the cage .
now , you &apos;re welcome to fear .
each other a big löffel , we &apos;re going to welcome the risk .
and finally , we should be welcome transparency .
nowadays , more than ever before , it gives us a little bit of honesty .
and this is , with honesty and transparency , my new talk , &quot; which is welcome transparency , &quot; and i was presenting to you from my good friends of emc die 7100 for the namensrechte for the namensrechte .
big data will be transformed for organizations around the world .
emc , &quot; well , welcome transparency . &quot;
thank you .
now , morgan , in the name of the transparency , this is what &apos;s going to happen to the $ $ now ?
that &apos;s a great question .
i have a check in my pocket , i showed the oberorganisation of the ted-organisation , the sapling-stiftung -- a check out of $ $ to finance my ted-auftritt for the next year .
my name is amit .
i did something else in google , and i was doing a little bit of google , and i was doing a regte thing to do with museums and art , and my chefin , which is also , i gave me green light .
and it took 18 months .
a lot of spaßiger negotiations and stories , i can tell you , with 17 very interesting museums from nine countries .
but i &apos;m going to focus on the demo .
there are a lot of stories about why we did this .
i think my personal perspective is very simple with this slide and your access .
i grew up in india .
i was a great education in my mind -- i didn &apos;t have -- but i had not access to a lot of museums , and this kind of artwork .
and then i went to visit these museums , i started learning a lot of them .
and while i was working for google , i tried to make this desire -- art more accessible to -- with technology together .
we then set a team , a great team , and we started with this .
i &apos;m going to start with the demonstration , and i &apos;m going to tell you some interesting things that happened since the launch .
so you can just go to the googleartproject.com. .
you can look around all these museums here .
there &apos;s the uffizi , the moma , the hermitage , the rijks , the van gogh .
i even come in one of my favorite favorite , the metropolitan museum of art in new york .
you get in two ways -- very simple .
click , and wumms , is the museum in this museum .
it doesn &apos;t matter where you are -- there &apos;s a bombay , mexico , it doesn &apos;t make any difference .
you &apos;re around and you &apos;re amüsiert .
you want to be in the museum ?
you open the map , and you jump to a click .
in it , they want to get to the end of the gang .
just further . so much fun .
look at the stöbern .
thank you , but the best one comes out .
so i &apos;m a front of one of my favorite lieblingsbilder , erntearbeiter of pieter breugel in the met .
i see this pluszeichen .
if the museum gave us the picture , you click on it .
this is one of the images .
this is all the metadaten .
those of you who really are interested in art , you can click here -- but i click that now .
this is one of the images we &apos;ve been held through with what we call gigapixel-technologie .
this picture , for example , has about 10 billion bildpunkte , i think .
and a lot of people ask me , &quot; what do you get for 10 billion ? &quot;
so i &apos;m going to show you this .
you can be very easily in and rauszoomen .
you &apos;re seeing a little bit of fun here .
i love this guy ; his expression is unbezahlbar .
but then they really want to get deep .
and so i started playing around , and i realized there &apos;s something going on there .
and i thought , &quot; wait a minute , that sounds interesting . &quot;
i went up to get up , and i realized that these kids actually hit something .
i was a little bit of a little bit of a familiar with a bunch of familiar with the met , and actually found that it was a game called squail , and they were beaten a gans on the fastnachtsdienstag .
it seems to be very popular .
i don &apos;t know why they did it , but i learned something about it .
to get really close to your day , you can go to the cracks .
just to give you a track of track , i &apos;ll figure out that you can see what you get .
here we were , and this is the painting .
the best one comes out of the day , in a second .
let &apos;s jump to moma fast , again in new york .
another lieblingsbild of mine , sternennacht .
so , in the previous example , it was about finding detail .
but what if you want to see the pinselstriche ?
and what if you want to see how van gogh is creating this kind of a little bit ?
you put it in . you can really go into it .
i &apos;m going to zoom in one of my favorite image of this picture until i really am in the cracks .
this is sternennacht , probably never seen before .
now i &apos;m going to show you my favorite feature .
there &apos;s a lot of other , but i don &apos;t have time .
this is the really cool part , it &apos;s called the collections .
each of you , everybody -- you can &apos;t -- if you can or arm , if you have a great house -- doesn &apos;t matter .
you can go ahead and create your own museum -- from all these images , you can put your own collection .
just , you go , you go in -- and i created this , it &apos;s called the power of the zoom -- you can get umherzoomen .
this is the gesandten , in the nationalgallerie .
you can put it all with anmerkungen , send your friends , and so a conversation starts about what you feel when you look at these meisterwerke .
i think , in conclusion , i think , for me , the main thing to me is that all of the wonderful things here are not about google .
and i think it &apos;s not even from the museums .
i don &apos;t want to say that .
they come from artists .
and that was a experience of humility for me .
i mean , i hope that we are going to do this with this digital medium of art , and they &apos;re working on online .
and the biggest question that i &apos;m recently asked is , &quot; did you do this to replicate the experience of a museumsbesuchs ? &quot;
the answer to that is no .
it should add the experience .
that &apos;s what it is . thank you .
thank you .
this is a representation of your brain , your brain can split into two .
that &apos;s the left half that &apos;s the logical side , and then the right half , which is the intuitive side .
if we had a measure to measure the aptitute of each brain , we could be your brain .
for example , this one is , the person , the full logical .
this would be someone that &apos;s completely intuitive .
now , where would you be positionieren your brain at that scale ?
some of us might have been for one of these extremes , but i think most people in the audience , your brain , you know , is about this -- with a high aptitute that is at the same time in both hemisphären .
it &apos;s not as if they &apos;re both exklusiv or anything .
you can be logical and intuitive .
and so i see myself as one of the people , in common with most other experimental quantenphysikern , which need a good share of logic to bring the complex ideas together .
but at the same time , we need a good share of intuition to actually carry the experiments .
how do we develop these intuition ? well , we love it with things .
so we go out and play with it and see how it responds . and then we begin to get out of our intuition .
basically , they do the same thing .
so one of the intuitions that you &apos;ve developed over the years is probably that one thing can be in a place at the same time .
i mean , it can make a strange thing that a thing is about two different places , but they were not born with this idea , they developed them .
i remember seeing a child playing a bodenschwelle .
he was still a kleinkind , and not very good at it , and he was falling constantly .
but i bet that it taught a very valuable lesson with the bodenschwelle , which is that big things don &apos;t just go over and stay in a position .
and this is a great model model of the world , so long they don &apos;t have a teilchenphysiker .
it would be a horrible model for a teilchenphysiker , because they don &apos;t play with bodenschwellen , but with these little odd particles .
and when you play with your particles , you can find all kinds of weird things -- how you &apos;re going through walls , or that you can be in two different places at the same time .
and so they all wrote this observations , and they called the theory of quantum mechanics .
that was the physics of physics , a couple of years ago ; you took quantum mechanics to describe the little tiny particles .
but you didn &apos;t need them to describe the big everyday objects around us .
that &apos;s not like my intuition , and it &apos;s just because i don &apos;t have to play with particles as much as a result .
well , i &apos;ll sometimes play with them , but not very often .
and i haven &apos;t seen them .
i mean , no one ever seen a particle .
but my logical page doesn &apos;t like it .
because if all things are made of particles and follow all these particles , and then , not simply what the rules would be done by the rules ?
i don &apos;t see why that &apos;s not supposed to be .
so i &apos;d better feel better with the whole thing , if we could somehow show that alltagsgegenstände can follow the rules of quantum mechanics .
so i made a couple of years ago to do that .
i created one .
this is the first object you can see in the quantenmechanischen superposition .
so what we &apos;re looking at here is a tiny computer chip .
and you can see this green dot there in the middle .
this is the piece of metal that i &apos;m going to talk about .
this is an image of the object .
and i &apos;m going to get it here . we &apos;re looking at the center here .
and here &apos;s a really big close-up of this little piece of metal .
so what we &apos;re looking at is a little bit of metal it &apos;s like a sprungbrett , and it &apos;s about the edge of the edge .
so i made this thing in similar ways to make a computer chip .
i went to a clean space with new siliziumscheiben , and rackerte for 100 hours of all the big devices .
for the last bit , i had to build my own machine -- to get this like a swimming hole and get the thing .
this thing has the ability to be in the quantenmechanischen superposition , but it takes a little bit of help to do it .
look at you , let me give you an analogy .
you know how did it be in a full elevator ?
i mean , if i &apos;m in the elevator , i &apos;ll do all kinds of weird things , but then other people are going to add , and i hear on all these things because i don &apos;t want to get them to it , or frankly , they &apos;re verschrecke .
so quantum mechanics says that unbewegliche objects are feeling as well .
the mitfahrer objects are not only humans , but also the light that seems and the wind that &apos;s over the end of the fegt and the heat of the space .
and so we knew that if we wanted to see that this piece of metal was metall , we had to get all the mitreisenden out of the mitreisenden .
and then we did that .
we put the light off , put it in a vacuum and saugten it , and it kühlten it up to the very much of the elevator , on the very , alone , the piece of metal was free to behave as it was .
so we measured his movement .
we found that it &apos;s really strange .
instead of it , it &apos;s just quiet there , it &apos;s vibrierte , the way it was vibrierte , like this -- like a ausdehnender and zusammen blasebalg .
and in which we gave it a little bit of push , we could actually put it up to the same time and not to vibrate -- something which is just allowed in quantum mechanics .
so what i &apos;m going to tell you is what truly fantastic fantastic .
what does it mean to vibrate for an object at the same time ?
let &apos;s think about atoms .
so the first case is all the trillionen of atoms that are still still there , and at the same time , the same atoms move up and down .
just to präzisen zeitpunkten , you can match it .
the rest of the time are delokalisiert .
this means that each atom is in two different places , which is at the same time that the entire piece of metal is two different places .
i think that &apos;s really cool .
really .
it was worth me for all this year in the clean room , because , you see that , the massstabsunterschied between an atom and this piece of metal is about as much as the difference between the piece of metal and you .
so if a single atom can be in two different places , this piece of metal can be two different places , why don &apos;t they ?
i mean , this is just what my logical logical is going to say .
so , imagine that they were in the same time in several places , how would it feel ?
how would your mind handle that your body is in the room ?
there &apos;s another aspect of the story .
when we aufwärmten it , the light anschalteten and the box reinschauten , we saw that the piece of metal was always in a piece of metal .
and so i had to develop this new intuition that it looks like , as if all the objects in the elevator are actually quanten objects that are gefercht in a small room .
you hear a lot of talk about how quantum mechanics says everything is connected to everything .
now , that &apos;s not quite right .
there &apos;s more behind it , it goes deeper .
it &apos;s like these connections , their connections with all the things around them , literally define who they are , and that &apos;s the tiefsinnige and the strange of quantum mechanics .
thank you .
in 2007 , i decided we should be rekonzeptualisieren how we think about economic development .
it should be that if families think about how to think about life and work , they &apos;re given to you between at least a hand full of different cities , which are all in competition for new people .
at the moment we &apos;re far away from this goal .
there are billions of people in developing countries that don &apos;t even have a single city to have to say that they would welcome .
but the amazing thing about cities is that they are so much more value than they &apos;re building .
so we could just be very simple with duzenden , maybe hundreds of new cities .
now , this sounds silly for them , unless they &apos;ve never thought about new cities .
they &apos;re just going to trade out that &apos;s a homes that are out of cities .
imagine , half of the people who want to live in homes , they did not . they don &apos;t yet .
you could try to expand the capacity of existing apartments .
but you know what you &apos;re going to be about , in these apartments and their environment , herrschen laws to avoid the law and abzulenken from ausbau .
so it turns out to be very hard to get all these major .
but you could go to a completely new place , building a completely new block of building , which the laws would support such building and not behindern it .
so i suggested that governments create new surfaces that provide enough space for a city and gave them a name , charter cities .
i found out later that , about the same time , javier and octavio , over the challenge of reform , have been thinking about the challenge of reform .
they knew that every year , every year , they had almost more 75.000 honduraner to auszuwandern the united states , and they wanted to know what they could do to make sure that these people could stay in their country , and they can do the same thing in the honduras .
so , in this point , javier , in the country , if we just put a unbesiedelte area of our country , what happens if we &apos;re just a message of the american message , a part of the canadian botschaft- , and when people go to work under the canadian rules or the united states , they can work there , and can do that all the messages
in summer , there was a heftigen verfassungskrise for a severe verfassungskrise .
in the next few elections elections , pepe lobo won in a umschwung , whose program both innovate and schlichtung .
he asked octavio to become his stabschef .
in the meantime , i was preparing for a talk at tedglobal .
through improvement , and what &apos;s been done by the research of consumers , i tried to reduce this complicated concept of the charter city to the essence .
the first point is the importance of laws , laws that determine that you cannot be stören to be stören .
we give new technologies to new technology , but for progress , it requires technologies and laws , and it &apos;s usually laws that have us to come back .
in the fall of 2010 , a friend of guatemala octavio sent the link to the tedtalk .
and again , it showed him .
the two call me .
and they said , &quot; let &apos;s present the head of our country . &quot;
so we met in december in december , in the sitzungssaal , in the sitzungssaal of a hotel in miami .
i tried to make a difference how valuable cities are , to be like much more valuable than they are .
and i used this graph to show how valuable rohland is in a place like new york . remember that a area in some cases is worth thousands of dollars worth .
but it was a pretty abstract discussion , at a point when there was a pause , octavio said , &quot; paul , could we see the tedtalk . &quot;
so the tedtalk put in a very simple form that a charter city is a place where the beginning of unbewohntes land is , a gründungsvertrag , which defines the laws that herrschen there and the people who offers the opportunity to live either under these rules or not .
so i was asked by the president of honduras , who said we need to make this project , that it &apos;s important , and that this is the way to bring our country forward .
i was asked to go to tegucigalpa and even at the fourth and fifth january a lecture .
so i &apos;ve given another with facts that i &apos;ve given a grafik talk , which is a graph like this , which is trying to make sure that if you want to create a lot of value in a city , it has to be a very big city .
this is a picture of the city , and the sketch is the new airport that was built in denver .
in the alone of this airport , it has a surface of 100 quadratkilometern .
so i tried to convince the honduraner of how to build a new city , you have to start with an area at least 1,000 quadratkilometern .
this is more than 250 thousand in the morning .
polite all have applaudiert .
the faces of the audience were very serious and paying attention .
the head of congress came up to the stage and i said , &quot; professor romer , thank you very much for your talk , but perhaps we could see the tedtalk .
i have it on my laptop here . &quot;
so i sat down , and they played the tedtalk .
and i &apos;ve come to the conclusion that a new city offers new possibilities for people .
there would be the possibility of living in a city that would be in honduras , rather than hundreds of miles away from the north .
and a new city also includes new opportunities for leaders with a .
the leaders of the government in honduras would be dependent on help from partnerländern , they could benefit from their partnerländern they were building the laws for this charter and to help them , that everybody can trust the charter really going to be .
and the realization of president lobo was that the confidence of the durchsetzung that i thought about as a way to get the foreign investors to get the foreign investors and build this city together could be for all parties in honduras , which had been under fear and mistrust .
we are in an area .
this picture is from this place .
it &apos;s a thousand square miles .
and shortly after that , on the 19th of january , they voted the kongress for the constitution to have a verfassungsgemäße policy that is for special entwicklungsgebiete .
in a country that just has been a major crisis , in congress , in congress , they voted for the verfassungsänderung .
all parties , all the fraktionen of society , supported this .
in fact , to be part of the constitution , it has to be approved twice by congress .
in february february , it was the second time with 114 to a voice .
immediately after this choice , between the 21st and of february february , a delegation of about 30 hunduranern , in the two places , are the two places that most of us were interested in the business of the städtebaus .
one place is south .
this is a picture of a big , new urban center , which is built in south korea , wurde- , and the core center .
all you can see in this picture was built within four years after it took four years to get the genehmigungen .
the other place that was very interested in the very städtebau is singapore .
it &apos;s been built in china , and the third is in preparation .
so if you &apos;re in handy to think about it , it &apos;s where we &apos;re standing today .
they already have a baugrundstück ; they &apos;re already concerned about this area for the second city .
it &apos;s already being working on a system that allows us to be part , and it &apos;s also working on an external system .
a country already has offered to provide its supreme court to provide as a court for the entgültige appeal of the dortigen of the dortigen system .
also , städtedesigner and -bauer are very interested .
they even get funding with one .
one thing you already know , has been already , has been already , there are a lot of mieter .
there are many of the businesses that would like to be in america , especially in a place with a freihandelszone , and there are many people who would like to live there .
around the world , there are 700 million people who claim they want to live in a different place .
one million people left latin america and travels in the united states .
many of them are dads who are forced to have their families to be their families to be suchen- , sometimes they have to make enough mothers who have to make enough money to be eating food and clothing .
and unfortunately , sometimes it &apos;s kids who try to find their parents again , which they haven &apos;t seen for a decade or more .
so what is it for an idea to build a completely new city in a new way ?
or even duzende of these cities , or are all distributed hundreds of the world ?
so what is it for an idea to insist that every family has a choice between a couple of cities that are in competition for new people ?
this is an idea worth spreading .
my friends from honduras have asked me to say , thank ted .
you know how many decisions you make a typical day ?
you know how many decisions you make in a typical week ?
i &apos;ve been making a survey recently about 2,000 americans , and the average number of decisions , the average of the average americans in a day , is 70. .
also , recently , recently , a study was done with ceos , and they were watching their ceos for a week .
and these scientists just have a lot of subjects on these , and they &apos;re doing this ceo , and how much time they were spending their own decisions that relate to topics .
and they found that an average ceo is doing a 139 job in week .
each of these topics , of course , was made of many , many smaller decisions .
50 percent of their decisions were made in nine minutes or less .
only for about 12 percent of their decisions they needed an hour or more of their time .
think about your own decisions .
do you know how many decisions you &apos;re going to meet in nine minutes , in the same time , in the one hour of a hour ?
how good do you think , are you going to have to deal with the decisions ?
today i want to talk about one of the greatest entscheidungsprobleme of our modern time , the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem .
i want to talk about the problem and about some possible solutions .
now , when i talk about this problem , i &apos;m going to ask you some questions and i want to know your answers .
if i ask you a question , you pick up , because i &apos;m blind , only the hand if you want to burn some calories .
otherwise , i ask you , if i ask you a question , and your answer is yes , so my first question is today , are you ready to hear something about the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem ?
thank you .
when i was a abschlussstudent at stanford university , i was going to this very very very exklusiven store , at least at the time it was a really exklusiv .
it was a store , the draeger &apos;s .
this business , it was almost like a vergnügungspark .
they had 250 different kinds of mustard and essig , and over 500 different kinds of fruits and vegetables , and more than two dozen different kinds of water -- and that was at a time when we actually had to drink leitungswasser .
i loved it to this business , but at a time i asked myself , well , how does it come to you that you never kaufst ?
here &apos;s the oil olive .
they had about 75 different olive oil , including those who were locked in boxes that came from a thousand years old olivenbäumen .
so i decided to go to the leader one day , and i asked the ladder , &quot; works this model , that you really can bring people all these possibilities ? &quot;
and he showed the busladungen of tourists that came every day and usually had their cameras .
we decided to do an experiment , and we chose marmelade for our experiment .
here &apos;s her marmeladen gang .
they had 348 different kinds of marmelade .
we put a little verkostungsecke right right at the front of the geschäfts .
we have six different pathways of marmelade , or 24 different pathways , and we &apos;ve looked at two things : first , what would i like to stay out of people and try and try and find the marmelade ?
there are more people stayed , if it was 24 , about 60 percent than when it was six percent , about 40 percent .
and then we looked at what was the case that people would buy a glass of marmelade .
now we saw the umgekehrten effect .
and the people who were stuck with the people were there , and only three percent of them were buying a glass of glass .
and the people who were there were six to be six , now , now we saw 30 percent of them actually bought a glass of marmelade .
now , if you do it , people bought six times a glass of glass , who they had six to the choice when they had 24 choices .
now , i don &apos;t want to choose a glass marmelade , probably good for us -- at least it &apos;s good for our taille -- but it turns out that the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem is affected by very konsequenzreichen decisions .
we don &apos;t decide to decide , even though it &apos;s going to happen against our own best interests .
so , in the end of the day , financial is saving .
i &apos;m going to tell you a study that i did with gur huberman , emir kamenica , where we were looking at the choices for a million americans &apos; retirement for a million americans from about 650 plans to the entire united states .
and what we looked at was whether the number of fondsangebote that were possible for a rentensparplan , the 401 plan that affects the likelihood of being saved for tomorrow .
and we found that there was a correlation in the fact .
so in these plans , we had about 657 plans that we &apos;d offer something between two to the 59 different fund .
and what we found was that the more fund became , that , in fact , the participation rate was lower .
if you look at the extremes , the plans that are offered two , a teilnahmerate in the &apos; 70s had a teilnahmerate in the back of the &apos; 70s -- still not as much as we want .
and the plans that anboten almost 60 fund , the teilnahmerate fiel , now , fiel to about the sechzigsten .
now , it turns out that even when you &apos;re involved in entschliessen , when there were more options to choose choice , then it has negative consequences .
so the people who decided to participate , more to the more opportunities , the more opportunities they were able to give them to market and to vote .
the more opportunities they were available , the more they were more likely to put their money in pure geldmarktkonten .
none of these extreme decisions , is it to the decisions that people recommend when your future resource matters .
now , in the last decade , we &apos;ve seen three essential effects that are the case that the offer of more and more choices to it .
they move the decision -- push it up , even if it &apos;s all about their own best interest .
they make more likely decisions -- worse financial and worse health decisions .
they &apos;re going to decide to be more comfortable with things that they make themselves less happy , even if they make it objective .
the main reason for this is that we might enjoy these huge regale of mayonaise , mustard , essig and marmelade , but we can &apos;t actually move the comparison and the abgrenzungen , and then you can actually vote something out of the fantastic service .
so what i &apos;d like to suggest today is four simple techniques -- techniques that we &apos;ve tested in different ways and different kinds of different types of information -- they can just apply in their business .
first of all , is limited .
you &apos;ve heard it before , but it wasn &apos;t real real than today that less is less .
people are always concerned when i say , &quot; limited . &quot;
they always make sure they lose regalfläche .
but in fact , we &apos;re always seeing it more and more , that if you &apos;re willing to limit , and the unwichtigen gleichartigen of the opportunity , now , there &apos;s a increase in sales , it &apos;s going to reduce the cost of gesenkt , &amp; amp ; and there &apos;s a improvement of entscheidungswahrnehmung .
as a proctor , and gamble , the various head of head , shoulders , arten , you have a increase in the u.s. population for 10 percent .
when the golden cat corporation , you loswurde 10 at the schlechtesten of katzenstreus katzenstreus , you &apos;d notice that the winning , 87 percent , is a result of the beidem increase in the u.s. and the reduction of cost .
you know , the average supermakrt today , you can have to 45.000 with you .
they &apos;re available to a typischer walmart that they have today .
but the neuntgrößte supermarket , which is a neuntgrößte supermarket in the world today , and they &apos;re offering you only to be a thousand products -- a kind of tomato sauce in a dosen .
now in the world of the sparens , i think one of the best examples that recently come out to the market , which is the best of the choice , was something that david laibson has very strong mitgestaltet , it &apos;s a program that &apos;s offered at harvard .
every single harvard employees are automatically now , automatically in a part of a lebenszeitfond part .
and the ones who really want to make a choice will be 20 , to say , 300 or more .
you know , how people often say , &quot; i don &apos;t know how to break it down .
it &apos;s all important possibilities . &quot;
and the first thing i ask the employees is , &quot; tell me how the possibilities are different from each other .
and if your employees can &apos;t be able to do it , it doesn &apos;t even can &apos;t . &quot;
now before we started having lunch today , i had a conversation with gary .
and he said , &quot; gary , he said he would be willing to offer all people in this audience to offer a all-inklusive bezahlten vacation to the beautiful road of the world . &quot;
here &apos;s a description of the road .
and i &apos;d like to read you .
and now i &apos;ll give you a couple of seconds to read them and i ask you to clap them if you &apos;re willing to take gary of the angebot .
okay . everyone is willing to take gary on the offer .
are that all ?
well , let me show you a little bit more about it .
you knew it was a trick , right ?
now , who &apos;s willing to be for this journey .
i think i might have heard more hands .
all right .
in fact , that &apos;s what you &apos;re doing is , you know , the first time , the first time , is more information than the second time , but i would dare to guess that you would actually be in the second time .
because the images made it feel real for them .
what brings me to the second technology that helps you deal with the problem of entscheidungsüberlastung , it &apos;s the konkretisierung .
it &apos;s about understanding people to understand the difference between possibilities , to understand what consequences are associated with the individual possibilities and that have to be lebhaft and specific with these consequences .
why are people spending about 15 to 30 percent more than they use a ec-karte or a card card , as in the cash ?
because it doesn &apos;t feel real money .
and it turns out that if you make it creates a little bit of what it feels , it &apos;s a very good tool to make people save more .
so we &apos;ve done a study that i did with shlomo benartzi and alessandro previtero , we did a study with the people who worked on ing -- employees who worked all for the ing -- and these people were all in a gathering where they signed their participation for their rentensparplan .
and during this meeting , we have just as just as we leave the same as as it was always , we &apos;ve added a little bit more thing to add .
the small thing that we &apos;ve added in the same way was that we asked people to just think about all positive things that would happen in their lives if they would save money .
and in the one that we did this simple thing , there was a increase in participation around 20 percent , and there were a increase in the number of people who were willing to save or a increase in the amount that they were willing to pay for the sparkonto .
the third technology : kategorisierung .
we can be better with more categories than more choices .
here &apos;s for example , a study that we did in a zeitschriftengang .
it turns out that it &apos;s in the wegmans supermärkten and below the northeast area , the number between 331 different kinds of magazines has to be high to 664 magazines .
but you know what ?
if i show you 600 magazines and i put them in 10 categories , or i put them 400 magazines , and they aufteile those in 20 categories , and they believe that i gave them more choices and a better auswahlerfahrung , than i gave them the 400 to the other than i gave them 600 .
because the categories tell me how to keep them apart .
here are two different schmuckauslagen .
one is called &quot; jazz , &quot; and the other is called &quot; swing . &quot;
if you think the left display is swing and the display on the right is , then you clap in the hands .
okay , there are a couple .
if you think that &apos;s on the left-hand side of the left-hand side , and the one on the right side is swing , please clap .
okay , a couple more .
well , it turns out they &apos;re right .
you &apos;re on the left , jazz and the one on the right is swing , but you know what ?
this is a highly unnützes kategorisierungsschema .
the categories have to say something that is a etwas , not the choice .
and this problem you often see if you look at the long list of all these fund .
who really want to inform it ?
my fourth technique : premise for complexity .
it turns out that we can handle more information than we think we need to simplify them .
we need to increase complexity slowly .
i &apos;ll show you an example of what i mean .
let &apos;s take a very , very complicated decision , the purchase of a car .
here &apos;s a german autohersteller who offers you the opportunity to make your car completely konfigurieren .
they have to make sure of making a difference to make their car completely .
now these decisions are different in the number of choices that they provide a choice .
autofarben , außenfarbe of the car -- i have 56 possibilities .
motors , getriebe -- four possibilities .
what i &apos;m doing now is i change the order of the choices .
half of the clients are going to get from many ways , 56 autofarben to the low possibilities , four .
the other half of the clients are about the low possibilities , four ways , to the 56 autofarben , many possibilities .
what do i look at ?
how are you interested .
if you keep using the standardauswahl for the decision , it means that you &apos;re being overwhelmed , the heisste , i &apos;m losing it .
what you find is that the people who go from the many to the low auswahlmöglichkteiten are always going to vote for the standardauswahl .
we lose them .
go from the little choice to the many , then you stay in .
it &apos;s the same information . it &apos;s the same number of possibilities .
the only thing i did is it is changing the order of the information that is being present .
when i start with the simple one , i &apos;m learning how i &apos;m going to do .
even though the getriebe , i don &apos;t choose to pick up my preferences at the time , and it &apos;s still bereitet to pick it up .
it also versetzt me to excitement about the big product that i &apos;m zusammenstelle , and so i &apos;m willing to motivate myself to be with interest in this .
let me summarize .
i told you about four techniques that mildern the problem of entscheidungsüberlastung mildern -- just -- you will go to the überflüssigen alternative . konkretisieren -- make it real ; we can -- we can get more categories , less possibilities , to prepare for complexity .
each of these techniques i &apos;m going to describe to you today is to help you manage the possibility -- good for you , you can use them for yourself , good for the people you &apos;re offering to service .
because i think the key to the best choice is that you &apos;re choosing to choose choice .
and the more we pick it off , the better we will be able to practice the art of choice .
thank you .
hi . i &apos;m kevin allocca , trends-manager on youtube . i &apos;m looking at youtube-videos .
that &apos;s true .
today we want to talk about how video will be viral , and then why it &apos;s important to all .
we all want to be the stars -- berühmtheiten , singers , comedians -- when i was young , that seemed so infinitely difficult .
but webvideos have made that we all can be made all of our creative activities of wahnsinnig in a part of the culture of our world .
every single one of you could be famous for the internet until next saturday .
but youtube , more than 48 hours of video is uploaded to the video a minute .
and again , just a tiny percentage will ever be viral and will look at thousands of times , and so on the cultural moment .
so how does it work ?
three things : tastemaker , teilnahmecommunities and unexpected .
well , we want to .
oh my god . oh my god .
oh my god !
woah !
ohhhhh , wowwww .
last year sendete bear video of this video he was filmed in the national national park in the national park .
in 2010 , it was 23 million times .
this chart shows what it looked like when the video was popular last summer .
actually , video didn &apos;t want to make a viral video .
he just wanted to share a rainbow .
because you do that , you know , if you &apos;re going to be yosemite mountain .
he had uploaded all sorts of naturvideos .
and this video was actually sent to january .
what &apos;s happening here ?
there was jimmy kimmel .
jimmy kimmel sendete the tweet who did the video of the most popular part of the day .
because tastemaker like jimmy kimmel are asking us new and interesting things and show you a big audience .
it &apos;s friday , friday . gotta get can go on . everybody &apos;s looking to the weekend , weekend . friday , friday . gettin on the board . you didn &apos;t think we would lead this conversation without talking about this video , i hope .
rebecca blacks &apos;s &quot; friday &quot; is one of the most popular videos of the year .
it was seen by 200 million times this year .
this is what the chart looked like .
it seems like &quot; double rainbow &quot; it seems like nothing to be .
what happened in this day ?
well , it was friday that &apos;s true .
if you want to know , these other tips are also freitage .
but what about this day , this particular friday ?
now , tosh.0 gabelte , a lot of blogs started writing about it .
michael j. was the first science theater , who was a first joke about twitter about twitter .
what &apos;s important is that an individual or a group of tastemakers took a point of view , shared with a big audience and beschleunigte the process .
then this community of people shared this big insiderwitz , and they started talking about it and to herumzuspielen with it .
now there &apos;s 10,000 parodien of friday , in youtube .
already in the first seven days , there was a parodie for every single week .
unlike the einseitigen conversation of 20th century , participation of the community is our way of becoming part of this phenomenon -- either by spreading it or something new .
&quot; nyan cat &quot; is animation and music in endlosschleife .
that &apos;s it , just .
this year , it was a nearly 50 million times .
and if you think it &apos;s crazy , you &apos;d know there &apos;s a dreistundenversion that has been looking at four million times .
even cats watch this video .
cats look at cats that are watching this video .
it &apos;s important , the creativity that &apos;s in the internetkultur of the techies and geeks .
there were remixe .
someone made an old version of it .
and then it became international .
a whole remix-gemeinde shot from the floor that made it from a stupid joke to something that we all participate in .
today we don &apos;t just find pleasure to something we &apos;re doing .
who could have been able to have it ?
who could have been able to predict &quot; double &quot; or &quot; rebecca cat &quot; ? &quot;
what drehbücher would be done to write , in which things like that ?
in a world where every minute and two days of video is uploaded , only unique and unexpected hervorstechen that i &apos;ve been talking about .
i admit , i wasn &apos;t really interested in a friend , as a friend told me to look at this great video , a guy who was going to buy tickets to the ticket to the bicycles .
i got a ticket , because i &apos;m not on the radweg , but often there &apos;s disability that you can &apos;t have a anständig on the radweg .
and this was completely surprising and humorvoll , a casey witzige idea and a case of five million times .
this approach is true for all new things we do creative .
and this is all of us going to get a big question .
what does that mean ?
ohhhh .
what does that mean ?
tastemaker , creative teilnehmergemeinden , completely unexpected , are the characteristics of a new kind of media and culture that everybody has access to , and in the audience , in the audience , is determined .
as i said , one of the most largest star at the moment -- justin justin -- did his beginning with youtube .
no one has to give your ideas to the green light .
and today we all feel as our eigentümer of culture .
and these are not the characteristics of the old media , and they also can &apos;t make any of the media today , but they &apos;re going to determine the conversation of the future .
thank you .
how can i talk about the middle of the middle of the middle of women between three generations , and how the amazing strength of this becomes a young girl &apos;s life , when she was her little sister , her mother , her mother &apos;s her mother and nights long on a small boat in the chinese ocean , and a connected that fest in life , that little
the story is not over .
it &apos;s a puzzle that &apos;s going to be put together .
i &apos;d like to tell you some of the puzzlestückchen .
imagine the first piece : a man who &apos;s burning his life .
he &apos;s a poet , a writer , a man whose whole life has been held together by the simple hope of unity and freedom of its home .
if you think about the einmarsch of the kommunisten in saigon , as he must admit , his life has been a single waste .
the words , so long , his friends , spotteten his .
he moved to silence .
he died , broken through the story .
he &apos;s my grandfather .
i never met him personally .
but our lives are so much more than our memories .
my grandmother never forgotten me .
i had to make sure it was not free , and it was my job to learn that the story was trying to try to zerdrücken us , we were going to go .
the next puzzleteil shows how a boat in the early morgenrot leise leise on lake .
my mother may was 18 , when her father died -- before a arrangierten marriage , already with two little girls .
she had her job , for her , the flucht of her family and a new life in australia .
it was completely clear that they could fail .
after a vierjährigen and filmreifen saga , a boat silent on the sea as a fischerboot .
all adults were aware of the risks .
the biggest fear was she was piraten , rape and death .
as most adults on the boat , my mother wore a small giftflasche .
in a gefangennahme , i had my sister and i , then you know , and i had my grandmother to it .
my first memories are from this boat -- the stetige tuckern of the engine , the klatschen of each wave to the front of the bug , the vast and empty horizon .
i didn &apos;t remember the piraten that many times came , but they were going to täuschen the men on our boat , or the ausfall of the engine that didn &apos;t want to start with six hours .
but i remember the lights of the ölplattform off the coast of the malaysischen coast , and the young man who collapsed and died , the end of the journey was too much for him , and the taste of the first apfels to me , which was one of the men on the platform .
no apple has ever been geschmeckt .
after three months in a refugee camp , we landed in melbourne .
and the next puzzlestück is about four women in three generations , who are building a new life together .
we left ourselves in footscray , one of the arbeiterklasse vorort , whose population of immigrantenschichten is made .
unlike the alteingesessenen mittelklassevororten that i had to know , i had no unknown existence in the alteingesessenen , there was no anspruchsdenken in footscray .
the smell of the ladentüren came from the rest of the world .
and the fetzen broken englischs were shared between people who had one thing in common : they started fresh .
my mother worked on farms , then on a line of an fließband in a autofabrik , six days , double layers .
and they kind of managed to find the time , and they had english and it-qualifikationen .
we were poor .
every dollar has been given , and was put in another education for english and mathematics , no matter what we had to do for this . mostly the new stuff , they always came out of a second hand .
two few strümpfe for school each , every one to cover the holes in the other .
a schuluniform to the knöcheln , because it had to pass six years .
and there was the rare , painful chöre of schlitzauge , and here and there &apos;s wandmalereien , &quot; asiaten , goes home . &quot;
where to go home ?
something versteifte in me .
there was a meeting of the reconciliation and a quiet voice said , &quot; i &apos;m going to go out of the way . &quot;
my mother , my sister and i slept in the same bed .
my mother was exhausted every night , but we were telling each other day , and listening to our grandmother &apos;s day in the house .
my mother suffered from the boat from the boat .
and it was my job to stay awake every night , until their alpträume came to be able to get it .
she opened up a computergeschäft , and then it was a kosmetikerausbildung , and then a business opened .
and the women came with their stories about men who don &apos;t ertrugen the change , angry and unflexibel , and sorgenerfüllte children , trapped between two worlds .
loans and donors were looking for .
centers were built up .
i was living in parallelwelten .
in one of the classical , asian student , the klassische of unerbittliche demands .
in the other , i was involved in the unsichere life , the tragic of the violence , the drogenmissbrauchs and the isolierung .
but so many of the years of help .
and because of that help , i was auserwählt in my last year of jurastudiums as a young australierin of the year .
and i was going to be katapultiert by a puzzlestück to the next , and the edges don &apos;t fit together .
tan le , anonyme bewohnerin of footscray , was now tan le , refugee and social activist that was invited to speak to places that she &apos;d never heard about , and in homes whose existence they never could have imagined .
i was not familiar with the etikette .
i didn &apos;t know how to use the besteck .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about wine .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about anything .
i wanted to go back to the routine and the comfort of a unknown vororts -- a grandmother , a mother and two daughters who were telling each of their days as 20 years , telling each other stories of their day and einschliefen , we still still in the same bed .
i said my mother , i wouldn &apos;t do it .
she reminded me that i was now that i was now as old as we climbed the boat .
no , no one was an opportunity .
&quot; just do it , &quot; she said , &quot; and not what you &apos;re not . &quot;
so i was talking about jugendarbeitslosigkeit and education , and the vernachlässigung of marginalisierten and entrechteten .
and the more open i spoke , the more i should tell .
i met people in all lebenslagen , so many of them did what they loved , they lived in the limits of the possible .
and even though i graduated from my degree , i realized that i couldn &apos;t go to a career in a jura career .
there had to be another puzzlestück .
and i realized at the same time that it &apos;s okay to be a außenseiter , a neuankömmling , new in the picture -- and not just okay , but what you must be grateful , perhaps a gift of the boots .
because dazuzugehören can lead to collapse collapse , so easily can mean that you are accepted the assumptions of the environment .
i &apos;ve been now going to have enough to be enough in my bequemlichkeitsbereich to know that , yes , the world auseinanderbricht , but not as you can &apos;t .
opportunities that would not have been allowed , in fact , ermutigt .
there was a energy , a unerbittlichen optimism , a strange mixtur of humility and the wagnisses .
so i did my feeling .
i was collecting a little team of people around me to the schublade , &quot; not a unwiderstehliche challenge .
we didn &apos;t have a cents for a year .
at the end of a school , i made a huge amount of soup that we shared .
we worked late at night .
most of our ideas were nuts , but it was a couple of brilliant , and we managed to breakthrough the breakthrough .
i made the decision to pull the u.s.
after just a journey there .
my gut feeling again .
three months later , i was moved , and the adventure went on .
before i &apos;m going to talk about the talk , i &apos;d like to tell you about my grandmother .
she grew up at a time , in the social norm , and the local mandarin was the most important person .
life hasn &apos;t been changed for centuries .
her father died shortly after their birth .
her mother moved her alone .
by 17 , she became the second woman of a mandarin whose mother beat her .
without support of her husband , she was worried for a sensation , by bringing him in court and anklägerin her own case , and a greater sensation than she won .
&quot; not &quot; erwies itself .
i just went back in a hotel room in sydney when she died . 1,000 kilometers away in the melbourne .
i looked across the duschtrennwand , and i saw them on the other side .
i knew she had come to leave himself .
my mother called me a couple of minutes later .
a few days later , we went into a buddhist temple in footscray and sat around their sarg .
we told her stories and they told her that we were in their own .
and at midnight , the monk came to the monk and he said he had to close the sarg .
my mother asked us to touch her hand .
she said to the monk , &quot; why is your hand warm and the rest of you is so cold ? &quot;
&quot; because she &apos;s keeping her in the morning , &quot; he said .
&quot; they didn &apos;t leave them . &quot;
when there &apos;s a band in our family , it &apos;s going through the women .
you see who we were and how life shaped us , we can now see that the men who might have come in our lives would be in the quere .
the defeat was too simple .
now i &apos;d like my own children , and i still think of the boat .
who would ever wish ?
yes , i was afraid of privilege , leichtigkeit , vor .
can i give you a bug in your life , the courageous of every wave , the unbeirrte , stetige tuckern of the engine , the weiten horizon , which doesn &apos;t guarantee anything ?
i don &apos;t know .
but if i could give this , and she could make it safe , i would do it .
and also , a tans mother today is in the fourth or five row .
i &apos;m here to share my photography with you .
is it really photography ?
because this is , of course , a picture that you can &apos;t pick up with your camera .
but i was interested in photography when i was given my first digital camera , at age 15 .
i put it up with my former vorliebe for drawing , but it was a little bit different , because the camera was actually the process of planning .
and if you take a picture with a camera , you end up with the trigger , you end up with the trigger .
so for me , i was really more of the photography to go to the right place at the right time .
i believed everyone could .
so i wanted to create something different , something that starts to do when the trigger is going to be left .
photos like this : a site along a lot of befahrenen road .
but it has unexpected twist .
and yet , they still make an realistic level .
or photos like these -- dark and farbenfroh , but everyone with the shared goal to keep a realistic plane .
when i say reality , i &apos;m going to foto-realität .
because , of course , it &apos;s not something you can really capture , but i &apos;d like to look it all the way , as if you could have this , a picture .
and photos , where you have to think a moment of a moment to figure out the trick .
so it &apos;s really about capture an idea , as a moment .
what is the trick that makes it realistic ?
is it about the details , or the colors ?
is it about light ?
what is the illusion ?
sometimes the perspective is the illusion .
but ultimately , it &apos;s about how we interpret the world , and how it can be made on a two-dimensional surface .
it &apos;s not about what &apos;s realistic , but what we think for realistic .
so i think the foundations are very simple .
i see them as a puzzle of reality that you can take and put together in different pieces and put a alternative reality .
and let me show you a simple example .
we have three perfect , vorstellbare physical objects that we can identify all of in a three-dimensional world .
but in a certain way , they can create something that &apos;s still more three-dimensional than it might exist .
but at the same time , we know that that &apos;s not possible .
so we &apos;re überlisten our brains , because our brain is not just accepted for not that much sense .
and i see the same process in the combine of photographs .
it &apos;s really about combining different realities .
so the things that make a picture realistic , i think it &apos;s the things we don &apos;t think about the things around us in our lives .
but if we combine photographs , it &apos;s really important to think , because otherwise you &apos;re kind of just wrong .
so i would say , there are three simple rules to follow in order to achieve a realistisches outcome .
as you can see , these are not three special images .
but combine something special , like this .
so the first rule is that there should be the same perspective as the same perspective .
second , the kombinierte took the same beleuchtungsart .
and these two pictures are going to meet these two , from the same altitude , and the same kind of thing .
third , it &apos;s not about making it possible to tell you where the individual images are starting and end by connecting them together .
it &apos;s impossible to say , &quot; how the picture was actually made . &quot;
so , by the way you put color , contrast and contrast to the rändern of the individual images , the fotografische colors and disorders , we verwischen the boundaries between the different images and the grenzen , even though a picture can be able to contain hundreds of levels .
here &apos;s another example .
you might think that &apos;s just a landscape and it &apos;s been manipulated in the bottom part .
this picture is actually completely composed of all of photos from different places .
i personally personally make it easier to create a place to find a place , because you don &apos;t have to go into compromise with the ideas in your head .
but it requires a lot of planning .
and when i had this idea in the winter , i knew i needed several months to plan to plan the different places for the pieces of the puzzle .
for example , the fish was taken on a anglerausflug .
the bank comes from a different place .
the unterwasser-teil comes from a steinbruch .
and yes , i even umgefärbt the house on the island of red to make it look .
to achieve a realistisches outcome , it &apos;s going to go out of me from that way .
i always start with a sketch , an idea .
and then it &apos;s about the combination of different images .
and here is a very good plan here .
and then , if you make good footage , the result can be pretty beautiful , and also pretty realistic .
so there are all the tools , and the only thing that we can &apos;t have is our imagination .
thank you .
i &apos;d like to talk about you about why so many electronic gesundheits-projekte .
and i think that the most important thing is that we stopped talking to our patients .
and one of the things that we introduced at the radboud-universität was a haupt-zuhörer .
it &apos;s not very scientific about this -- she &apos;s putting a cup of coffee or tea and ask the patients , families , who are like ?
how can we help you ? &quot;
and we think we want to think that this is one of the main problems that all -- maybe most of the electronic gesundheits-projekte fehlschlagen : because we stopped listening .
this is my wlan-waage . a very simple thing .
she has a button , and it &apos;s a button .
and every morning i got on this morning .
and yes , i have a task , i think , you might recognize .
i put my job to 95 pounds of the angesetzt .
it works just , every time i get to the scale , you get my data on google health .
and there &apos;s also , you know , from my allgemeinarzt , it &apos;s going to recognize where my gewichtsproblem is , and not only in the moment i need a kardiologische or so i can look at the past .
there &apos;s something else .
maybe you know , i &apos;ve got over 4,000 follower on twitter .
so every morning i jump to my wlan-waage and the people talk to me before i &apos;m sitting in the car , &quot; for lunch , only a little salat today , lucien . &quot;
but this is the netteste , which is what can happen because this is the gruppenzwang , to help patients , because this could be used to obesity or it could get patients smoking .
but it might be used to get people out of their chairs and get them to play together in some kind of play , to control their health .
and the next week , this is coming into the market .
it will give this little blutdruck-messgerät to give you an iphone or something like that .
and it will enable people to measure their blood pressure , send it to their doctor , and to share it with others , for something more than 100 dollars .
at this point , the patient come in . they can &apos;t just take control of their own ship , but also , in the face of the health , we can help us in the face of the challenges that are in front of us , as the kostenexplosion of healthcare , double demand , and so on .
do the methods that are easy to use , and start to give them to the patient with this one , patients in the team .
and that can get them through these ways , but also in crowdsourcing .
and one of the things that we did , i want to share with you through a quick video .
we all have the navigationssysteme in our cars .
maybe in our cell phones .
we know exactly where all the machines are around maastricht .
we know one of them , where all the stations are .
and sure we can find fastfood-ketten .
but where would the next aed to help this patient ?
we have herumgefragt , and no one knew it .
no one knew where the next lebensrettende aed was in this moment .
so , what did we do ? we did crowdsourcing in the netherlands .
we set up a website and asked a menschenmasse , &quot; if you see a aed , please share with where he is when he &apos;s in , &quot; because sometimes he &apos;s closed during geschäftszeiten , of course .
and over 10,000 aeds have been in the netherlands .
the next step was to find apps for this .
and we created a ipad-app .
we developed an app for layar , extended reality to find these aeds .
and if you &apos;re in a city like maastricht and you &apos;re going to go down , you can use your iphone , and within the next few weeks , your microsoft-handy will be your microsoft-handy to find the next aed to save lives .
and so , today , we don &apos;t just want to just as a aed4u , as the product is called , but also introduce .
and we want to bring this to a global scale .
and we &apos;re asking for our colleagues around the world , from other universities , to help us help the knotenpunkte to bring these aeds around the world .
and if you &apos;re in vacation and you &apos;re going to go down , your own own your own or somebody else , you can find a aed .
the other thing that we want to ask is that companies are helping us all over the world for us in the bestätigung of these aeds .
these may be kurierdienste , or technicians , for example , to make sure that the gemeldete aed is still in its place .
please help us and try to improve health , not only to improve the health .
thank you .
today i &apos;m going to report unexpected discoveries .
i work in the solartechnologie-branche .
and my little startup wants us to make sure that we &apos;re going to make sure that ...
... the crowdsourcing of beachtung .
here &apos;s a quick video of what we do .
oh . a moment .
it might take it until it &apos;s been geladen .
now , we can just jump that -- i &apos;m going to just pass the video out instead of ...
no .
that &apos;s not ...
okay .
solartechnologie is ...
oh , my time is over ?
okay . thank you .
so a couple of years ago , i started a program to get the stars in technology and design to take a year off and work in an environment that &apos;s pretty much everything they hate , we &apos;re going to work in the government .
the program is called code for america , and it &apos;s a bit like the friedenscorps of the computerfreaks .
we choose a few of the fellows we &apos;re going to do every year , and we let them work with stadtverwaltungen .
instead of sending them into the third world , we send them in rathäuser .
and they developed great apps to work with urban employees .
but what they really do is to show what is possible today .
so they meet al .
al is a hydrant in the town of boston .
here it looks like he &apos;s looking for a date , but what he really is looking for , is someone who &apos;s freischaufelt him when he &apos;s eingeschneit , because he knows he &apos;s not very good at the brandbekämpfung when he &apos;s zugedeckt by a meter of snow .
how did he come to look for this particular way ?
we had a team of boston in boston in boston with the code for america .
they were in february , and it &apos;s been a lot of geschneit last february .
and they realized that the city never schaufelt this kind of hydranten .
but a certain fellow , a guy named erik michaels-ober , noticed something else , and that was the bewohner bewohner the bürgersteige , right from those parts .
so he did what any good engineers would do , he wrote an app .
it &apos;s a nice little app where you can adopt a fire .
you stimmst to him free when it &apos;s schneit .
if you do that , you can give it a name , and he called the first al .
if you don &apos;t do that , you can take it away .
so there &apos;s a nice little game .
this is a modest little app .
it &apos;s probably the smallest of the 21st apps that the fellows wrote in the last year .
but she does something that no other regierungstechnologie does .
it &apos;s going to be expanding .
there &apos;s this guy in the i.t. city of the city , who saw that he could use this app , not to snow , but to adopt the citizens of the citizens of tsunami-sirenen .
it &apos;s very important that these tsunami-sirenen work , but the people steal the batteries .
so he got the citizens to test them .
and then seattle decided to use the app to get the citizens to clean the verstopften gullys .
and chicago has just introduced it to people , which is the buergersteige freischaufeln , when it &apos;s schneit .
we &apos;re now familiar with nine cities , planning to use this app .
and it &apos;s spread , organic , of course .
if you know something about regierungstechnologie , you know that it doesn &apos;t normally work .
the beschaffung of software is usually a few years .
we had a team that worked on a project in boston , for three people a half months .
it was a way of a way of parents can find out what the right public schools are for their children .
and we later got a lot later that if it would go on the normal channels , it would have taken two years , and it would cost about two million dollars .
and this is nothing .
there &apos;s a project in the california , which is the steuerzahler cost two billion dollars , and it doesn &apos;t work .
and there are projects like this on the government .
so an app that &apos;s written in a couple of days is , and then spreading from selbt , it &apos;s a kind of shot before the bug of the government .
it shows how the government could work better -- no more like a private company , how many people think it should .
and not even like a technik-unternehmen , but rather like the internet itself .
and that means free access , that means open and productive .
and that &apos;s important .
but more importantly , to this app is that you represent a new generation that anpackt the problem of government -- not as the problem of an verknöcherten institution , but as a problem of collective action .
and this is a very good news , because it turns out that we are very good in collective action with digital technology .
now there &apos;s a huge community of people who make the tools that we need to do things effectively in common .
it &apos;s not just code for america , there are hundreds of people across the country who are up and writing regierungs-apps , every day in their own communities .
they haven &apos;t given up the government .
they &apos;re terribly frustrated with her , but they don &apos;t complain about it , they don &apos;t fix it .
and these people know something we &apos;ve lost from the eyes .
and that &apos;s when you all have your feelings and the snake in the arbeitsamt and all the other things that we really get on the other things that we really get upset , is government , in the core , in the words of tim o reilly , &quot; which we can &apos;t do . &quot;
today , a lot of people have left up .
and if you &apos;re one of those people , i ask you that you &apos;re going to be doing it , because things change .
politics is not changing ; government is in change .
and because the government , ultimately , is schöpft its force -- erinner you , &quot; we people , &quot; -- how we think about it will change how that change is happening .
i didn &apos;t know very much about government when i started this program .
and as many people , i thought it was the government of the government to vote for a office .
now after two years , i &apos;ve come to conclude that it &apos;s all about local communities , to beutelratten .
this is the call-center of service and information .
you &apos;re in the way that you get out of your city , you know , in your city .
if you ever have the chance to work in your städtisches , as our fellow scott silverman as part of the program -- in fact , do all of that -- you &apos;ll see that people who call government for many different problems , including that a beutelratte in their house is in their house .
so , scott gets this anfruf .
he &apos;s tippt , &quot; beutelratte &quot; into the official database .
and he doesn &apos;t really have an idea . he starts with the tierfänger .
and finally he says , &quot; look , you can just open and open all the doors in your house and see a very loud music and see if the livestock are abhaut ? &quot;
and that worked . applause for scott .
but that was not the end of the beutelratten .
boston doesn &apos;t just have a center .
it has an app , a web- and handy-app , called &quot; citizens connect . &quot;
we didn &apos;t write this app .
this is a very clever people in the office of the new urban mechanics in boston .
one day -- this is a real report -- this is in my mülltonne , and it can &apos;t tell whether she &apos;s dead .
how do i get them away ? &quot;
but what happens to &quot; citizens connect is different . &quot;
scott unterhielt , from human , to human .
but on &quot; citizens connect , &quot; it &apos;s all public that everybody can see .
and in this case , it saw a neighbor .
and the next thing we got to get was , &quot; i went over there , found the mülltonne behind the house .
beutelratte ? yes . alive ? yap .
and the mülltonne turned on the site . went home .
good night , beautiful beutelratte . &quot;
pretty simple .
that &apos;s great . this is digital the physical .
and it &apos;s also a good example of how the government is to be in the crowdsourcing .
but it &apos;s also a great example of government as a platform .
and i don &apos;t necessarily mean , a technical definition of the platform .
i &apos;m going to talk more about a platform for people to help themselves and help others .
a citizen helped a different citizen , but the government played a central role here .
they are all connected these two people .
and you could have able to connect them with government performance , if these were needed , but a neighbor is a very better , billigere alternative to state services .
when a neighbor helps the other , we empower our communities .
let &apos;s call the tierfänger , it costs a lot of money .
one of the most important things is that we have to think about it is that government is not the same thing as politics .
and most people understand that , but you think that one is the input of the others .
that our contribution to the system that &apos;s vote .
how often we chose a political leader -- and sometimes we &apos;ve used a lot of energy to choose a new political leaders -- and then we can go back and we expect the government to reflect our values and have our needs , and then hasn &apos;t changed much ?
that &apos;s because the government is like a farther ocean , and politics are the top of the top .
and what &apos;s below is that what we call bureaucracy .
and we use this word in such contempt .
but it &apos;s this contempt that we own , and for the one we pay for , to be something that works against us , something else , and then we entmachten ourselves .
people seem to think , politics is sexy .
if we want this institution to work for us , we have to make it more complicated sexy .
because this is where the actual regierungsarbeit is taking place .
we need to be able to get into the government of government .
so the occupythesec-bewegung did it .
you &apos;ve seen these guys ?
it &apos;s a group of besorgter citizens who wrote a very detailed 325-seitigen report , which is an answer to the sec-memo to the gesetzesvorlage .
it &apos;s not political active , that &apos;s a bürokratisch active .
now , for those of us who have left up the government , it &apos;s time we think about the world we want to leave our children .
you have to imagine the enormous challenges that you have to imagine .
do we really believe that we are reaching what we need to do without a institution that can be done by all of us ?
a government is absolutely necessary , but it has to be more efficient .
the good news is that technology makes it possible , the function of the government fundamentally umzudeuten in a way that can actually achieve something by stärkt society .
and there &apos;s a generation that grew up on the internet , and it knows that it &apos;s not so hard to do things together , you have to build the only systems .
now the average age of our fellows is 28 , so i &apos;m , unfortunately , almost one generation older than most of you .
this is one generation that grew up to see her voice as a granted .
they &apos;re not fighting this struggle that we &apos;re all fighting , about who can talk to who , they all allowed to talk .
you can make their opinion on every channel at every time , and they do it .
so , if you &apos;re faced with the problem of government , you &apos;re not so much about using your voices .
they use their hands .
they use their hands to write applications that improve the government of government .
and this apps , let us use our hands to improve our communities .
this could be a hydranten freizuschaufeln , unkraut , umzudrehen a trash trash .
and sure , we could have these hydranten all the time , and many people do that .
but these apps are like little digital memories that we &apos;re not only consumers , and we &apos;re not only consumers of government who receive taxes .
we are more than that , we are citizens .
and we &apos;re not going to improve government until we improve the way .
so the question i have here for you here : if it &apos;s about the big , important things we need to do together , all together , we will be a bunch of voices , or will we be a lot of hands ?
thank you .
normally , my role of explaining how wonderful the new technologies that are the emergence of being here , and i thought i &apos;m here under friends , i would tell you what i really think , and also try to look back and understand what &apos;s really going on here , with these incredible sprüngen that are going on , that we can &apos;t keep up with the other
i &apos;m going to start to show you a little , boring slide .
... if you just want to show the slide .
this is a slide that i &apos;ve been chosen for my folder .
i &apos;m not going to tell you about the details of the slide , but rather in the general form .
this slide shows data from a analysis of the performance of risc processors compared to the performance of a local area .
and what &apos;s interesting here is that this slide , like this , as many others , which we find a lot of antreffen in our field , a kind of a semi-logarithmischen curve .
in other words , every step here is a potenz in the leistungsskala .
and this is a novelty that we need to use this guy on a semi-logarithmischen curves in the region of technology .
something very strange happens here .
so this is basically what i &apos;m going to talk about .
so if you can turn the lights back on .
another thing a little bit , because i &apos;m going to draw a little bit of the paper here .
now , why do we draw graphs in the technology to semi-logarithmischen curves ?
the reason for this is , if i draw it on a normal curve , what we say , this is the years , and so the timeline of a kind of type , and this is a random amount of technology that i want to use with a graph , that &apos;s going to be silly .
and then you look like this .
and that doesn &apos;t tell us much .
now , if i want to record another technology , let &apos;s say a transporttechnologie , then this would be very unvernünftig on the semi-logarithmischen scale , in a flat line .
but if something like this , it changes the qualitativen conditions .
so if the transporttechnologie would be so fast as the mikroprozessor-technologie , we could go into a cab and we would be in tokyo in 30 seconds .
but it &apos;s not that fast .
and that was never before in the history of the technologie-entwicklung , this kind of rekursivem growth , which is going to increase the scale of the scale .
so the question i want to ask you now is if you look at these exponential curves , you don &apos;t go to keep it forever .
it &apos;s not possible that everything is now on forever as fast as now .
there are two possibilities .
it &apos;s either going to be a classic s-kurve like this , to get something completely new , or it &apos;s going to happen here .
it &apos;s in about this .
well , i &apos;m an optimist , so i think that i think this is going to happen in the way here .
it &apos;s really , that means that we &apos;re right now in a transition right now .
we &apos;re here in this line , in a transition from the world &apos;s a new way of a new world .
so the question i want to ask , and i also often ask myself , is how this new world will be ?
what is this new state that is going to take the world slow ?
because the transition seems to be very , very confusing if you &apos;re in the middle of the middle .
when i was a child , there was the future somewhere in 2000 , and people were often talking about what would happen in the year 2000 .
now , we have a conference where people talk about the future , and you realize the future is still in 2000 .
and we don &apos;t go to that .
in other words , the future of the future has been since i &apos;ve been since i &apos;m in this world .
i think the reason why we realize that is something that &apos;s happening .
transition is happening . we can feel all of it .
and we know that there is just no point to try to look at the moment of what 30 or 50 years into the future , because everything is going to be so different , that a simple hochrechnung of what we don &apos;t make sense is not meaning .
i want to talk about what this might be , that transition that we &apos;re in right now .
so to make this , i first will talk about some other things that really don &apos;t have anything to do with technology or computer .
because i think that i think , to understand this , we need to go back and look at the thing on a longer scale .
and that &apos;s what i &apos;d like to look at on the earth &apos;s earth &apos;s life .
i think the big picture makes sense when you split it in some milliarden-schritte .
so let &apos;s go back , and that &apos;s 2.5 billion years , the earth was a big , steriler steinklumpen with lots of chemicals on it .
so if you have a way of being organized , the way these chemicals were organized , then we have a pretty good picture of how they anstellten it .
i think there are theories that are beginning to understand how everything started rna , but i &apos;m going to tell you a little story about that , at that time , small öltröpfchen herumschwebten , which is in different kinds of chemicals for chemicals .
some of these öltröpfchen are a special combination of chemicals which allowed them to integrate other chemicals from the outside , and then grow .
they all were like this , they started to have the aufzuteilen .
these little öltröpfchen were the primitivste zellenform in the sense .
but this öltröpfchen wasn &apos;t about a living in today &apos;s senses because each one of them was just a little , zufälliges recipe for chemicals .
and every time it divided , they have befindlichen chemicals to ungleichen the chemicals .
so every tröpfchen , a little bit different .
in fact , the tröpfchen , which was growing one for growth , faster , faster than others and more integrated , more chemicals from the outside and shared faster .
so that &apos;s the very neigten to survive longer , and they vermehrten into grösserem .
so this is just a very simple chemical form of life , but more interesting it will , if this tröpfchen , it &apos;s going to learn a trick from abstraction .
so , in any way we don &apos;t understand , this tröpfchen has learned the ability to niederzuschreiben information .
they &apos;ve learned to store the recipe for the cell as information , and it &apos;s in a certain chemical shape that we call dna .
in other words , they found a way that allowed them to be a way to allow them to be niederzuschreiben , so that this information could be stored and copied .
and the amazing thing is that this kind of information is about the time of 2.5 billion years that they were born in the same time .
in fact , the recipe for us , is our genes , from the same code and the same in the same .
and that is every living organism , that &apos;s exactly the same letters and the same code .
we &apos;re far that we can write only for the vergnügungszweck , the thing that we can write in this code .
and i have 100 mikrogramm of a white pulvers that i &apos;m trying to keep in the airports of sicherheitspersonal .
and it &apos;s in there -- what i &apos;ve done is , i &apos;ve taken this code -- the code is made up of a normal letter that we use to use -- and i wrote my visitenkarte to a piece of dna , and i &apos;ve got it verstärkt 10 22 times .
so if someone to make a hundred million copies of my favorite , i have enough to everyone in this room , and even for everyone in the world , and it &apos;s right here .
if i had been a egoist , i would have written it on a virus and then put into the room .
so what &apos;s the next step ?
the niederschreiben of dna was an interesting step .
and the veranlagten of these cells -- that made them happy for another billion years .
but then another , very interesting step , where things were completely different , and that was how these cells started communicate and exchange information so that communities had evolved from cells .
i don &apos;t know if you knew that , but bacteria can actually exchange your dna .
and that &apos;s why the reason for example is that it &apos;s growing for antibiotics .
some bacteria have found how they can stay away from penicillin , and have this information that &apos;s written together with other bacteria , and now we have plenty of bacteria that are resistant to penicillin because the bacteria communicate with each other .
so these communication allowed for the reasons of communities that were in a certain sense , in the same boat . they were synergetisch .
so they either survive together , or they went together , and that meant that if a community was successful , all individuals are wiederholt and bevorzugt by the evolution of the evolution .
so the übergangsstelle is now where these communities are so close to that they decided to write the recipe for the whole community in a zeichenkette .
and the next interesting phase took about another billion years .
at this point we have mehrzellige communities , communities from many verschiedlichen zellentypen , which are in the same organism as a single organism .
in fact , we &apos;re also a mehrzellige community .
we have a lot of cells that are not going to be on themselves .
your skin cells are useless without heart cells , muscle cells , brain cells , and so on .
so these communities began to feel like that , the plane that was taking place , no longer the single cell , but the whole zellengemeinschaft that we &apos;re going to call organism .
the next step is now happening within these communities .
the zellengemeinschaften started to abstract information .
and they developed special structures which did nothing else to process information within the organism .
and these are the neural structures .
so the neurons are the informationsverarbeitungsapparat that have built this zellengemeinschaften .
they started to train specialists within the community , special structures , which were responsible for learning , understanding and the remaining of information .
and this was the brain and the nervous system of these communities .
this gave you an evolutionary advantage .
because at that point , an individual -- and then , within the time period of time , within the period of time of life , they &apos;re going to happen instead of this evolutionary period .
so , an organism could be learning , for example , a certain fruit , because she didn &apos;t taste bad and made it sick , the last time he ate it .
now , this could happen within a single organism , whereas hundreds of thousands of years were needed because this information had to be learned from the individuals who died because of these animals , because these informationsverarbeitungsstrukturen haven &apos;t been there .
so the nervous system has the evolutionsprozess of this particular particular because the evolution could now be within a individual .
it could be within a place of lernrahmens .
what happened after that is that the individual organisms found one way to communicate with each other .
let &apos;s say , as an example , the raffinierteste version of this kommunikationsart is the human language .
it &apos;s a fairly amazing invention when you think about it .
i have a very complicated , unordentliche and verwirrte idea in my head .
i &apos;m sitting here , and i &apos;m basically , i &apos;m just grunzende notes , in the hope of creating a similar verwirrte idea in your head , which has a resemblance to my original idea .
so we take a little bit complicated , turn it into sound , a sequence of sound , and produce a little bit of a complicated in the head of other .
so this allows us to work again as a unified organism .
and what we actually did , we , we have humanity , is we started to have a abstrahieren .
we &apos;re going through the same steps that have gone through -- the abstraction of our methods , to bring data on .
the invention of the language , for example , was a little step in that direction .
telefonie , computers , videobänder , cd-roms and so on , all of our neural mechanisms that we built in our community to be able to handle this information .
and it &apos;s all connecting us together to something that is much bigger , and also capable of developing faster than we have been .
so today , evolution can happen in the amount of microseconds .
you &apos;ve seen tys little evolutionsbeispiel , where he showed a little bit of evolution in the &quot; convolution &quot; program , right in front of your eyes .
so we have verschnellert the zeitskalen again .
the first steps of history that i told you about , dauerten a billion years a piece .
the next steps , the same thing that the nervous system and the brain , a few hundred million years .
then the nächstens steps , like language , and so on , dauerten less than a million years .
and these next steps , like electronics , seem to be few decades .
the process is feeding itself , and so i think , auto-katalytisch , is the word for that -- when something verstärkt its änderungsgeschwindigkeit .
the more it changes , the faster it changes .
and i think this is what we see here in this explosionsartigen curve .
we see the process that feed themselves .
i live a living from building computers , and i know that i &apos;m using the mechanism that i use to build computers , not use , without the recently of gemachten progress in computer computing .
my current activity is to design objects with such a very large complexity that it &apos;s impossible for me to design this in the traditional sense .
i don &apos;t know what each one in the verbindungsmaschine is doing in the verbindungsmaschine .
it has billions of them .
what i do instead , and what &apos;s the designers of thinking about thinking is we think about a certain abstraktionsebene machine , this machine , and the machine does something that goes beyond our capabilities , better and faster than we could ever do .
and it makes it partly with the methods that we don &apos;t even understand right now .
one way that is particularly interesting , and what i &apos;ve been used for recently is a lot of time is the evolution itself .
and we put a evolutionsprozess in the machine that &apos;s going to happen in the mikrosekunden-bereich .
to give an example , in the most extreme cases , we can create a program that developed the random instruktionen .
we say , &quot; computers , generiere , please , to make a hundred million random sequences of instructions .
now , you &apos;re going to take these random to be elected by the same instruction , and i &apos;m finally , you know , to end the ones who are the next to my own . &quot;
so in other words , i define what i want .
let &apos;s say , i want to just sort of a numbers , which would be a simple example that i &apos;ve been used for this .
so , in fact , there are programs that can be the most likely numbers .
of course , the chance of random elected instructions is very small that they just sort of sortieren numbers by random , so they don &apos;t actually do the instructions of the instructions .
but one of them might be a little bit of happiness in the right order .
now i say , &quot; computers , take the people to take the 10 percent of the gene sequences that have come out of my vorgaben . &quot;
and they go off , lösche the rest .
now , all the übriggebliebenen that have numbers of the best .
and that &apos;s a way of rekombinierens , analog to reproduction .
take two programs , and they produce children through the exchange of their subroutinen , and the children are vererben the characteristics of the two programs .
so i have a new generation of programs that were created by combinations of programs that are something closer to the vorgaben than others .
tell , &quot; please repeat this process . &quot;
bewerte them .
maybe a few mutations may .
and try and try and try to do this with another generation .
all these generations need to be a few milliseconds .
and so i can take a evolution of a million years of a few years in the computer in a few years , or in a more complicated cases , a few hours .
and finally , i &apos;m going to get the programs that can be done numbers .
in fact , these programs are so much more efficient than any program i could ever write by hand .
and then i look at these programs , i can &apos;t tell you how to work .
i tried to understand it .
it &apos;s a verworrene and strange programs .
but they do the job .
i know , i &apos;m sure you &apos;re going to do the job because you &apos;re from a series of hunderttausenden programs that have done the job .
because your life was hanging out of whether she did the job right .
i used to sit in a 747 with this marvin minsky , and he ale a map , and says , &quot; oh look . look at that .
that aircraft is made of hunderttausenden kleinteilen , which are working together to make their flight more secure . &apos; does not make you ? &quot;
we know that a entwicklungsprozess is not a perfect way when it gets too complicated .
so we &apos;re going to start on computer , for a process which is different from the classical engineering .
he allows us things to make things with a much higher complexity than it would allow the normal methods .
and yet , we don &apos;t really understand the possibilities of it .
so gewissermassen überflügelt us so .
we &apos;re using these programs to make the computer much faster , so we can do these processes even faster .
so it creates a rückkopplung .
it gets faster and faster and i think that &apos;s why it seems so confusing .
because all these new technologies are being feeding by themselves .
we raise .
we &apos;re at a point , the analog is to be developed as a einzeller-organismen zu .
so we &apos;re the amöben , and we can &apos;t really make what we &apos;re doing here in the hell .
we &apos;re in the middle of this übergangpunkt .
but i really believe that something &apos;s going on .
i think it &apos;s very hochmütig to say that we are the main product of evolution .
and i think we all are part of the creation of what &apos;s next to the next thing .
now , you know , the lunch is before , and i think i &apos;m going to hear here before i &apos;m going to get a rausgewählt .
my story starts in here , in my case , about two years ago .
i was under the sky of the sky with sufi-sänger mukhtiar ali .
we talked about that nothing has changed since the time of ancient indian epos . &quot;
if we wanted to travel back at the time , we left into a car and schwirrten across the sky .
now we &apos;re going to do this with airplanes .
back then , when the great indian kriegerprinz durst had durst , he took a bow , schoss in the floor and water .
now we &apos;re doing this with bohrern and machines .
we came to conclusion that magic and magic were replaced by machines .
that really made me sad .
i got a little bit of fear of technology .
i &apos;m afraid that i could lose the ability to enjoy the sonnenuntergang , without the camera and without tweet my friends .
i found that technology should make magic possible and not kill .
when i was a little girl , my grandfather gave me his little silberne taschenuhr .
this piece of 50 technology became the most magischste thing for me .
she became a goldener access to a world full of piraten and verunglückter ships and images into my imagination .
i came to think that our fancy camera and cameras were to dream about it .
they thought we were inspired by this .
and so i went into the world of technology to see how i could use it to make magic rather than kill .
and i started to illustrate books with 16 .
when i saw the ipad , i saw it as a device of storytelling that readers can connect around the world .
it can know how we hold it .
it can know where we are .
it &apos;s bringing images and text together , and animation , sound and touch .
the storytelling always took more senses .
but what do we do ?
i just go to khoya , an interactive ipad .
this is : &quot; put your fingers on every light . &quot;
and so -- this is : &quot; this box belongs ... &quot; i write my name .
and i &apos;m a character in the book .
and again , a letter will be down for me -- and the ipad knows through gps where i live -- that &apos;s right to me .
the child in me is really excited about such opportunities .
i talked a lot about magic .
i don &apos;t mean a magician and a new thing , but the magic of childhood , those ideas that we all had as children .
fireflies found it in a glass , and i found quite exciting .
so you have to flip the ipad here and fireflies fireflies .
and they beleuchten away through the rest of the book .
another idea that fascinated me as a child is that a whole galaxy can be in a single murmel .
and therefore , every book and every world is going to make a little bit of a murmel , which i &apos;m going to get here to the magic device in the device .
and this opens up a map .
fantasybücher had always been maps , but these cards were static .
this map grows and lighting and serve to the rest of the book .
it also shows you in other places of the book .
i &apos;m going in here .
also , it &apos;s important for me to make something that indisch is also very zeitgemäß .
these are the apsaras .
we &apos;ve all heard about feen and nymphen , but how many people outside india are familiar with india &apos;s indian colleagues , who are apsaras ?
the poor , poor people were stuck in indras rooms for thousands of years in a old muffigen book .
and we bring them back , in a contemporary story of children .
a story that &apos;s coming on with new issues , like the umweltkrise .
for the subject , a big problem for the last 10 years is that children in their rooms are sitting in their computers without any rauszugehen .
but now , with mobile technology , we can take our children into the natural world with their technology .
in a interaction of the book , you &apos;re sent to a search for . you have to go out and collect the camera of the ipads and more natural objects .
as a child , i had collections of stöckern , rocks , kieseln and muscheln .
somehow , the children don &apos;t do .
this is kindheitsritual . you have to go out to make a picture of a flower and mark it in a chapter .
in a different chapter , you have to fotographieren a piece of baumrinde and tag .
so , you can actually create a digital collection of photographs that you can put online .
a child in london shows the picture of a fuchses and says , &quot; oh , i &apos;ve seen a fox today . &quot;
a child in india says , &quot; i &apos;ve seen a monkey . &quot;
this creates a kind of social network around a digital collection of photographs that you actually took .
there &apos;s a variety of possibility to connect magic to connect the world and technology .
so , in the next book we plan an interaction at the same video of the ipads , and through augmented reality , an animation of elfen looks like a plant in front of the house .
at a point , the screen is filled with leaves .
you have to make the sound of the winds you can blow away and read the rest of the book .
we all move to a world where the forces of technology can come closer and to be able to get in the magic and technology .
we use the energy of the sun .
we bring our kids to the natural world and the magic , fun and love of our childhood through the simple medium of a story .
thank you .
this is really an extraordinary honor for me .
i spend most of my time with people in untersuchungshaft , prisons or todeszellen .
i spend most of my time with the socially schwächsten in the sozialbausiedlungen and in places where there &apos;s a lot of hoffnungslosigkeit .
here at ted , to see and hear about how it is , how powerful it is , i gave you a lot of power .
in the short time here , i realized it &apos;s one of the time : ted has an identity .
you can tell things the world &apos;s impact around the world .
and sometimes , when something comes about ted , it gets meaning and force that it doesn &apos;t have .
i say that because i think identity is very important .
we &apos;ve seen some amazing presentations .
i think we &apos;ve learned that the words of a teacher will meaning , but the words of a dedicated teacher is particularly meaningful .
as a doctor , you can do good . but as a fürsorglicher doctor , you can do more .
and that &apos;s why i want to talk about the power of identity .
i didn &apos;t have learned this as a lawyer in my work .
i learned that from my grandmother .
i was big in a family , a traditional afroamerikanischen household , which was dominated by a matriarchin , and this matriarchin was my grandmother .
she was a taffe , strong woman , she had effect .
she had the last word in every familienstreit .
it was also the place of a lot of differences in our family .
she was the daughter of a sklavenfamilie .
their parents were born in southern southern camps in virginia as a slave .
it was born to be in the age of the 1880 , and the experience of slavery is the world &apos;s view very strong .
my grandmother was strong , but she was also loving .
when i met her as a little boy , she came to me and umarmte me .
she hit me so that i could barely breathe , and then she went off .
one or two hours later , when i met her , she came up to me and said , &quot; bryan , do you feel my embrace ? &quot;
and if i said no , i said , &quot; no , &quot; she said , &quot; if i said , &quot; she would leave me .
she was something that made you want to be near your nearby .
the only thing about it was that they had 10 children .
my mother was the youngest of her 10 children .
sometimes , if i wanted to spend time with her , it was hard to get her attention .
my cousins were walking around all around .
i remember , i have to be eight or nine , i woke up one morning and went into the living room . all my cousins were walking around .
my grandmother was sitting at the end of the zimmers and he was staring at me .
first i thought that was a game .
i looked at her and she was smiling , but she looked very serious .
this went 15 or 20 minutes . then she stood up and came over to me . she took me in my hand and said , &quot; come , bryan . you and me , we need to talk . &quot;
i remember it was about as if it was yesterday .
i &apos;ll never forget it .
she took me out and said , &quot; bryan , i &apos;m going to tell you something , but you have to promise you don &apos;t . &quot;
i said , &quot; i said , grandma . &quot;
she said , &quot; ehrenwort ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
she sat down and looked at me . she said , &quot; i want you to watch you . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you &apos;re something special . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you can do everything you want to do . &quot;
i &apos;ll never forget that .
then she said , &quot; you must promise to me just three things , &quot; bryan . &quot;
i said , &quot; ok , grandma . &quot;
she said , &quot; first of all , i &apos;m telling you that you will always love your mom . &quot;
she said , &quot; your mom is my baby , and you have to promise you will be to take care of you . &quot;
i was going to make my mother , so i said , &quot; yes , grandma , i &apos;m going to do that . &quot;
she said , &quot; next time i &apos;m going to do the right thing , &quot; and it &apos;s hard to do the right thing to do . &quot;
i thought , &quot; yes , i said , &quot; oma . i promise it . &quot;
she finally said , &quot; the last thing you have to promise to me is that you will never drink alcohol . &quot;
well , i was nine years old , and i said , &quot; yes , grandma . i promise it . &quot;
i grew up on the land , in the old rural south and i have a brother who &apos;s older one year , and a year younger .
when i was about 14 or 15 , one day my brother came home , and i got this sixpack beer with grabbed my sister and i went to the forest .
we just alberten around the way else .
then he took a drink of beer and he offered my sister one , and she took them , and then she offered to me one .
i said , &quot; no , no , no . i &apos;m ok . just do it . i don &apos;t want to beer . &quot;
my brother said , &quot; well , do it . now we do this , you &apos;re doing whatever we do .
i had , what had your sister , and go , trink a beer . &quot;
i said , &quot; i don &apos;t want . just do it . &quot; just do her .
my brother staring at me .
he said , &quot; what &apos;s going on with you ? well , what &apos;s going on . &quot;
then he looked at me in my face , and he said , &quot; oh no , you don &apos;t have been nuts with a conversation with grandmother ? &quot;
i said , &quot; what are you talking about ? &quot;
he said , &quot; grandma tells all the grandchildren that you &apos;re special . &quot;
i was devastated by the ground .
i &apos;m going to give you a little bit .
i probably shouldn &apos;t do that .
this is probably going to be public .
i &apos;m a 52 years old , and i gestehe that i never drink a drop of alcohol .
i don &apos;t say that because i think it &apos;s tugendhaft . i &apos;m saying that , because identity is power .
if we can create the right kind of identity , we can tell people around us , and they don &apos;t think they don &apos;t think about it .
we can get them to do things that they thought they couldn &apos;t .
of course , my grandmother would say all their grandchildren , they &apos;re something special .
my grandfather was during the prison prison in prison .
my uncle died of alkoholinduzierten diseases .
and she believed that these are the subjects that we would care about .
i tried to tell something about our justizsystem .
this country is different than 40 years ago .
in the &apos; 70s , 300,000 people in haftanstalten and prison .
today , it &apos;s 2.3 million .
the united states has now the highest inhaftierungsrate of the world .
seven million people are on the bewährung of bewährung or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
i think , in my view , masseninhaftierungen has changed our world .
in socially weak and black parts of the population of despair and despair , because of these changes .
one of three male black between 18 and 30 is in prison , in prison , on the prison , or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
in urban communities , in the country , from los angeles to philadelphia , washington to washington -- are 50 to 60 percent of the black men in prison , in prison , in bewährung , or with bedingter strafaussetzung .
our system is not just shaped by questions that have to do with rassenzugehörigkeit , it &apos;s also entstellt by poverty .
we have a justizsystem that they have in this country , which they are treated much better if they are rich and guilty than poor and innocent .
wealth , not verschulden , impacts the outcome .
and yet , we seem to be satisfied with this .
politics and anger , we believe , is that these problems are not our problems .
we have lost the contact .
i think that &apos;s interesting .
there are some hochinteressante developments .
my home , in my home , entzieht entzieht , dauerhaft them to wahlrecht .
and here today , in alabama , 34 percent of the male &apos;s black population are permanent their wahlrecht .
we &apos;re prognostizieren that in 10 years , the average rate of the bürgerlichen ehrenrechte will be so high , like the verabschiedung of the wahlrechtsgesetzes .
the silence is ohrenbetäubend .
i &apos;m vertrete children .
many of my clients are very young .
the united states of america are the only country in the world who convicted dreizehnjährige children in prison .
in this country , there are lebenslängliche haftstrafen of lebenslängliche haftstrafen without the bedingte .
we &apos;ve already run a lot of things .
the only country in the world .
i vertrete people in todeszellen .
the question of death is an interesting question .
we believe , because you &apos;ve taught us that the real question is : did a human being deserves to die of him for him ?
it &apos;s a very sensitive question .
but you can also think differently , depending on how we see our identity .
the other way is not : has someone who deserves a crime , but they are deserves to kill it ?
i find that fascinating .
the death penalty in america is defined by error .
in nine people we &apos;ve executed , one that we &apos;ve been doing for innocent , who was released for innocent who were released from the death row .
an amazing fehlerquote . one of nine innocent .
i find that fascinating .
we would never ever fly someone with an airplane , if for nine airplanes , that &apos;s going to take off , a abstürzt .
but somehow we can get it from this problem .
it &apos;s not our problem .
it &apos;s not our burden .
it &apos;s not our struggle .
i talk a lot about these questions .
i &apos;m talking about race , and the question of whether we &apos;re right to kill that .
and it &apos;s exciting because i &apos;m a afroamerikanische of my students , i &apos;m a afroamerikanische story . i &apos;m talking about slavery .
i talk about terrorism , the time against the end of the rekonstruktion , until the beginning of the world war .
we don &apos;t really know a lot about it .
but for the afroamerikaner in this country , it was a time of terror .
in many areas , people had to be afraid of lynchmobs .
or bombs .
it was the fear of terror that shaped her life .
these older people are now coming to me and say , &quot; mr. , stevenson , you &apos;re talking about talks . you tell people that they should stop saying that we first have to deal with the history of our nation with terrorism : after 9 / 11 . &quot;
they say , &quot; no , no -- tell people that we grew up with this . &quot;
and after terrorism , of course , the rassentrennung and decades of rassistisch motivierten and apartheid .
and yet , in our country , there is a dynamic -- we don &apos;t like to talk about our problems .
we don &apos;t like to talk about our story .
and that &apos;s why we don &apos;t really understand what meaning our actions have in the historical context .
we &apos;re constantly hitting each other .
we always create new tensions and conflict .
it &apos;s hard to think of race , and i think that &apos;s because we &apos;re not willing to approach the process of truth and reconciliation .
in south africa , people understood that the rassentrennung is not too überwinden without the willingness to truth and reconciliation .
even after the genocide in rwanda , there were these willingness , but not in this country .
i &apos;ve given a couple of talks about the death penalty in germany .
it was fascinating , because one of the scientists stood up to my talk and said , &quot; you know , it &apos;s profoundly deeply , to hear it &apos;s so talk . &quot;
he said , &quot; in germany , there &apos;s no death death .
and of course , you can never give them in germany .
it was still silent . then a woman said , &quot; with our history , it &apos;s impossible that we will ever kill us again for the systematic killing of people .
it would be gewissenlos of us , consciously and specific to hinzurichten people . &quot;
i thought about it .
and what it would feel like in a world where german government had people hinrichten , especially if there were a lot of jews .
it would be .
it would be gewissenlos .
and yet , here in this country , in the united states , we &apos;re richten people -- and here &apos;s the risk of being convicted of death , 11 times higher when the victim knows when it &apos;s black . 22 times higher , when the black is black and the victim knows -- in the same states , in whose earth , the body is gelynchter people .
and yet there is this mental abkopplung .
i think our identity is threatened .
if we don &apos;t deal with these hard issues , the positive and wonderful things are affected by the positive and wonderful things .
we love innovation .
we love technology and creativity .
we love entertainment .
but then , finally , these realities are überschattet of suffering , abuse , herabsetzung , ausgrenzung .
i think it &apos;s important to unite both .
because we ultimately talk about that we need more hope , more engagement , more commitment to pass in a complex world .
for me , the time is to create , to think and talk about the poor , the benachteiligten , who will never be at ted .
but think about a way that is embedded in our own lives .
we all have to believe in the end of the end of the things that we can &apos;t see .
we do that . we &apos;re rational as well as we understand .
innovation , creativity , and development , not only come from our heads .
they come from ideas that are driven by the belief in our hearts .
it &apos;s this kopf-herz-verbindung , which i think is that it &apos;s driving us , not only being open to all the light and the begeisternden things , but also for dark and problematischen .
vaclav havel , the great tschechische politicians , once said , is .
&quot; when we fought for killing oppression , we wanted to do everything . but what we needed most was hope , a mental orientation , the willingness to be in hoffnungslosen places , and witness . &quot;
this mental orientation is the core of what i think is that the ted-gemeinschaften need to be engaged in this .
there is no abgrenzung of technology and design that allows us to be fully human , unless we have eyes and ears for poverty , ausgrenzung and injustice .
i want to warn you . this kind of identity requires a lot more of us than if we don &apos;t care about it .
she &apos;s going to touch it deeply .
as a young lawyer , i was a great privilege of meeting pink parks .
and then , women park came back to montgomery , where they were two of their oldest friends , johnnie carr , who had organisiert the montgomery-busboykott -- an incredible afroamerikanerin -- and virginia durr , a white ehemann whose husband , clifford durr , dr. king vertrat .
so these women are getting together and they were just a lot of .
and then , and then , woman called me and said , &quot; bryan , ms. parks is coming into the city . we want to talk about us .
do you want to hear and listen ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; yeah , i like to . &quot;
she said , &quot; and what are you going to do when you &apos;re here ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m going to hear . &quot;
and i went over and i just heard .
it was always inspiring , so beflügelnd .
one day i sat there and i heard these women , and after a few hours , women &apos;s park to me and turned to me , &quot; well , tell me what the other thing is the other right for the same thing .
what are trying to achieve ? &quot;
i started with my usual talk .
i said , &quot; we &apos;re trying to get injustice .
wr people want to help people who were convicted of innocent .
we want to fight bias and discrimination in the strafvollzugssystem .
we want to end up lebenslängliche haftstrafen without the bedingte strafaussetzung for children .
we want to do something against death death .
we want to lower the number of death .
we want to end up masseninhaftierungen . &quot;
i thought my usual talk , and after that , she looked at me and said , &quot; mhmm . mhmm . &quot;
she said , &quot; that &apos;s going to be very , very tired . &quot;
then woman was lehnte to me , put a finger on my face and said , &quot; and therefore , you have to be very , very tapfer . &quot;
and so i think the ted ted should be .
we need to be able to ask ways to ask the challenges , these problems , that suffering .
because ultimately our humanity depends on our humanity .
in my work , i learned very simple things .
i learned a couple of very simple things .
that we are all more than the worst thing we &apos;ve ever done .
i think that &apos;s true for every person on the planet .
when someone is lying , it &apos;s not just a liar .
if someone takes something that doesn &apos;t hear it , it &apos;s not just a dieb .
even who kills someone is not just a killer .
and because this is , there &apos;s a basic human dignity that has to respect the law .
i also think that in many parts of this country , and certainly in many parts of the earth , the opposite of poverty is not wealth .
i don &apos;t think that .
i think that in many places , the opposite is justice .
and finally , i think , even though it &apos;s so dramatic , so beautiful and inspiring , and so anregend , we &apos;re not going to be measured at the end of our technology , not to the things we &apos;re developing , not to our intellect and intellect .
and finally , a society will not be given to how they treat their rich and powerful and the privilegierten , but as they manage with poor , the verurteilten , the inhaftierten .
because in this context , we begin to understand the truly amazing things that make us feel .
sometimes i &apos;m losing the balance . a story of the end .
i sometimes urge to be too .
i &apos;m going to get tired of how we all .
sometimes these ideas are going to be ahead of our thinking , in a very important way .
i vertrete these kids who were convicted of too hard strafen .
i go to the untersuchungsgefängnis and i &apos;m going to visit a client who might be 13 or 14 years old , and it &apos;s going to be as a adult in court .
and then i ask myself , how could it happen ?
how can a judge turn someone into something that he &apos;s not ?
the judge looks at it as adults , but i see a child .
one night i stayed up for a long night , and i thought , my god , if a judge can turn us into something different , then he must have zauberkräfte .
right , bryan , the judge has zauberkräfte .
you should wish you .
and because it was late , and i couldn &apos;t think i could do it right , i started working on a antrag .
i had a 14jährigen , poor black boys as a client .
and i started with this . the headline was , &quot; antrag , my poor , 14jährigen black client like to treat a privilegierten , white , 75jährigen topmanager . &quot;
in my head , i explained that fehlverhalten of the staatsanwaltschaft and the police and verfahrensfehler were to take care of as well as the police and verfahrensfehler .
there was a crazy line of this country that there &apos;s nothing more rechtens in this country that there &apos;s only fehlverhalten .
and the next morning i woke up and i didn &apos;t know if i was just dreamed of these crazy , or actually writing him .
and i didn &apos;t only have written it to my horror , but also to court .
a few months went , and i just forgotten everything .
but finally , i decided , my god , i must go to court and i &apos;m making this crazy case .
i went into the car and i was really overwhelmed with it .
so i went to the court .
and i thought that &apos;s going to be so hard , so painful .
finally , i went from my car and i went up to the court .
when i was a treppe for the court , there was an elderly , black man who was in the court .
when he saw me , he came over to me and he said , &quot; who are you ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m a lawyer . &quot; he said , &quot; you &apos;re a lawyer ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
he came to me and i was umarmte .
then he flüsterte into the ear .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m so proud of her . &quot;
and i have to say , there was power .
it touched a very deep thing in me , identity , the ability to contribute to each other , to contribute to a community , to a perspective of hope .
well , i went on the gerichtssaal .
once the judge saw me .
he said , &quot; mr. stevenson , did you put these crazy ? &quot;
i said , &quot; yeah . &quot; and then we started to argue .
more people came in , just because they were angry .
i wrote these crazy things .
polizeibeamte came in and stellvertretende staatsanwälte and büroangestellte .
in the handumdrehen , the gerichtssaal full of people who were angry , that we were talking about color , about poverty , about inequality .
from my augenwinkel , i saw the janitors and off .
he always saw the windows over and could hear the whole thing .
he went up and down .
finally , this old black man came up with a very besorgten gesichtsausruck in the gerichtssaal , and she sat down , almost like the verteidigungsbank .
ten minutes later , the judge left a pause .
during the break , a polizeibeamter came in and she was making it was a little job of the morning .
this deputy ran across the older black .
he said , &quot; jimmy , what do you do in the gerichtssaal ? &quot;
the old black man stood up . he looked at the deputy , and he looked at me , and he said , &quot; i &apos;m going to be here to say this young man , don &apos;t lose the goal . don &apos;t give it up . &quot;
i came to ted because i think many of you have understood that the moral pendel of the universe is far ausschwingt , but that it &apos;s the justice of justice .
that we are not fully designed as humans unless we take care of human rights and human rights .
that our world &apos;s survival is connected to the survival of each individual .
that we have to connect our visions of technology and design , from entertainment and creativity , with humanity , pity and justice .
and especially , i want to share with you that just look at that , just say , don &apos;t lose the goal from your eyes . don &apos;t give it .
you have in this audience , this community , you know , that community , you know , and belongs to them and to help them .
what can we do ?
bryan stevenson : well , there are all possibilities .
if you live in california , there &apos;s a volksentscheid volksentscheid that &apos;s about the fact that it &apos;s about doing a effort , something about the geldstrom umzuleiten , which is in the politics of punishment .
here , in california , for example , you will be a billion dollars for a death penalty of a billion dollars .
and yet , the most 46 percent of all the tötungsdelikte isn &apos;t end with a verhaftung .
56 percent of all vergewaltigungsfälle are not in court .
there &apos;s a chance to do something .
this is going to suggest that money will invest in more sicherheitskräfte and safety .
i think there are possibilities everywhere .
over the last three decades , the verbrechensrate has dropped immense in america .
that &apos;s a lot of a relationship in a context of the increased inhaftierungszahlen .
what would you say to someone who believes that ?
well , in fact , the number of the gewaltverbrechen has not changed .
the majority of the masseninhaftierungen in this country didn &apos;t really find in the class of the gewaltverbrechen .
it was the fehlgeleitete kreuzzug against drugs .
so the dramatic pay for the very dramatic numbers come in .
we have hinreißen us from the rhetoric of punishment .
now we have drei-verstöße , who put people on the past grid for a fahrraddiebstahl , for the theft of the theft , for the theft , rather than that you force them to give things to the victims .
i think we need to do more to help people who have become victims of a straftat , not less .
and i think our current can &apos;t help us .
i think that &apos;s what we need to change .
bryan , they really put string string here .
they &apos;re an inspiring personality .
thank you for ted . thank you .
sprecher : he &apos;s a erhöhtes gefahrenrisiko .
two : famine in somalia . sprecher 3 .
4 : bösartige kartelle . sprecher five , dangerous .
6 : social decline . sprecher : 65 .
tsunamiwarnung tsunamiwarnung : tsunamiwarnung 9 .
different speaker : drogenkrieg . mass destruction .
recession . gridlock . doomsday . egypt . syria .
crisis . death .
oh my god .
so these are just a couple of the clips i &apos;ve collected over the last six months -- but it could be the last six days , or the last six years .
the fact is that the media prefer to show negative topics because our mind is given to these topics of attention .
and there &apos;s also a very good reason for that .
every second , every second , our senses will begin with much more information than our brain ever can process .
and because nothing more important than our survival is the first stop for all the information to all the information , the amygdala .
so the amygdala is our frühwarnsystem , our gefahrendetektor .
it &apos;s sortiert and durchkämmt all the information on the search of any kind of andeutung of danger in our environment .
so if we can see the news , we prefer to look for the negative news .
and the old adage , &quot; if it blutet , the demand is very true . &quot;
now , with all our digital devices that seven days a week , the negativen news every day , it &apos;s not a miracle that we &apos;re in a pessimistic .
it &apos;s not a miracle that everybody thinks that the world is always worse .
but perhaps that &apos;s not the case .
that might be the reality .
it &apos;s probably going to be accelerating at the enormous progress that we &apos;ve done in the last century , and it &apos;s so strong that it will become possible for the next three decades , to create a world of abundance .
now , i don &apos;t say we have big problems -- climate crisis , artensterben , water , water , and energieprobleme -- we &apos;ve already have .
and as humans , we &apos;re much better at the problems of problems in a long way , but ultimately , but eventually .
let &apos;s look at what we &apos;ve done in the last century , so we can predict the development of development .
in the last hundred years , the average life expectancy has doubled more than doubled , which has tripled the inflation of inflation , the world &apos;s population .
child mortality is a tenth .
and this is the ernährungs- , elektrizitäts- transport- and communication costs have reduced by a vielfaches .
so steve pinker showed us that we &apos;re currently living in a very peaceful time of life .
and according to charles kenny , the alphabetisierungsquote alphabetisierungsquote , in the past 130 years , has gone up from 25 percent to 80 percent .
we live in a really extraordinary time .
and a lot of people forget this .
and we &apos;re increasing our expectations all the time .
we actually definiert poverty .
remember that a lot of americans who live under the poverty line , they have access to power , water , water , toiletten , the tv , mobile phones , klimaanlagen , car phones , car phones .
the richest , the most cool , the earth &apos;s reichsten , the earth &apos;s earth , never had ever dreamed of such luxusgüter .
the basis for a lot of these are technologies , and these grow grow .
my good friend ray kurzweil has shown us that every tool that &apos;s going to information technology , and it &apos;s going to work on the curve of moore &apos;s law , and the preis-performance-quotient is doubling all 12 to 24 months .
that &apos;s why cell phone costs about a million times less , and it &apos;s a thousand times faster than a supercomputer from the 1970s .
now look at this curve .
this is moore &apos;s law last hundred years .
notice two things on this curve .
first , how smooth it is -- in good like in bad times , war or peace , recession , depression and hochkonjunktur .
this is the result of the computer computers that build faster computers .
it &apos;s going to slow down for not any of our big problems .
and also , despite your logarithmischen verlaufs on the left-hand side , you &apos;re going up .
so the growth itself is accelerating .
and on this curve , on the back of moore &apos;s law , we &apos;re going to find a series of extraordinary technologies that are available to all of them .
&quot; cloud-computing , &quot; something that my friends in autodesk &quot; infinite-computing , &quot; sensors , robots , 3d 3d , which allow the personal production on our planet , synthetic biology , treibstoffe , impfungen , digital medicine , nano-materialien , artificial intelligence .
how many of you have seen the victory of ibms supercomputer watson at risk ?
this was a big time .
i used to look for newspapers and looking for the best headlines that i could find .
i love this : &quot; watson bezwingt &apos;s human enemy . &quot;
&quot; risk &quot; is not a simple game .
it &apos;s about understanding the nuancen of language .
imagine that this artificial intelligence would have every single owner of a mobiltelefones .
so , four years ago , ray kurzweil , and i at ted here at ted , a new university called &quot; singularity university . &quot;
we bring our students all of these technologies to focus on how they can be used to solve the great challenges of humanity .
and every year we ask the students , businesses , products and services , within a decade that can be able to affect the lives of billions of people .
think about that a group of students today can impact the lives of billions of people today .
30 years ago , it was ridiculous .
today we can have verweisen on dozens of companies that are able to do this .
when i think , i think , as i think , a lot of a life of luxury for everyone on this planet ; it &apos;s about creating a life of possibilities .
it &apos;s about getting a knappen of goods .
because of course , the lack of the knappheit is kontextbezogen , and technology is a resource resource .
here &apos;s an example .
this is the story of napoleon iii. in the middle of the 18th century .
he &apos;s the guy on the left .
he invited the king of siam to dinner .
napoleons soldiers got silber-besteck , napoleon himself had gold-besteck .
the king of siam was getting aluminium-besteck .
and aluminium , at this time , was the most valuable metal on the planet , more valuable than gold and platin .
this is why the dome of the washington-monuments was made out of aluminum .
even though aluminium &apos;s einnimmt percent of the erdmasse , it doesn &apos;t come out of a pure metal .
it &apos;s going to be connected by oxygen and silikate .
but then the technology of the elektrolyse developed , and it was so cheap that we use it to our use of our wegwerf-mentalität .
then let &apos;s take this analogy into the future .
we think about energieknappheit today .
ladies and gentlemen , we live on a planet that is filled with more energy than we use every year .
16 terawatt energy , all of the 88 minutes , all of the time .
it &apos;s not about the lack of the lack of the problem , the problem is .
and there &apos;s good news .
in this year , you &apos;ve been able to make it a 50 percent of the cost of solar power in india -- 8.8 rupees to 17 rupees .
the cost of solar is fielen by 50 percent .
last month , this has published a study that shows that until the end of this decade in the sun &apos;s sun , six cents per capita income , compared to 15 cents at national average .
and if we have a energieüberschuss , we will also have water as well .
let &apos;s talk about wasser-kriege .
remember , as carl sagan , the voyager-raumfahrzeug in 1990 , when it was saturn , was going to turn back to earth ?
he took a famous photograph . what was it ?
&quot; a pale blue . &quot;
because we live on a wasserplaneten .
we live on a planet that &apos;s covered in 70 percent of water .
yes , it &apos;s 97,5 percent of water , two percent are vereist , and we &apos;re fighting to 0,5 percent of the water on the planet , but there &apos;s hope .
and there are new technologies , not in 10 or 20 years , but now .
it &apos;s new nanotechnologien on the way , nano-materialien .
and from a conversation with dean kaman , one of the innovators to share it with you , i want to share with you -- he gave me permission -- his technolgie , the &quot; slingshot &quot; and i &apos;ve probably heard of many of you , and it &apos;s got the size of a kühlschranks in the studentenheim .
it can produce a thousand gallons of clean water a day from different sources -- whether it &apos;s water , verschmutztes water , latrine -- and all that for less than two cents a gallon .
the president of coca-cola has just eingewilligt a big test-projekt to launch a hundred units in developing countries .
and if everything goes well , and i &apos;m very confident , then coca-cola is going to apply this technology to global countries across the planet .
this is the technologieunterstützte innovation that &apos;s available today .
and we &apos;ve seen this in mobile phones .
you mean , i &apos;m going to reach the 70 percent of the income of mobile phones in developing countries to the end of the u.k. .
just remember that a massai-krieger cell phone with a cell phone in the middle of kenya has a better mobil-kommunikation than president reagan in a 25 .
and if you search for google on google , you have more access to knowledge and information as president clinton 15 years ago .
they live in a world that has information and communication , as it has no ever been able to predict .
and it &apos;s better , the things you &apos;ve spent several thousand dollars -- gps , hd-video and photo , libraries are full of books and music , technology to medical medical medical medical medical imaging -- now , literally , entmaterialisiert and cheaper in their mobile phone .
and the best part of that is what we &apos;re doing in the area of health .
i had the pleasure of the pleasure that i had to do with the qualcomm-stiftung that so-called &quot; $ 10 million qualcomm x prize &quot;
we ask teams to be able to connect all these technologies in a mobile phone , that you can talk to the device , because it &apos;s equipped with ai , you can test reinhusten or your blutwerte .
and to win , the device must be a better diagnosis than a team of hochqualifizierter physicians .
imagine this device , in a developing country , where there are no doctors , but 25 percent of the krankheitslast percent of the healthcare workers , and 1.3 percent of the staff of healthcare .
if this device is sequenced a rna- or a dna-virus , which is not known , calls it down and prevent a pandemic before the outbreak .
but now , the biggest force that will lead us to a world of abundance .
i call them &quot; the coming billion . &quot;
the white lines are the population .
we just passed the 7-milliarden-marke .
and by the way , the biggest absicherung against a population is a better education , and diet all over the world .
in 2010 , we had just connected to two billion people online .
by 2020 , we &apos;re going to grow up two to two billion billion .
three billion new minds that we never heard before , are going to join the global communication .
what do these people need ?
what will they consume ? what will they want ?
and instead of wirtschaftlichem , i see one of the greatest economic anschübe of history .
these people represent several dollars dollars that will flow into global economy .
and they &apos;re going to get healthier in the use of the tricoders , and they &apos;re getting trained through the khan-akademie , and by doing the possibility of 3d and infinite computing and so much more productive than they have before .
so what can three billion growing , healthy , educated , productive members of the menschengemeinde members of the menschengemeinde ?
it would be a set of new , never before .
how would it be , the unterdrückten , wherever you are , to give a voice to pay attention to the point and make change , for the first time ?
what are these three billion people going to bring ?
what about beiträgen that we can &apos;t even predict ?
one of the things that i learned from the x prize is that small teams who are motivated by passionate and focus on extraordinary things , things that have been able to create large companies and governments only in the past .
i want to close with a story that really excites me .
there &apos;s a program that some may have already known .
it &apos;s a game that &apos;s called the foldit .
it was developed at the university of washington in seattle .
and it &apos;s a game where people can take a sequence of amino acids , to explore how the protein will evolve .
according to his behavior , we can predict the structure and function .
and this is very important in the medizinforschung .
so far , this was a problem for supercomputer .
and this game was played by university and so on .
and it &apos;s hundreds of thousands of people who played online online .
and it showed that today the human pattern pattern better than the proteins that are folding than the best supercomputer .
and when these people came and looked at who the best protein-ordner of the world was not a mit-professor , no caltech-student , it was somebody from england , manchester , a woman who was an assistentin who was an assistentin who was an assistentin , and at night the best protein-ordnerin in the world .
ladies and gentlemen , what i &apos;m going to have to give me enormous trust in our future is the fact that we have more power to make us of the grand challenges of our planet .
we have access to tools with exponential technology .
we have the passion of a diy-innovatoren .
we have the capital of the techno-philanthropen .
and we have three billion new minds that we can work online to create the new challenges , and to do what it is necessary .
we expect a couple of extraordinary decades .
thank you .
i think we need to do something against a verändernswertes piece of medical culture .
and i think it &apos;s beginning to be a medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical medical .
and maybe i &apos;m going to be in business for long , as i can allow myself to give a piece of my own falschen prestiges to make this happen .
but before i get to my talk about my talk , let &apos;s start with a little baseball .
hey , why not ?
we &apos;re near the saisonende and we move to the world .
we all love baseball , right ?
baseball is full of great statistics .
and there are hundreds of them .
&quot; moneyball &quot; is soon and turns around statistics and to use these great baseball team .
i &apos;m going to relate to a statistics that i hope most of you have heard before .
it &apos;s the durchschnittsleistung of the schlägers .
we &apos;re talking about 300 when a bat beat 300 .
that means that player is going to be schlägt by 10 beats .
this is the ball of the ball , it &apos;s coming up , he &apos;s not going to get stuck , and who &apos;s trying to throw the ball to the first base , it didn &apos;t make it and the läufer was in safety .
three out of 10 .
you know how to call a 300ter in major league baseball ?
well , really good , maybe a all-star .
you know what you call a 400ter ?
this is someone who &apos;s probably trifft four from 10 .
legendär -- like ted williams legendär -- the last major player player has been a player who met 400 times over the course of a regulären season .
let &apos;s turn back into my world of medicine , where i feel a lot more comfortable , or maybe a little less than i talked about to talk about it .
suppose you have a blinddarmentzündung and you &apos;re going to überwiesen to a operateur , whose durchschnittsleistung 400 in relation to blinddarmentzündungen .
somehow that doesn &apos;t work , right ?
suppose they were in a certain remote area , and they &apos;d have a beloved menschen people with verstopften herzkranzgefäßen , and their hausarzt überweist of this to a kardiologen , whose durchschnittsleistung at gefäßdarstellung .
but , you know what ?
it &apos;s much better . it &apos;s a aufsteigenden .
and she &apos;s beating a 257 .
somehow that doesn &apos;t work .
but i &apos;m going to ask you a question .
what do you think the durchschnittsleistung for a kardiologen or a nurse or a orthopäden , a geburtshelfer , a rettungsassistenten ?
1,000 , very good .
the truth is that no one in the whole medicine knows what a good surgeon or doctor or rettungsassistent should be .
what we do is we &apos;re doing every one of them , including , to be aussenden into the world with the claim .
never make a mistake , no one does the details about the details of how to do this .
and this is the message i took in the medical school .
i was a zwanghaft student student .
in high school , a mitschüler told that brian goldmann would learn for a bluttest .
and so it was .
and i learned in my little dachstube in the nurses of the nurses at the nurses of the toronto , general hospital , unweit from here .
i learned everything .
in my anatomievorlesung , i learned the origins and the ausläufer of each other , every branch of a artery , which one of the aorta wegführt , obskure and ordinary differentialdiagnosen .
i actually knew the differentialdiagnose um azidose azidose .
and i &apos;d been collecting more and more knowledge .
and i was good , i was schloss with cum laude .
and i left this medizinstudium with the impression that i knew everything i knew , or at least as much as possible , as close to vollständigkeit as possible , i had a immune to that make mistakes .
and it was working for a while , until i met the wife printer .
i was residierte at a lehrkrankenhaus here in toronto , as a woman , i got to the notfallabteilung of the hospital .
at that point i was able to build the kardiologischen layer in the kardiologischen service .
and it was my assignment when the notfallpersonal kardiologischen was looking for the notfallpatienten .
and i &apos;m going to get feedback on my oberarzt .
i studied her wife , and she was in atemnot .
and when i was listening to her , they made keuchende sounds .
and when i was abhörte her breast with the stethoskope , i could hear a knackendes sound on both sides that told me she suffered under kongestiver failure .
this is a state of the heart of failing , instead of pump the entire blood , and then a part of the blood blood is solid in the lung and then füllt these little , so the kurzatmigkeit came .
and it wasn &apos;t a hard diagnosis to be stellenden .
i put her and i made my treatment .
i gave her aspirin . i gave her medicine to take the pressure of the heart .
i gave her medicine , which we call diuretics , tabletten water , so that they ausschied the liquid .
and over a period of time and two hours , she started to feel better .
i felt really good .
and i made my first mistake ; i sent them home .
actually , i made two mistakes .
i sent them home without talking to my oberarzt .
i didn &apos;t take the hörer , and i did what i should have , what would be a call in my oberarzt to make him feel like he had a chance to make a own picture .
and he knew she , he would have been able to put extra information on their beizusteuern .
maybe i did it with good reason .
maybe i didn &apos;t want to be the hilfsbedürftige doctor .
maybe i wanted to succeed and so i could take responsibility to take responsibility that i was so i could have to worry with my patients without contact with him .
my second mistake was worse .
and so that i sent her home home , i &apos;m going to make a quiet voice i &apos;m trying to say , &quot; goldman , no good idea . don &apos;t do it . &quot;
and i really didn &apos;t really have a very fehlte that i was asking the nurse , which was the nurse , she was taking care of the nurse , &quot; do you think it &apos;s okay when you go home ? &quot;
and the nurse thought about it , and she said , in faktischer , i think , i think it will go all right .
i remember it was yesterday .
so i unterzeichnete the entlassungspapiere and an krankenwagen and rettungsassistenten and brought them home .
and i went back to work .
the rest of the day , i had this nagende feeling in my stomach .
but i continued to work .
and at the end of the day i grabbed my stuff , i got the hospital , and i went to the parking lot to drive the car home , and i did something that i didn &apos;t do .
i went out of the notfallabteilung on my way home .
and there &apos;s another nurse , not the sister who had seen the wife printer , but one other three words , and these three words fear the most notfallärzte i know .
other medical medical medical fear , but the most notfallmedizin is especially because we just see the patients so so .
the three words say , &quot; do you remember ?
&quot; do you remember the patient that you &apos;re going to be in your home ? &quot;
she asked the nurse .
&quot; so she &apos;s back , &quot; she said in this particular tonlage .
so she was back .
she was back and die .
about one hour after she had at home , after i sent her home , and the family called the 911 , and they brought them back to the notfallstation with a blood pressure of 50 , that &apos;s a dangerous schockzustand .
she was barely atmete , and she was blue .
the notfallpersonal is all the strands of all the strands .
they gave her blutdruckerhöher .
they schlossen them to the beatmungsmaschine .
i was shocked and to the inner zerrüttet .
and i went through this achterbahn because she came to the intensivstation for the intensive care ward , and i hoped that she was going to recover .
and after two , three days , it realized she would never be again .
she didn &apos;t have a behandelbaren gehirnschaden .
her family gathered together .
and over the course of the next eight or nine days , they made the geschehenen .
and the day of neuten , they liesen them -- wife printer , a woman , a mother and grandmother .
you say you never forget the names of those .
and this was the first time i learned this .
and the next weeks i did , i was making a lot of my vorwürfe , and i found myself the most complex shame that exists in our medical culture -- i felt alone , isoliert , not the kind of healthy shame that you feel because you can &apos;t talk to the colleagues about it .
you know all the healthy shame , if you give a secret of the best friend , even though this one is auf , and you get caught and you get a very bad friend , and i &apos;m going to get a terrible discussion , but you can &apos;t get a terrible conversation , and you can &apos;t make such a mistake .
if you &apos;re doing wiedergutmachung and never make the mistake again .
this is the kind of lehrreicher shame .
the food that i &apos;m talking about is the ones that makes you sick in the heart .
it &apos;s one that tells you that doesn &apos;t mean what you &apos;re doing bad , but you &apos;re bad .
and that was what i felt .
and it wasn &apos;t on my oberarztes , he was very dear .
he talked about the family , and i &apos;m sure he glättete the wogen and sure i wouldn &apos;t be going to be sued .
but i asked myself to ask these questions .
why did i not ask the oberarzt ? why did i go home ?
and then in my worst moments , how could i make such a stupid mistake ?
why did i have gone into medicine ?
but it &apos;s slow , but it &apos;s certainly .
i started feeling better .
and then on a bewölkten day , there was a hole in the clouds , and the sun came out , and i would say i could feel better again .
and i was , i was , if i was going to double my efforts to perfection and never again , to make a mistake that the voice could be verstummen .
and she did .
and i continued to work .
and then it happened .
two years later , i had service in the notfallstation hospital north of toronto , and i begutachtete a 25 year-old man with gereiztem rachen .
it was a lot of los and i &apos;m in a hurry .
he always showed up here .
i looked at the rachen , and it was a little bit pink .
and i gave him a verschreibung for penicillin and sent it .
and yet , when he went out of the door , he showed his rachen .
two days later , i came to my next notfalldienst , and my chefärztin asked me to talk to their office .
and she said the three words : do you remember ?
&quot; do you remember the patients with the gereizten ? &quot;
it turned out that he was a streptokokken-infektion .
he had a potentially lebensgefährliche disease called epiglottitis .
you can google , but it &apos;s not an infection from the rachens , it &apos;s the upper atemwege and cause the verschluss of the atemwege .
and luckily he died .
he got intravenöse antibotica and erholte a couple of days later .
and i went through the same tortur of schande and selbstzweifel , felt , and went to work on the work until again and again and again .
in a notfallschicht , i &apos;ve missed two times a blinddarmentzündung .
there &apos;s a lot of things that you have heard about that , especially if you think that you &apos;re working in a hospital , that only 14 patients had a night .
in both cases , i didn &apos;t send them home , and there were no mängel in her treatment .
i thought i &apos;d had a thought of nierensteine .
i ordnete the röntgen of the kidneys , when this was without befund , my colleague in the patient patient , in the patient , was stuck with a verhärtung in the lower right sector , and called the operateure .
the other had a strong diarrhea .
i ordnete fluide to rehydrieren him and asked my colleagues to too begutachten him .
and that did , and when he was a verhärtung in the right lower sector , he called the operateure .
in both cases , operierte , and they were doing well .
both cases of nagten , i &apos;m fraßen .
and i would be happy to say that my worst errors was only in the first five years , which is a lot of my colleagues , but total nonsense .
some of my favorite stories happened in the last five years .
by themselves , beschämt and without support .
here &apos;s the problem : if i can &apos;t close with my mistakes and talk about you , if i &apos;m the silent voice , which tells me what really did not happen , how can i share it with my colleague ?
how can i teach them my mistakes , so they don &apos;t commit the same ?
if i had a room -- like now , i &apos;m not thinking what you think about me .
when did you hear the last time from somebody who was talking about fehlschlag about fehlschlag talking about fehlschlag ?
oh yes , you go to a cocktail party , and you might hear about any other doctor , but you don &apos;t hear somebody talking about your mistakes .
if i had to go into a room with colleagues and ask your immediate support , and i started to tell you what i just told you , i would not probably have the end of the second story before you really get unangenehm , you would change a joke , you would change the subject and forget the rest .
and actually , if i knew , or my colleagues , that a orthopäde in my hospital would be taken the wrong leg , i believe i had trouble looking at the eyes .
that &apos;s the system that we live in .
it &apos;s a completely verleugnung of mistakes .
it &apos;s a system where there are two basic positions -- the ones who make mistakes and the ones that don &apos;t do it , and those who are einschränkt and the ohne , which is with bad outcomes and the good results .
it &apos;s almost a ideologische reaction like the antibodies that attack a human .
and there is the idea that if we make the ones that make mistakes out of medicine , that we have a secure system .
but there are two problems .
in my mind 20 years of medical medical and journalism , i made a personal medical study about medical errors and wrong treatments for the things that i could do for a first article that i &apos;m going to star for the toronto of the toronto , &quot; white coat , black way . &quot;
and what i learned is that mistakes are absolutely unumgänglich .
we &apos;re working in a system that &apos;s happening in a system that is happening in every day , which is a false falsche or wrong with the krankenhausinfektionen , and always more and more and more and more and dead .
in this state , they die , in fact , a 24.000 kanadier of umgänglichen errors .
in the united states , the institute of medicine was beziffert in 100,000 .
both are strong untertreibungen , because we don &apos;t look at the problem as we should .
and it &apos;s the crux .
in a krankenhaussystem where medical knowledge has doubled , every two to three years , we can &apos;t keep up .
schlafmangel is ubiquitous .
we can &apos;t get rid of it .
we have a cognitive error , so that we can take a perfect amount of information for a patient with pain .
then i take the same patient with brustschmerz , mache it , and geschwätzig , and give a slightly alkoholisierten breath , and suddenly the story of durchsetzt durchsetzt .
i don &apos;t take the same process .
i &apos;m not a robot ; i don &apos;t always do things .
and my patients are not cars ; they don &apos;t tell me their symptoms in the same way .
all of these things , all the main ones are inevitable .
so , if you take the system , as i was taught it , and all the fehlerbehafteten gesundheitsexperten are aussortiert , then no one is left left .
and you know the leier about people who are not going to talk about their worst cases ?
in my show , white coat , black style , i would say , &quot; i would say to everyone from the rettungsassistenten to the chefarzt der , &quot; i would say to everyone from the rettungsassistenten to the kardiologen , &quot; that &apos;s my worst mistake , blah , blah , blah , blah , &quot; what is with her ? &quot; and then i &apos;m going to show
and then your pupillen , you &apos;re hit on your head , then you look down and it &apos;s hard to go and start telling your stories .
they want to tell their stories . they want to share their stories .
they want to be able to say , &quot; look , don &apos;t make the same mistakes i &apos;m going to do . &quot;
what you need is an environment that you can put in it .
what you need is a new medical culture .
and it starts with a doctor .
the newly traditional doctor is a human being , knows to be akzeptiert , to make it wrong , but he puts everything from you to learn so that it can be passed on .
they share their experience with others .
it supports when others are talking about their mistakes .
and she shows others &apos; mistakes , not for bloßzustellen , but in a liebevollen , supportive way that everybody can benefit .
and she works in a medical culture that recognizes that people will fill the system with life , and when that is , people are also making mistakes of time .
so that the system is developed to create the backups that make people inevitable and it also makes a sense of creating and to create the ways that everyone who &apos;s watching health care , and actually can respond to things that are the potential error and that makes a fehler and that makes for people like me who are wrong and for the begradigung of those rewards .
my name is brian goldman .
i &apos;m a new definierte doctor .
i &apos;m a human being . i make mistakes .
i &apos;m a bedaure , but i &apos;m trying to learn best possible to learn to pass it .
i don &apos;t know what they &apos;re holding me , but i can live with it .
let me close with three of my own words : i remember i remember .
i &apos;m going to talk about a tiny , little idea .
it &apos;s about veränderbare normwerte .
and because you can explain this idea in a minute , i &apos;ll tell you three stories before you use time .
the first story is about charles darwin , one of my heroes .
you know , you know , he was 1835 .
you might think he &apos;s going to kill finken , but that &apos;s not true .
it &apos;s actually collected fish .
he described one of them as a very common .
it was a zackenbarsch .
until the &apos; 80s , it was gefischt in a great style .
now he &apos;s on the red list of gefährdeter species .
this story , we &apos;ve heard a lot of times from the galapagos or other places , it &apos;s not very special .
yet , we still get to the galapagos .
we still think they were originally .
the broschüren is still described as a unberührt .
what &apos;s happening here ?
the second story is a different concept , which is a different concept , which is clear .
because i experienced it when i was a lagune in a 1971 .
i went there , because i grew up in europe and i wanted to work in africa later .
i thought i could integrate it .
and i got a bad sonnenbrand and i felt that i wasn &apos;t really there .
it was my first sonnenbrand .
and you can see , the lagune of palmen and some of the mangroven were umsäumt .
there were buntbarsche of about 20 inches , schwarzkinnmaulbrüter , a unterart of the buntbarsche .
the fischgründe of these buntbarsche were very ertragreich , and the fishermen were living good at that and they were living in ghana in ghana .
and i got to get back to the zurückkehrte , and i got to get there , 27 years later , the fish that had to get to half of its size .
and they measure it five inches of them .
they were genetically erdrückt .
they were still fish .
people were still happy .
and the fish also had the fortune to be there .
so it &apos;s not changed , and yet everything has changed .
my third little story told me about my mittäterschaft in the introduction of schleppnetzfischerei in asia asia .
in the &apos; 70s , more early in the &apos; 60s -- förderte europe a lot of entwicklungsprojekte .
fischförderung , the industriellen of the industriellen , the industrial fishing , the industrial fishing , is called mutiara 4. .
i went along and we did all of the southern southern ocean ocean and especially in the javasee .
we didn &apos;t have words for what we started .
i know that it was the reason of the ocean .
90 percent of our fangs were schwämme , other animals that are connected to the cause .
the biggest part of the fish , the little dots there on the trümmern , the trümmerhaufen , were korallenriff-fische .
basically the bottom of the sea was deck , and then it was zurückgeworfen .
these images are extraordinary because the transition goes very fast .
within a year , you will take a survey , and then you start with the commercial fishing .
the reason is going to change . it &apos;s -- in this case -- a hard reason or weichen coral &apos;s mist .
this is a dead turtle .
they were not eating , they threw them away because they were dead .
once we started a living .
she wasn &apos;t yet .
then they wanted to kill them , because they could eat them .
in fact , this mountain of the trümmern are actually angesammelt by fishermen when they &apos;re driving in areas where they &apos;re never going to be in the age of the fish .
it won &apos;t be documented .
we change the world , but we don &apos;t remember it .
we adapt our normwerte of the new level , and we don &apos;t call ourselves in memory , which was there .
if you &apos;re verallgemeinert , what happens is .
in the y-axis , there are some good things : biodiversity , the number of orca , the green in your country , the wasservorrat .
it &apos;s changing the time . it changes because people are all of natural actions .
every generation looks at the images that they take at the beginning of their conscious life , as standard and will be able to get it all from that .
the difference is going to be seen as a loss .
but they don &apos;t take the previous losses .
it can give a sequence of changes .
and at the end , they just want to get the most erbärmlichen remains .
that &apos;s what &apos;s actually weitestgehend our goal .
we want to get things that are disappeared , or things that are not the way they were .
you might think that the problem was in betraf , which is certainly when they were living in räuberischen societies , and they were only aware of a few generations that they had done .
because obviously , an animal that &apos;s going to have a very common , first before it &apos;s going to happen .
so you don &apos;t lose any very common animals .
you &apos;re always losing rare animals .
and that &apos;s why it &apos;s not seen as a great loss .
and at the time , we focus on the big animals and the ocean , these are the big fish .
they &apos;re going to be less likely because we &apos;re going to start them .
and there &apos;s a little bit of fish with the time , and we think that &apos;s the normwert .
the question is , why people accept that .
now , because you don &apos;t know that it was different .
of course , many people , scientists , confirm that it was really different .
you will tell it , because the evidence you &apos;re in a previous form is not as you like to make the evidence .
so , for example , there &apos;s an anecdote that the report of a kapitäns project that was watching large fischvorkommen in this region , or not fischereiwissenschaftlern , usually not gewertet because it &apos;s not scientific .
so we have the situation that people don &apos;t know the past , even though we live in the gebildeten societies because they don &apos;t trust the sources of the past .
this shows the enormous amount of role that a marine reserve can play .
because we &apos;re essentially going back to the past , basically , the past .
we &apos;re making the past the past that people can &apos;t understand , because the normwerte changes , and they &apos;re very low .
so the people who see a marine marine reserve and benefit from the insight that it allows for their normwerte to be zurücksetzen .
what about the people who don &apos;t possibly can because they have no access -- the people in the middle west for example ?
and here , i think , art and the movie maybe fill the gap , and also simulations .
this is the simulation of the bay bay .
long time there was grauwale -- 500 years ago .
and the farbtöne and -schattierungen may remind you in the &quot; avatar . &quot;
if you think about &quot; avatar , &quot; if you think about why people have been touched by this -- except by pocahontas-geschichte , why were they touched by the bilderwelt ?
because it &apos;s a little bit of wachruft that went out of a way .
so my empfehlung , the only one i &apos;m going to give , is to cameron cameron by turning &quot; avatar ii . &quot;
thank you .
in the &apos; 80s , in the kommunistischen , you had to have a schreibmaschine that they were writing in the government .
they also had to be registrieren a piece of beispieltext from this schreibmaschine .
the reason for this is the government to track where a text was coming from .
and they found an article with falschem gedankengut , they could detect the creator of these thought .
and we couldn &apos;t understand the west , like anyone could do something like that , and how much that would be einschränken .
in our own countries , we would never do this .
but if you buy a new farblaserdrucker from the leading laserdruckerfabrikanten and a page print , this page has bright yellow flecke on every page , in a pattern that &apos;s clearly lässt the site on you and the printer .
this is what happens today .
and it doesn &apos;t seem to be a aufzuregen .
and this was an example of what our own governments are the technology for us , the citizens of the citizens .
and this is one of the three hauptquellen of the existing online-problemen that today .
let &apos;s look at what really happens in the world : we can divide the attacks into categories .
we have three hauptgruppen .
there are online-kriminelle .
for example , this is mr. dimitry golubow from kiew in the ukraine .
and the motive of online-kriminellen are very easy to understand .
these people make money .
they use online-angriffe to make a lot of money , a huge amount of money .
there are several known cases of online-millionären , multimillionären that are made their money by attacks .
this is wladimir tsastsin from tartu in estonia .
this is alfred gonzalez .
stephen watt .
björn sundin .
this is matthew anderson , tariq al-daour and so on and so on .
these people have come up with wealth online , but they &apos;ve been allowed to have been acquired it by using trojaner to steal money from our bankkonten , while we &apos;re doing our online-banking , or also keylogger that have collected our kredikarteninformationen from the input on the keyboard while we &apos;re going to buy a infected computer online .
the u.s. intelligence intelligence fror two months ago , the swiss bank account from mr. sam jain , and on this account , 14,9 million dollars when it was frozen .
mr. jain itself is on freiem feet , which is unknown .
and i claim that it &apos;s more likely to be more likely to be victims of a online-verbrechens than a verbrechens in the real world .
and it &apos;s very obvious that this is going to be even worse .
the future is most of the crime that will happen online .
the second largest angreifergruppe we can observe today is not a geld of money .
they &apos;re a little motivated in something else -- the protest , or , in a opinion , or their audience .
groups like anonymous are more and more than anonymous , and they have become a hauptspieler on the field of online-angriffe .
so these are the three hauptangriffsgruppen : criminals who are doing the money , hacktivisten , like anonymous , who are doing their resistance , but the last group is nations , governments that are running the attacks .
there are cases of what we &apos;re doing .
it shows a lot of what happens when governments are going to attack their own citizens .
diginotar is a vollmachtszertifikat from the netherlands -- or it was that .
and it had to be insolvenz in the last fall , because diginotar was a gehackt .
someone was eingebrochen , and had a gründlich , a very gründlich .
and last week , in a meeting with dutch regierungsvertretern , i asked one of the senior leitenden of this group , whether he was possible for possible that because of the diginotar-hacks people had died .
and his answer was yes .
now , how do people die in a row of such a remote plan ?
diginotar is a zertifizierungsstelle .
they sell zertifikate .
what do you do with zertifikaten ?
now , a certificate you need to do , if you have a website with https service , for example , you can use it .
now we &apos;re all using , or many of us , or one of us , gmail or one of your competitors , but these services are especially available in totalitären states like iran , where the dissidenten foreign practices are using the gmail , because they know that they can trust more than local anbietern , so that local government cannot herumschnüffeln into their conversation .
but you can , if you &apos;re in a foreign foreign foreign foreign foreign foreign foreign .
zertifizierungsbehörde hacken and fake zertifikate .
and this is what happens in the case of diginotar .
what about the arab spring and the things that happen in egypt for example ?
well , in egypt , the aufständischen in april , in april , the headquarters in the egyptian is the headquarters called the egyptian geheimpolizei , and they found a lot of records .
in this records , a folder called &quot; finfisher . &quot;
and in this folder , there &apos;s been a notizen company that the egyptian government sold for some programs to do -- in very large frame -- to be able to capture any communication for egyptian citizens .
they were selling this program for 280.000 dollars to the egyptian government .
the firmenhauptquartier is right here .
so western governments , governments governments , are versorgen governments with hilfsmitteln , so that they can run against their own citizens .
but western governments are helping themselves .
for example , in germany , just a few weeks ago , called the sogenannte staatstrojaner , this was a trojaner that was used by german regierungsvertretern to bespitzeln their own citizens .
if you &apos;re going to be verdächtigt in a kriminalfall , you &apos;ll be able to angezapft your phone with a lot of security .
but today we &apos;re far beyond that .
they tap into their connection .
they use tools to bespielen their computer with a trojaner that allows them to monitor their entire communication , their online-diskussionen abzuhören , collecting their passwörter .
so if we keep thinking about these things , the obvious answer would be , &quot; ok , that sounds bad , but it doesn &apos;t really matter because i &apos;m a braver citizen .
i don &apos;t have to worry about it .
i have nothing to hide . &quot;
and this argument doesn &apos;t make sense .
privacy has to be .
privacy is not about debate .
it &apos;s not a choice between privacy and safety .
it &apos;s a choice between freedom and control .
and while we &apos;re today , in 2011 , our governments like trust , but every right that we &apos;re giving , for always , is abgegeben .
and trust , we trust a government &apos;s government , a government that we might have in 50 years .
these are the questions that we have to deal with the next 50 years .
it may seem strange to you , but i &apos;m a big fan of betonblocksteinen .
the first betonblocksteine were produced and entstammten of a simple idea : module module with a little bit that fit in .
betonbausteine became very quickly the meistgenutzte baueinheit in the world .
they put us into the position to build things that were bigger than we , buildings , bridges , a rock after the other .
essentially , the betonbaustein was made for the building of our time .
a hundred years later , in 1947 , lego came out with this .
it was &quot; automatically verbindende rock . &quot;
and within a few years , lego , the lego , they go into every household .
it &apos;s estimated that over 400 billion stones were produced -- or 75 stones for every person on this planet .
you don &apos;t have to be an engineer to create nice houses , beautiful bridges or beautiful buildings .
lego made it possible for everyone .
and lego basically has the betonbaustein , the building block of the world , and it made a sense of a building block for our imagination .
in the meantime , in the same year , at the bell labs , the next revolution announced , the next thing .
the transistor was a small plastikeinheit that was given us from a world of statischen , aufeinandergestapelten building blocks in the world where it was interactive .
as the betonblock , the transistor allows us to build much more bigger , more complex , more complex , a rock after the other .
but there &apos;s a hauptunterschied : the transistor was only for experts .
i personally don &apos;t accept that the building of our time is being reserviert for experts , and therefore i decided to change that .
i was at the media lab eight years ago , and i started exploring this idea of how to put the power of engineers to put in the hand of artists and designers .
a few years ago , i started developing littlebits .
so let me show you how they work .
littlebits are electronic module that have specific function .
they &apos;re vorgefertigt , light , sound , motor and sensor .
and the best part about it is that they connect with magnets together .
you can &apos;t put them wrong .
the stones are farbcodiert .
green is a copy , blue is electricity , pink is input and orange is cables .
so , all you have to do is , you know , a blue blue and a green one , and you can build up very rapidly bigger kreislaufe .
you add a blue blue one to a green , and you can make light .
you can put a switch between and you can make a little dimmer .
take the switch out to a pulsmodul , which is here , and you &apos;re making a little blinker .
add these buzzer to an extra effect , and they made a lärmmaschine .
i &apos;m going to stop that .
and beyond the simple play , it &apos;s actually littlebits pretty powerful .
instead of coding , verdrahten or löten , they allow you to program simple , intuitive gestures .
so to slow down the little , or slow down , just turn it on this button and it makes the pulse faster or slow .
the idea behind the littlebits is that it &apos;s a growing library .
we want to bring every single interaction in the world in a gebrauchsfertigen rock .
lights , sound , solarelemente , motors -- all should be available .
we &apos;ve spread littlebits to children and they can see them .
and it was an incredible experience .
the most beautiful thing is , how do you start to understand the electronics that you &apos;re in the world and you don &apos;t learn to school .
like a nachtlicht , or why the doors of the aufzugs offenbleiben , or how an ipod responds to touch .
we also brought littlebits to designschulen .
so , for example , we had designer with no experience of any experience in electronic things that began to play with littlebits as materials .
here we see , with filz , paper and water bottles , like geordie ...
we have taken littlebits , a couple of weeks ago , and gave them some designers that had no technical experience -- just box , wood and paper -- and they said , &quot; power . &quot;
here &apos;s an example of a project that they did , a bewegungsgesteuerte konfetti-kanone .
but wait , this is really my lieblings-projekt .
it &apos;s a hummer of play-doh that &apos;s afraid of the darkness .
for these nicht-ingenieure , littlebits became another material , electronics was just another material .
and we want to make this material available for everyone .
so littlebits open source .
you can go to the website , you download all the designvorlagen and make it yourself .
we want the world of the creator , the inventor , the mitwirkenden , because this world we live in , this interactive world , we heard .
so , you go and start to invent .
thank you .
