you know , one of the big vernügen in travel and one of the pleasure in the ethnographischen research is to live with people who can remember the old days , and the past time , the past , touch , they can schmecken them on the rain , schmecken them into the bitteren leaves of the plants .
simply , the way that jaguar-schamanen is still beyond the milky way , or the meaning of the &apos; ältesten of the inuit , or that in the himalayas , the buddhist offenbarung the buddhisten , and that &apos;s the idea that the world we live in life is not , in absolute sense , but as a model of reality , as a result of a group of certain
and of course , we share the same anpassungsnotwendigkeiten .
we &apos;re all born . we bring children to the world .
we went through initiationsrituale .
we have to move away from the unaufhaltsamen distance by death , and so we should not surprise that we all sing , dance and art .
but what &apos;s interesting is the unique tonfall of the liedes , the rhythm of dance in each culture .
it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s the penan of the borneo , or the voodoo-akolythen in haiti , or the warrior in the kaisut-wüste of nordkenia , the curanderos in the anden , or an karawanserei in the middle of the sahara . this is the colleague i traveled to a month in the desert , or even a yak-hirte on the hanging of the qomolangma , everest ,
all these people teach us that there are other other people , other ways of thinking other ways of guidance on earth .
and that &apos;s an idea that , if you think about it , you can only meet a hope .
together , the unzähligen cultures form a web of spirituellem and kulturellem life that umhüllt earth and for the sake of the earth is as important to the erde that you know as a biosphere .
you can imagine this cultural lebensnetz as a ethnosphäre , ethnosphäre , as the gesamtsumme of all the thoughts and dreams , myths and intuitionen , inspirationen and intuitionen that were defined by the human imagination since the beginning of consciousness .
the ethnosphäre is the great legacy of humankind .
it &apos;s the symbol of what we are and what we are doing as an amazing species of species .
and just like the biosphere was abgetragen , this was what happened with the ethnosphäre -- just even more than even more than even more than even more than even more than even more than even more than even more than even more than even more than even more than even more than even more than even more than even more than even more than even more than even more
no biologist would say 50 percent or more of all species are just about to go on to extinction , because it &apos;s just not true , and yet , this -- the apokalyptischste szenarium in the field of biological diversity -- is almost hardly what we know as optimistischstes szenarium in the field of cultural diversity .
and the crucial thing for this is to be an extinction .
as any of you in this room , everyone was born on earth , 6,000 languages .
now , a language is not just the sum of the vokabulars , or a series of grammatikregeln .
a language is expression of the human mind .
it &apos;s a means that the soul of a particular culture finds access to the material world .
every language is like a altbestehender forest of the mind , a turning point , a thought , an ecosystem spiritual possibilities .
and from those 6,000 languages , today , while we &apos;re sitting here in monterey , half the time is geflüstert .
they &apos;re not taught a lot of the time , which means , if nothing is done , they &apos;re actually already dead .
what could be more sustainable than being more einsamer , one of the last your people who speak to your language , not have a way to have a chance to give the wisdom of the ancestors , or expect the hope to expect children ?
and yet , this horrible fate of fact , in fact , someone &apos;s going to get someone anywhere on earth , about every two weeks , because every two weeks , an elderly man dies and taking the last silben of a old language to the grave .
and i know some of you are saying , &quot; is it not better like this ? &quot; wouldn &apos;t the world be a better place if we all would speak a language ? &quot; and i say , &quot; well , let &apos;s be a yoruba . let them be kantonesisch .
let &apos;s be kogi . &quot;
and then you would suddenly see what it would be like if you could not speak your own language .
so i &apos;d like to take you a bit of a trip through the ethnosphäre , a short trip through the ethnosphäre , to try to understand what &apos;s actually lost .
now there are some of us who forget that when i say &quot; different possibilities of being , &quot; really different possibilities of being .
take this kid in the northwest of the amazon , the people who anakonda the people , they believe they were mythologisch the milchfluss from the east in the belly of saint snakes .
this is a people which is not very much more different between the color and the green , because the himmelszelt of the forest that people depend on is gleichgestellt .
they have a very strange language and a heiratsvorschrift called the linguistic exogamie , and you have to get married to get somebody who &apos;s speaking a different language .
all of these are wurzelt in the mythologischen past . the eigenartige of these big houses , where there &apos;s six or seven languages , and they &apos;re talked to six or seven languages , but you never hear somebody who learns a language .
they just hear and start speaking .
or , one of the most fascinating tribes i &apos;ve ever lived , the waorani of the nordosten of the ecuador , a remarkable people that was the first time to get peaceful in peaceful .
in 1957 , five missionare were trying to get contact and made a schwerwiegenden error .
they warfen glänzende photos from the air , which we would rate as a friendly act of , and then forgot that these people in their lives had never seen a little more zweidimensionales .
they took these photographs from the forest floor to see the face or the character , and they didn &apos;t find anything and schlussfolgerten that this was a business of the devil and then killed the five missionare with the speer .
but the waorani were not only killing the außenstehende .
they &apos;re durchbohrten each other .
54 percent of the deaths were done by durchbohrungen .
we were tracking the geneaologie eight generations and we found two cases of a natural death , and when we ausfragten people with a little bit about it , they gave that one of the people who had become so old that he died because of his age , and we killed him with the speer .
but at the same time , they had a clear knowledge of the forest that was amazing .
their predators could smell the urine of a animal from 40 steps and determine what the animal was that was .
in the early years , i got an really astonishing task when i asked my professor at harvard , whether i was interested in haiti and infiltrieren the secret societies that were the foundation of duvalier and tonton and the poison that was used to make sure .
so to give a sense to this point of view , i had to know something about this remarkable belief of the vodoun , and voodoo is no kult of black magic .
the contrary , it &apos;s a complex metaphysische worldview .
it &apos;s interesting .
if i asked you to be able to see the big world , what would you say ?
christianity , islam , buddhismus , judaismus , whatever .
a continent is always left because the guess is that there &apos;s no religious belief in sub-saharan africa , of course , and of course there &apos;s one and voodoo , and it &apos;s just the überbleibsel of this very , very profound religious thought , which is the tragic of the tragischen of the sklavereizeit .
but what &apos;s interesting about this is this living relationship between the living and the dead .
the living one is the spirits .
the spirit of the spirit can be heraufbeschwört from under the big water , respond to the rhythm of dance to verdrängen the soul of living , so that the akolyth for a brief light moment is going to be god .
deshab , who like to say , &quot; her white is going to church and talk about god .
we dance in the temple and we become god . &quot;
and because you &apos;re obsessed , you &apos;re going to take off of the mind . how can you be damage to you ?
you see these amazing demonstrations : voodoo-akolythen in a trancezustand , glühende coal without burning , an amazing veranschaulichung of the ability of the mind that it will be aushält , if it &apos;s versetzt in a state of extreme arousal .
now , of all the people i met were the kogi kogi kogi de de marta de de in nordkolumbien , the most extraordinary .
the nachkommen civilization , which is bevölkerten the karibische küstenebene of columbia and in a consequence of the pacific , moving into a isoliertes of a vulkanisches massive , which is aufsteigt over the karibischen küstenebene .
in a blutbefleckten continent , these people were the only ones that were never been erobert by the spaniern .
until the day , it &apos;s been governed by a ritual priesterschaft , which is very extraordinary to be a professional part .
the young akolythen are separated from their families and vier from their families at the age of three and four years in a schattenhaften world of finsternis , zwei at the base of the glacier &apos;s fuße , two periods of the time nine years , selected by the nine months of pregnancy that she spent in the lap of her mother &apos;s mother , and she &apos;s a metamorphorisch
and during that whole time , they &apos;re going to be culturally culturally into the values of their society , values that maintain the claim that their prayers , and their prayers , the cosmic ones -- or we could say the environmental thing .
and at the end of this amazing initiation , you &apos;ll actually take a little bit out of your life , and at the age of 18 , and in this kristallklaren moment of the first light , when the sun begins to the hänge of the amazing beautiful landscape , all you &apos;ve learned in the abstract of amazing glory , and the priest and says , &quot; look
it &apos;s so wonderful . you need to protect it . &quot;
they call the older brothers and they say that we are the younger brothers , who are responsible for the destruction of the world .
now this level of intuition is very important .
whenever we think about the eingeborene and landscape , we &apos;re either beschwören and herauf the old gerücht of the noblen wild wilden , which is a rassistischer thought , or the other thing , and say , these people are more connected to nature than we are .
so , eingeborene are neither sentimental , nor they &apos;re going to be geschwächt by the nostalgie .
it doesn &apos;t stay in the malariaverseuchten sümpfen of asmat or the cold winds of tibet , but they still have a geheimnisvollen nimbus of the earth , which doesn &apos;t have to be based on the idea , to be aware of it , but on a far more subtileren intuition , the idea that the earth is only exists in , because they &apos;re hineingeatmet into the human
well , what does that mean ?
it means that a little kid in the anden that believe that the mountain is a apu-geist , which is your destiny , will be a whole different person , and have a different relationship to this resource or this place , when a little kid in montana growing up , that a mountain is a pile of rocks that can be abgetragen .
whether it &apos;s a aufenthaltsort of a mind or a bunch of erz , it &apos;s irrelevant .
the interesting thing is the metaphor which defined the relationship between the individual and nature .
i grew up in the forests of britisch columbia and believed that these forests are there to be gerodet .
that made me to another person as my friends under the kwakiutl who believe that these forests of aufenthaltsort aufenthaltsort and the gebogenen himmelsschnabel and the kannibalischen spirits that live in the world &apos;s nordende , geister , geister them in their hamatsa-initiation .
now , when you start to think the idea that these cultures can create different reality , you can understand some of your extraordinary discoveries . like this plant here .
it &apos;s a photograph i took only last april of the amazon of the amazon .
this is ayahuasca , which many of you have heard , the most powerful psychoaktive präparat in the repertoire of the schamanen .
what &apos;s fascinating is it &apos;s not just the most important potential of this information , but it &apos;s really going to be made from two different sources , and it &apos;s going to really make these hölzerne liane , which is a series of betakarbolinen , harmin , harmolin , harmolin , leicht , birgt , and that kletterpflanze is sort of as if a blue trüber smoke puts
this plant contains some very strong tryptamine that are in the serotonin , dimethyltryptamin-5 and methoxydimethyltryptamin .
if you &apos;ve seen the yanomami , you &apos;ve seen this stuff , this substance that you create from various species , also , enthält enthält .
this is a powder that &apos;s like a gewehrlauf shot , gesäumt from barocken paintings and landing on a sea of electricity .
it &apos;s not going to be verzerrung of reality , but the resolution of reality .
i even have a professor , richard evan shultes , who was a man who has been eingeleitet the psychedelische ärea , who was the discovery of the magic mushrooms in mexico , and i said that you could not be able to put this tryptamine as a halluzinogen , because there &apos;s a moment where you feel the effects , you don &apos;t have to know what &apos;s a
but the thing about tryptaminen is that they can &apos;t be taken away from a oral , because of a human gut , natürlich enzyme enzym , denaturiert .
they can only be eingenommen with some other chemicals that are the mao denaturieren .
now what &apos;s fascinating is that the betakarboline that contain in the liane are mao-inhibitoren of the same way that &apos;s necessary to potenzieren the tryptamine .
how can these people out of a flora of 80.000 species of 80.000 plants , which are kombiniert , which , if , in this way , create a kind of biochemischer version , so the whole bigger is the sum of its parts ?
we use this great euphemismus , trying to make mistakes , which is meaningless .
but you ask the indians , you know , &quot; the plant speaks to us . &quot;
so , what does that mean ?
so , this tribe , the cofan , are 17 variations of ayahuasca , which they see all at large distance in the forest that seem like a kind of view .
and then you ask her how to take her taxonomie and say , &quot; i thought you understand something about plants .
i mean , you know nothing ? &quot; and i said , &quot; no . &quot;
so , it turns out that you &apos;re going to take each of the 17 variants in vollmond and you sing it into a different tonlage .
now , that doesn &apos;t get you a ph.d. at harvard , but it &apos;s much more interesting than i count it .
now , the problem- thing is that even those of us who have sympathy for the difficult situation of the native americans have seen as a orginiell and farbenfroh , but somehow to narrow the past , while the real world , the world .
so , the fact is that , in 300 years , in 300 years , in 300 years , it will not be a war or technical innovation , but rather than an era where we were in zugegen , and the massive destruction of the biological and cultural diversity on earth either active led and passive , and the problem is not the change .
all cultures have been involved in the dance with new lebenmöglichkeiten .
and the problem is not the technology .
the sioux-indianer stopped not being less of the sioux when they were bogen and pfeil tasks , when the american americans are not americans as the american horse and pferdewagen tasks .
not change and technology is bedrohen the integrity of the ethnosphäre . it &apos;s power . the ugly face of the rule .
and wherever you &apos;re still going to be untergang , you &apos;re going to be dynamic living peoples , whose existence are dynamisch forces , which is ungeheuerliche forces , from erkennbare forces , from a nomadenvolk of südostasien , and now , a volk of sarawak , von , where you can see , fast frachter in , which is ready to fill their schiffsräume with raw baumstämmen that
or if we go to the mountains of tibet , where i &apos;m doing a lot of research , you &apos;re going to see the ugly face of the political dominance .
you know , the genocide , the phyische extinction of people , is convicted of a general extinction , but the ethnozid , the destruction of the people &apos;s lives , not only verurteilt of people , but generally and vielerorts as part of a entwicklungsstrategie .
and you can &apos;t understand the suffering that you have not seen in the unterster plane .
i took a young colleagues of chengdu überland überland by südost-tibet to lhasa , and first when i came to the lhasa , i saw the face behind the statistics of which you hear . 6,000 sacred monumente , which were transformed into the schutt and asche , 1.2 million people killed during the cultural revolution .
the father of this young manns was identified as the followers of the panchen lama .
that meant that he was killed in the chinese invasion .
his uncle , floh , floh with her holiness in the diaspora that people brought into nepal .
his mother was locked in as a punishment for -- for the crimes of being wealthy .
he was geschmuggelt into prison at the age of two years to hide under their rockzipfel , because she couldn &apos;t live it .
the sister who did these tapfere did was put into a erziehungslager .
and one day , she came out of an armband armband and for that übertretung , she had to work for seven years in a tough prison camp .
suffering is tibets , but the erlösende spirit of people is a little bit more .
and at the end , we &apos;re really standing in front of a election . do we want to live in a monochromatischen world of monotonie , or in a polychromatischen world of diversity ?
margaret mead , the great anthropologin , before she died that , while we move towards a faden , gestaltlosen , generischen , we would not only see the entire range of human imagination to see a eingeengte mindset , but that we would wake up from a dream and forgotten that there was ever other possibilities .
and it &apos;s a demütigend to think that our species may have existed for over the last time .
the neolithische revolution that brought us agriculture , and we were in this moment the kult of the saatkorns unterwarf , the poetry of the priesterschaft ersetzte and hierarchy and hierarchie and überschuss and überschuss -- just 10,000 years ago .
the modern industrial world as we know it is barely 300 years old .
now , this shallow story doesn &apos;t tell me that we all have answers to the challenges we are facing in the next millennia .
if we ask these unzähligen weltkulturen after the meaning of the human , you respond to 10,000 different voices .
and in that song , we will be able to be the possibility of being , what we are : people with full conscious minds that are aware of the importance of that all humans and gardens have to be able to grow up to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to grow
here &apos;s a photograph i took off the northern end of the baffin-inseln , when i went to the narwhal-jagd and the mann , and this man , olaya , was told me a wonderful story of his grandfather .
the canadian government is not always very good with the inuit and during the 50iger years of the etablierung of our rule , they were forced to move to settlements .
the grandfather of this old man refused to go .
the family who had fear to live , he took all the guns and all the tools .
now you have to know that the inuit are not afraid of the cold , they used to use it to their advantage .
the gleitschienen of your schlitten were originally in karibu-haut , made in karibu-haut .
the grandfather &apos;s grandfather was not a fürchtete of the arctic night or the black storm .
he schlüpfte out outside , let his pants off seehundsfell and defäkierte his hand , and when the feces started to frieren , he shaped them into the form of a messers .
he sprühte the speichel on the side of the beach and it was fully frozen , and he was erstach a dog .
he enthäutete the dog and he improvisierte a geschirr , took the skeleton away and improvisierte a schlitten , spannte a dog and entschwand the eisschollen with the fäkalien-messer on the ground .
so you can &apos;t do anything .
and this is in many ways a symbol of resistance of the world &apos;s resistance and all the native around the world .
the canadian government gave the inuit in april of the inuit in 1999 , which is the complete control of the area that &apos;s bigger than california and texas .
it &apos;s our new country , and it &apos;s called nunavut .
it &apos;s an independent area . they &apos;re controlling all the mineralvorkommen .
an amazing example of how a nation , a state that can search for the wiedergutmachung and reach the wiedergutmachung .
and finally , i think it &apos;s pretty obvious , at least for those of us who &apos;ve traveled to those distant goals of the earth , to recognize that they &apos;re not even away at all .
they &apos;re the heimatländer of somebody .
it represent parts of the human imagination that are zurückreichen in past times , and for all of us , are the dreams of these children , like dreams of our own children in our own children .
what we &apos;re trying to do at national geographic , we &apos;re going to do believe that politicians never do anything .
we believe that polemik -- we believe that polemik is not compelling , but we believe that storytelling can change the world , and therefore we &apos;re probably the best institution for storytelling in the world . our website is 35 millionen of hits every month .
the other nations are sending our fernsehkanal .
our magazines are read by millions .
and we do a series of travel into the ethnosphäre , which we take our audience to places from such cultural wonder that it &apos;s werden. from the gesehenen geblendet and hopefully , will be one after the other offenbarung of anthropology , that that world has earned to exist in different ways that we can find a lebensmöglichkeit in a truly multikulturellen world where the wisdom of all humans
thank you .
so , as soon as you can , i &apos;m going to show you the basic work , a new technology that we have at the same time , which is a part of a übernahme , which is seadragon . and it &apos;s an environment where you can either local or entfernt from vast amounts of visual data .
we see a lot of gigabytes of digital photographs here that you can nahtlos and continuously heranholen , schwenken , in a way .
and it doesn &apos;t matter how many information we look at how large these collections are or how large the images are .
most of you are digital images of a camera , but this is , for example , a scan of the kongressbibliothek and it &apos;s in a field of 300 megapixeln .
it doesn &apos;t make a difference because the only thing that can be the power of a system like this is the number of pixeln on your screen on every moment . it also has a very flexible architecture .
this is a whole book , an example of nichtbild-daten .
this is bleak house from dickens . every spalte is a chapter .
to prove that it really is about a text and not about a picture , we can do something like this to really show that this is a real representation of the texts and no picture .
maybe this is an artificial way to read a e-buch .
i wouldn &apos;t recommend it .
this is a realistischerer case . this is a copy of the guardian .
every big picture is the beginning of a abschnitts .
and that &apos;s really the pleasure and the good experience of reading a real papierausgabe or a newspaper , which is a kind of a kind of medium with a number of scales .
we also did something about the corner of this particular copy of the guardian .
we &apos;ve designed a red ad with very high resolution that &apos;s much higher than a regular display , and we added more content .
if you want to see the functions of this car , you can see it here .
or other models , or even technical spezifikationen .
and this really reaches these ideas , these constraints for the available place to the screen .
we hope that this is not going to be a pop-ups and other nonsense -- that should not be necessary .
now , of course , the mapping is one of the really obvious applications for a technology like this .
and i don &apos;t really want to spend a lot of time , except to say that we &apos;re going to be contributing in this area .
but these are all roads in the u.s.
übereinandergelagert up at the top of nasa &apos;s erdräumlichen .
now let &apos;s get a little bit out of it .
this is actually live on the internet . you can nachprüfen it .
this is a project called photosynth , which is really connecting two different technologies together .
one is seadragon , and the other is a very good research on computervision , which snavely by noah snavely , a universitätsstudenten university university at the university of steve seitz at the uw of the uw .
and rick szeliski was done by microsoft research . a very good collaboration .
so this is live on the internet . it &apos;s powered by seadragon .
you can see that , if we create these kinds of views , where we can penetrate through images and make this experience of the mehrfachen .
but the spatial orientation of the images is actually what matters .
the computervision-algorithmen have these images together with this picture , which is the real space that these images made of grassi lakes in the canadian rockies , and you see here on the kanadischen slides , or panoramischer bildverarbeitung , and these things were all gesetzt in relation to each other .
i don &apos;t know exactly if i have time to show you other environments .
there are some of the räumlicher ones .
i would like to go straight one of the originalen datensätze of noah , and this is from a early prototype of photosynth that we first worked in summer to show you what i think it &apos;s really the pointe behind this technology , which is photosynth-technologie , and this is not necessarily so obvious when you look at the environments that we have on the website .
we had to worry about the lawyers and so on .
this is a rekonstruktion of the cathedral of the kathedrale of flickr , just to put it in the computer with images of flickr . just give you just a notre lady in flickr , and you &apos;ll get pictures of men in t-shirts and on the universitätsgelände , and on the universitätsgelände , and each of this orange kegel is a picture that was discovered as a model of
so this is all flickr-bilder , and they all are in relation to each other .
and we can navigate in this very simple way .
you know , i never thought i &apos;m going to work at microsoft .
i &apos;m very grateful for the empfang here .
i suspect you can see that there are many different types of cameras : everything is the handy-kamera to professional slrs , a fairly large number of you who are zusammengeflickt in this environment .
and if possible , i &apos;ll find some of the weird ones .
many of them are covered by faces , and so on .
somewhere here are a bunch of photographs -- here they are .
this is actually a poster of the notre lady that was recorded right .
we can switch from the poster to a physical view of that environment .
the point is that we can do things with the social environment , and it &apos;s going to be collected from all -- from the whole collective memory of what &apos;s visual from the earth -- and everything &apos;s going to be connected .
all of these photos are connected to each other , and it &apos;s something that &apos;s bigger than the sum of the parts .
they get a model that comes out of the earth .
look at this as the sequel of the work of stephen lawlers on earth earth .
and that &apos;s something that &apos;s grown through the complexity that people use , and it &apos;s going to be bigger for the user to use .
their own photos are going to be beschildert with a metadaten person who has been involved .
when someone has done and mitteilt , who you all are , and you know , who you all are , my photo of the notre dame-kathedrale of all of this data , and i can use it as a origin to come into this room , into these metaverse , taking photos of other people and therefore making a kind of übergreifender modaler of other anbietern .
and of course , the vast , nebenprodukt , are the vast rich of all interesting part of the earth that &apos;s not just been given by überflüge or satellite images and so on , but by collective memory .
thank you .
do i understand it right ? your software allows you to have a specific time , within the next few years , all the images that are used in the world in the world , in principle ?
yes . she doesn &apos;t do anything else .
if you want to create a hyperlinks between the images .
and she does this because of the content of the content .
and that &apos;s really exciting when you think about the abundance of the information that many of these images have .
like if you take a websuche for pictures , where you &apos;re looking for sentences , and the text of the website contains a lot of information about what &apos;s the picture .
but what if it would be , if the image is associated with all of your pictures ?
and then the scope of the semantischen and the abundance that comes out of it , really enormous , it &apos;s a classic netzwerkeffekt .
blaise , that &apos;s really incredible .
thank you very much .
i &apos;m going to tell you some things from my book , which i hope is in the einklang with other things that you &apos;ve heard , and i &apos;m going to try to create myself a few links , if you haven &apos;t noticed that .
i want to start with what i call &quot; offizielles dogma . &quot;
the official dogma of what ?
the official glaubenssatz of all western industrialized societies .
the official dogma works like this : if our goal is the maximize of our citizens , this is all about the maximierung of the freedom of the individual .
the reason for this is that freedom is good for yourself , valuable , meaningful , meaningful , a unverzichtbare premise for human human .
when people have freedom , each of us are about doing the things that our common ones , and nobody has to decide for us .
the way to maximize freedom is to maximize choice .
the more choices people have , the more freedom they have , and the more freedom they have , the more common they have .
this is , i think , so deep in our water supply , that it would not be in mind to question it .
and it &apos;s also in our lives .
i &apos;m going to give you some examples of what makes modern progress .
this is my supermarket . no big .
i just want to say just a little bit about salatdressing .
there &apos;s 175 dressings in my supermarkets , if you don &apos;t mitzählen the 10 different extra extra that you could buy to make a large number of eigenen dessings in the case , in the case , that no one of the 175 in the store is right .
so , that &apos;s like the supermarket is .
and then they go to the verbraucher-elektronik store to zusammenzustellen a stereoanlage , lautsprecher , cd-player , a kassetten-player , radio , verstärker , and in this one electronics , there are so many stereo facilities .
we can put together millions of different stereo facilities together from the components that are being offered in this business .
you have to admit that this is a great selection .
in other areas , the world of communication .
there was a time when i was a boy , because you could have the phone that you wanted to have to have the long time that he came from the bell bell .
you &apos;ve got your phone . you didn &apos;t buy it .
and a consequence of that was that the phone never had broken .
those days are over .
we now have almost an infinite selection of phones , especially in the world of mobile phones .
these are the mobile phones .
my favorite favorite person is in the middle -- mp3-player- , nasen-haar-trimmer and crème fackel .
and if you don &apos;t have seen this until your business now , you can be sure that you &apos;ll soon become .
and what it does is it makes people to walk into business and ask this question .
now you know what the answer to this question is ?
the answer is &quot; no . &quot;
it &apos;s not possible to buy a cell phone that doesn &apos;t do too much .
in other aspects of life , which are much more bedeutsamer than the buy of the objects , the same explosion of choice is true .
health care -- it &apos;s no longer the case in the united states that you go to the doctor , and the doctor tells you what to do .
instead , they go to the doctor , and the doctor &apos;s going to tell you , we could do a , or we could make b .
a has these benefits and risks .
b has these benefits and risks . what do you want to do ?
and they say , &quot; doctor , what do i do ? &quot;
the doctor says a has these benefits and risks and b has the benefits and risks .
what do you want to do ?
and if you say , &quot; if you were , i &apos;d doctor , what would you do ? &quot;
the doctor says , &quot; but i &apos;m not you . &quot;
the result is -- we call it a good thing , but in reality , a shift the burden of the responsibility for making decisions for someone &apos;s making something -- namentlich -- namentlich -- to someone who knows nothing and more likely , and that &apos;s not the best constitution is a decision -- namentlich the patient .
there &apos;s an enormous marketing of marketing drugs for people like you and me , that , if you think about it , don &apos;t make sense , because we don &apos;t buy them .
why do they do it , if we can &apos;t buy ?
the answer is : you expect us to go to the doctor &apos;s the next morning and ask for a change in the prescription .
something like that , as our identity is now a question of choice , like this slide .
we don &apos;t erben identity , we invent them .
and we &apos;re inventing ourselves as many as we want to do .
that means that every day , when you wake up in the morning , you have to decide what kind of person you want to be .
in terms of marriage and family , there was a time when the standard-annahme was , almost everybody had one , and they could heirateten as quickly as they could , and then got the kids as fast as they could .
the only real choice was &quot; who &quot; and not when , and not what they did .
nowadays , it &apos;s all easy .
i teach wonderful smart students , and i &apos;ll give them 20 percent less work than i did .
and that &apos;s not because they &apos;re less smart , and not because they &apos;re less carefully .
it &apos;s because they &apos;re dealing with other things , you ask yourself , &quot; should i get married , not ? should i get married ?
should i get married later ? do i have to have children , or have a career ? &quot;
they &apos;re all questions .
and they &apos;re going to answer these questions , whether that means all the tasks that i &apos;m going to do and get a good grade in my course .
and indeed , they should do that . these are important questions to ask .
work -- we &apos;re blessed , as carl has been shown with the technology that allows us to work every single day of every single day on the planet -- to the randolph hotel .
there &apos;s a corner , by the way , which i &apos;m not going to tell you about , which works in the wirelesslan .
i &apos;m not going to tell you , because i want to use it .
so what it means , that incredible freedom of choice we have to make decisions about decisions , again and again , whether we should work or not work .
we can play our kids playing football , and we have our phone on the one hip , and we have our blackberry on other hip , and our laptop probably on our lap .
and even if they &apos;re all off , every minute in which we are at the verstümmeln of a fußballspiels , we also ask ourselves , &quot; should i accept that call ?
should i respond to this email ? should i write this letter ? &quot;
and even when the answer to the question &quot; no , &quot; it &apos;s certainly going to be a very different experience of your child &apos;s experience than it would have been .
all over the place , we look , big things and little things , tangible things and lifestyle , life is a question of choice .
and the world we lived in this .
so i want to say , there were some choices , but not everything was a question of choice .
and the world in which we now looks like this .
and the question is , is the good news or bad news ?
the answer is yes . &quot;
we all know what &apos;s good about it , so i &apos;m going to get a bad about it .
all these choices have two effects , two negative effects on people .
a effect , a paradoxer , is that it &apos;s lähmt .
so with so many options you can choose , it &apos;s very hard to decide .
i &apos;m going to give you another more drastisches example of this , a study of investment in voluntary investment .
one of my kollegin , i had access to investitions-akten of vanguard , the giant fondgesellschaft of about a million employees and about 2,000 different jobs .
and what she found was a 10 investmentfonds investmentfonds that was anbot , took the participation to two percent .
they offer 50 investmentfonds -- 10 percent less staff taking part than if they were only going to be five . why ?
because there are 50 investmentfonds that are on the selection , it &apos;s so hard to decide which you should choose to get it to the morning .
and then tomorrow , and then tomorrow , tomorrow , tomorrow , and tomorrow , of course , never come .
understand that this is not only that people have to eat food food when they go to retirement because they don &apos;t have enough money to go to the movie , it means making decisions so hard they miss the great investitionsangebote of their arbeitgeber .
they don &apos;t give you any participation to 5,000 u.s. dollars a year on the arbeitsgeber , who would be happy to reproduce their contributions .
paralysis is a consequence of too many choices .
and i think it makes the world that the world looks like this .
they want to really make the decision really right if it &apos;s all the time , right ?
they don &apos;t want to go the wrong investment , or even the wrong thing .
so this is a effect . the other effect is that even if we cross the paralysis and make a decision , we end less happy with the outcome of choice , as if we had the opportunity to decide between less possibilities .
and there are several reasons for this .
one of them is a bedingt , and it &apos;s not perfect , and it &apos;s easy to imagine that you could have a different choice that would have been better , and what happens is that they regret the decision , and that regret seems negative to happiness , which they had made of their own , and that regret was a good decision .
the more options there are , the more easier it is to regret nothing at all , that &apos;s enttäuschend for the choice that you &apos;re going to meet .
second , what economists call oppertunitätskosten .
dan gilbert did a big point in this morning , telling how much the way we evaluate things on how we compare it .
well , if there are very many alternatives to consider , it &apos;s just a very attractive thing to imagine about alternatives you &apos;re ausschließen to , which makes you less happy with the alternatives you voted .
here &apos;s an example . for those of you who are not new york , i apologize .
but here &apos;s what they should have thought .
here &apos;s a couple of the hamptons .
very expensive .
beautiful beach . great day . they have it all for themselves .
what could be better ? &quot; damn &quot; the man thinks , &quot; it &apos;s august .
everyone in my manhattener neighborhood is gone .
i could park directly in front of my house . &quot;
and he &apos;s about two weeks of the thinking he &apos;s tracking the opportunity to have a great parking lot of a lot of parking .
oppertunitätskosten lower happiness , which we get through our choice , even if what we &apos;ve chosen is fantastic .
and the more choices there are choice , the more attractive properties of this selection are going to be into account .
here &apos;s another example .
now , this cartoon is a little bit of the statements .
he makes a point in this now , and maybe too slow to do things .
but a more important point that he &apos;s doing is , always who you decide for one thing , they don &apos;t decide to do things .
and these other things may have a lot of attraktive properties , and it &apos;s going to be what they &apos;re doing less .
third : eskalation of expectations .
this has met me when i wanted to exchange my jeans .
i &apos;m wearing jeans , almost all the time .
and there was a time in the only room of a kind of a kind of time , and they bought it , and they were bad , they were incredibly unkomfortabel , and if they were wearing them long enough and they had enough enough , they started to anzufühlen .
so , to buy new jeans for a lot of years old and a lot of years old , and i said , &quot; i &apos;d like to have a few jeans , here &apos;s my size . &quot;
and the sales said , &quot; do you want to schlanke , easily anliegende , weite ?
do they want to push buttons or reißverschluss ? stone or säure gewaschen ?
do you want to have jeans with holes ?
you want to cut down the bottom , kegelig , blah blah blah , &quot; and so on .
my jaw was down , and after i was erholte , i said , &quot; i &apos;d like the way the only way was the only way . &quot;
he had no idea what that was , so i spent an hour of all these damn jeans anzuprobieren , and i got the business -- and i &apos;ll say the truth -- with the best appropriate jeans i ever had .
i had better . all of these selection made it better .
but i felt worse .
why ? i wrote a whole book to try to explain it myself .
the reason i felt worse with all these available opportunities , my expectations , what a good thing is a good bit of jeans , would go up .
i had very low expectations . i didn &apos;t have a specific expectations when it was only in a way .
when they came in 100 species , one of them should be perfect .
and what i got was good , but it wasn &apos;t perfect .
and so , as compared to what i was expecting , and what i had was a enttäuschend , what i was expected to do .
the add of opportunities to people &apos;s lives , inevitably , is increasing people &apos;s expectations of how good people are going to be .
and this is what leads to less happiness with the results , even when the results are good .
nobody in the world of the marketings knows this . because , if you would , you know all of you didn &apos;t know what it &apos;s about .
the truth is more like this .
the reason that was all better than anything was worse than anything worse was , it was possible for people to make experience possible to be a very pleasant surprise .
nowadays , in the world we live in -- we wealthy , industrialisierten citizens , with perfect citizens -- the best for which you can hope is that things are so good for you to be expected .
they &apos;re never going to be comfortable because of their expectations , my expectations , are haushoch .
the secret to the glücklichkeit -- which is what they &apos;ve all come to -- the secret to the glücklichkeit is low expectations .
i want to say -- a short autobiographischer moment -- i &apos;m married with a woman , and she &apos;s really wonderful .
i couldn &apos;t have done it better . i didn &apos;t have a niedergelassen .
but niederlassen is not always a bad thing .
finally , a consequence of a bad sitzenden , jeans , if you &apos;re just a way to buy a way , and you ask yourself why who is responsible , the answer is clear . what would you have done ?
if hundreds of different kinds of jeans are available , and they buy one that &apos;s a enttäuschend , and they ask why , who is responsible ?
and it &apos;s also clear that the answer to the question is : it &apos;s .
they could do better .
with 100 different types of jeans in the schaufenster , there &apos;s no excuse for mistakes .
and so when people make decisions , and even when the outcomes are good , they feel disappointed about it , they &apos;re beschuldigen themselves .
clinical depression in the industrial world has been in the last generation .
i think a signifikanter -- not the only but a signifikanter beiträger to this explosion of depression and suicide , is that people have erfahren the enttäuschend because their standards are so high , and then , if they have to explain to themselves , they think it would be their fault .
and so the bilanzergebnis is that it &apos;s better to get us better , objective , and we feel worse .
so let me remember you .
this is the official dogma , which is one that we all think is completely wrong . it &apos;s not true .
there &apos;s no question that a choice is better than not , but it doesn &apos;t follow that more choice is better than something choice .
there &apos;s a magical amount . i don &apos;t know what it is .
i &apos;m pretty sure that we missed this point for a long time , and we &apos;ve been improved our common sense .
now , as a rule of question -- i &apos;m almost finished -- as an rule question , the thing about thinking about , which is what all these selection are possible in the developed societies , is the material .
there are many places in the world , and we &apos;ve heard of many of you , whose problem is not the big selection .
the problem is they have too little .
so the things that i &apos;m talking about are a strange problem of modern , rich , western societies .
and what &apos;s so frustrating and ärgerlich , steve levitt , told you about how it &apos;s expensive and hard to help the car seats , it &apos;s a waste of money .
what i &apos;m telling you is that these expensive , complicated decisions -- it &apos;s not easy that you don &apos;t help .
they actually hurt .
they worry about it .
if something of what our society makes make decisions to the societies in which people have a little choice of choice , it would change not only life , but our dignity would be improved .
economists call this an pareto-verbesserungs application .
einkommensumverteilung is going to worry about all the way it &apos;s all the way -- not just the poor -- because all this great selection of us .
finally , read this cartoon , and a sophisticated person , says , &quot; oh ! what &apos;s white for this fish ?
you know nothing possible in this goldfischglas . &quot;
verarmten phantasie , a kurzsichtige view of the world -- and that &apos;s the way i read it first .
the more i thought about it , the more i came to the idea that the fish knows .
because the truth is that if you break the goldfischglas , so you can &apos;t have freedom . you have paralysis .
if you break the goldfischglas , so everything is possible , lower happiness .
you increase paralysis and lower happiness .
everybody needs a goldfischglas .
this is almost mit safety -- potentially for the fish , definitely for us .
but the abhanden is a metaphor goldfischglas , a recipe for misery , and i suspect , disaster .
thank you very much .
you know , i &apos;ve talked about some of these projects earlier about the human genome and what that means , and the discovery of the genes of genes .
in fact , we &apos;re starting from a new point : we have all of our biology , and now we &apos;re trying to get from the digital code into a new phase of biology by designing new lives and build new lives .
we &apos;ve always been trying to ask significant questions .
what &apos;s life ? it &apos;s something i think that a lot of biologists have tried to understand and it at different levels .
we &apos;ve tried different approaches to simplify it to the minimum components .
we &apos;ve been nearly 20 years . when we sequenced the humangenom , the shift from the analog world of biology to the digital world of computers .
now we &apos;re trying to ask whether we can regenerate , or whether we can create new life , from this digital universe ?
this is a map of a small organism , mycoplasma geitalium , which has the smallest genome of a species that can replicate itself in the lab , and we &apos;ve tried to do that if we can do that with a smaller genome .
we did it in about a hundred genes from the 500 or something that are here .
but if we look at this map of map , which is very simple , in comparison to our , and trust me , that &apos;s easy . but if we all look at these genes that we can eliminate one after the other , it &apos;s very unlikely that this would lead to a living cell .
so we decided that the only way to the front is that it &apos;s the only way to actually , which allows us to vary the individual components and ask some of these fundamental questions .
and so , we started with the question , can we actually get a chromosome ?
does it allow the chemistry to create these really big molecules , which is never done before ?
and , if we can , can we start the chromosome ?
a chromosome is just a piece of inertes chemical material by the way .
our steps in the digitalisierung of life were exponentially .
our ability to write genetic code has been very slow to evolve yet , and yet , and we &apos;ve got to have a exponential curve .
we started with this 15 years ago .
it took a few years starting with a bioethischen review before we did the first experiments .
and it turns out that &apos;s a very difficult thing to be .
there are tens of thousands of machines around the world , and they can make little pieces of dna , 30 to 50 letters long , but it &apos;s a degenerativer process , so the longer you make a piece of force , the more mistakes you make .
so we had to develop a new method of putting these little pieces together and we could correct the mistakes .
this was our first attempt , starting with the digital information , the genome x x .
it &apos;s a little virus that &apos;s killing bacteria .
we made little pieces , made a fehlerkorrektur and we had a dna molecule of about 5,000 letters .
so exciting phase when we took this piece of inerte chemical and put it into a bacterium , and the bacteria started to read the genetic code and made viral particles .
the viral cells then were released and came back and kill the e. .
i was recently speaking to the oil industry and they said they were exactly what it was like .
they laughed more than her .
so we think that this is a situation in software that actually can build your hardware in a biological system .
but we wanted to go on to go on a whole lot . we wanted to build an entire bakterielles chromosome . it has more than 580.000 letters genetic code , so we thought we &apos;re building it in kassetten from the size of the virus , which we could vary the size of the tape of the tape , to understand what the individual components are a living cell
design is the key , and if you want to start with digital information in the computer , this digital information has to be really accurate .
when we first sequenced the genome in 1995 , the fehlerrate was a mistake per 10,000 base .
we found 30 mistakes in the resequenzieren . if we had used the original sequence , it would never be possible .
part of design is to make pieces of the 50 letters long , and that would have to be able to put together kleinere pieces to build smaller sub-einheiten that fit those fit .
we &apos;ve built unique elements here .
you may have heard that we &apos;ve built waterzeichen .
think about it : we have a 4-buchstaben code : a , c , g and t. , g , and t.
triplets of these letters -- these letters are actually kodieren about 20 acids acids , and here &apos;s a single purpose of each of these amino acids .
so we can use the genetic code to write our words , sentences , thoughts .
at the beginning , we just signed .
some people were disappointed that it was not poetry .
we &apos;ve engineered the pieces of the pieces that we just could easily easily easily into . and there &apos;s enzymes that repair these repair and then come back together .
and we started to make pieces , starting with pieces that had the fünf- to siebentausend letters , put these together together to make 24.000-buchstaben-stücke together to put together this back to 72.000 .
in each one , we produced these pieces in the brain so we could sequence them because we tried to create a very robust process , which they &apos;ll see in a minute .
we &apos;ve tried to get to the point of the automation .
so , this looks like a basketball-playoff .
if we get to this really big stuff -- with 100,000 cell cells -- then they won &apos;t just grow in the creation of the creation , and it &apos;s all the way in the modern biology , and so we used to have other mechanisms .
we knew about a mechanism of homologe rekombination , which is using biology to repair dna that can put together those pieces .
here &apos;s an example of it . there &apos;s an organism called deinococcus radiodurans , which übersteht three million radiation in radiation .
you see in the upper field that his chromosome is just falling apart .
12 to 24 hours later , everything has been together as zusammengefügt as it was .
we have thousands of organisms that can do that .
these organisms can be completely ausgetrocknet , they can actually live in a vacuum .
i &apos;m absolutely sure life exists in space and move , looking for aquatischen conditions .
in fact , nasa has shown that there are a lot of them out there .
here &apos;s a gefügeaufnahme of the molecule that we &apos;ve made by using these processes -- actually , we only use hefe-mechanismen with the right design of pieces , we have eingepasst pieces of pieces , we can eingepasst them . yeast would do it automatically .
this is not a elektronenmikroskopaufnahme mikroskopaufnahme .
it &apos;s such a big molecule , that we can actually see it with the lichtmikroskop .
this is footage over a long time .
this is the publication we &apos;ve done just recently .
these are über letters of genetischem code , it &apos;s the largest molecule with definierter structure that has ever been created by humans .
it has a molekulargewicht of over 300 million .
if we would take it with a schriftgröße of 10 and without the time , it would be umfassen pages , just to auszudrucken these genetic code .
now , how do we start a chromosome ? how do we activate it ?
obviously , it &apos;s very simple with a virus , it &apos;s a lot more complicated with bacteria .
it &apos;s also easier to do it in eukaryonten like we &apos;re doing it : you just take the nucleus out and you have another in there , and that &apos;s exactly what you &apos;ve all heard about the gulf .
so , archaebakterien , the chromosome in the cell is embedded , but we just showed that you can actually transplant a chromosome from a cell to others and activate it .
we reinigten the chromosome of a mikrobenspezies , roughly , and roughly , these two are the ones that we see from humans and mice . we gave some extra-gene to pick this chromosome , we zersetzten it with enzymes to destroy all the proteins , and it was very amazing when we gave it into a cell -- and they &apos;re going to appreciate our very ausgereiften .
the new chromosome went into the cell .
in fact , we thought that there &apos;s the end , but we &apos;ve tried to bring the process to a little bit .
this is the hauptmechanismus of evolution here .
we &apos;ve all found species of species here that we took a second chromosome , or a third of irgendwoher , each time thousands of characteristics in just a second to a species .
so people who think evolution as a gene is changed at a time , and we &apos;ve missed a lot of biology .
and there are enzymes called the restriktionsenzyme , which are actually using dna .
the chromosome that was in the cell has no one ; the chromosomes we &apos;ve added it .
it was exprimiert in the cell , and then it realized the other chromosome as a foreign material , and so we ended up with a cell on a new chromosome .
it verfärbte blue because of the genes that we &apos;ve been added .
and after a very short time , it had lost all the characteristics of species and konvertierte completely into a new species based on the new software that we gave in the cell .
all the proteins changed the membranes , and when we read the genetic code , it was exactly what we &apos;ve been doing .
it may sound like the genomische sound , but we can move by changing the software-dna , and we can change things quite dramatic .
now , i &apos;m saying that this is not the genesis -- that &apos;s based on a 3,5 billion years of evolution evolution .
and i &apos;ve been suggesting that we may have a new form of the explosion of the explosion of the explosion that there could be massive new artenbildung based on this digital design .
why should we do that ?
i think it &apos;s pretty obvious to what we need .
we &apos;re going to spend six billion people in the next 40 years .
to put it in my context , i was born in the year .
today , three people on this planet are in the year of the year in 1946 ; within 40 years it will be four .
we have trouble with food , with fresh and clean water , medicine , fuel for 6,5 billion people .
it will offer a challenge for nine .
we need over five billion tons of coal , oil billion oil oil oil , and that &apos;s a hundred million fässer on the day .
if we think about biological processes or any process to replace that , it will be a huge challenge .
then , of course , there &apos;s all the co2 from this material that land on the atmosphere .
we have now , from our discoveries from all over the world , a database of about 20 million genes , and i want to believe that these are the most designkomponenten of the future .
the elektronikindustrie had a dozen components , and you see the diversity that came out of this .
we &apos;re actually running into the limits of biological reality and to those of our imagination .
we have technologies today because of this fast synthesemethoden to do what we call kombinatorische genetics .
now , we have a way to build a large robot that can make millions of chromosomes a day .
if you imagine these 20 million different genes , or to optimize these processes to make oktan , or new vaccines , we can change a small team of more biology than the last 20 years .
and it &apos;s just nurmale selection . we can nach lebensfähigkeit , production of chemicals or treibstoffproduktion , and so on .
this is a shot of real design-software on that we &apos;re working on with that you actually sit down and design new species on the computer .
you know , we don &apos;t know what it &apos;s going to look like . we know exactly what the genetic code are going to look like .
we &apos;re now focusing on the fourth generation of the fourth generation .
you &apos;ve recently , corn corn to ethanol , which is just a bad experiment .
we have treibstoffe of the zweiten- and third generation that are relatively soon coming up , which are much more sophisticated zuckerwertigkeiten , like oktan , or different kinds of butanol .
but how we think , the only way of biology , has a huge impact of the cost of food or the limitation of its availability , is when we see co2 as a primary material , and we &apos;re working on cells that go that way .
and we think we &apos;re going to be the first one with the most treibstoffen of the fourth generation , and that &apos;s about 18 months .
sunlight and co2 are a way of doing .
but in our discovery of the world , we have all sorts of different methods .
this is an organism that we described in 1996 .
he lives in the deep sea , about ein-einhalb miles deep , in nearly kochenden wassertemperaturen .
it &apos;s turning co2 into methane in methane , using hydrogen &apos;s energy source .
we &apos;re looking at whether we can use carbon dioxide , which could easily be put into produktionsplätzen , konvertieren the co2 into fuel to make this process .
within a brief period of time we might think we could be able to solve one of the fundamental questions of life .
you know , we have really -- moderate goals like the ersatz of the entire industry industry . right . if you don &apos;t do that at ted , where else ? a hauptquelle of energy .
but we &apos;re also working on this at the same time that we &apos;re using the same approach to the development of vaccines .
you &apos;ve seen this year with flu , we &apos;re always a year back and have a dollar too little when it comes to the right vaccine .
i think that can be changed by creating a lot of vaccines in the vorhinein .
this is what the future might look like , could be , today , can be accelerating today &apos;s evolutionsbaum , is going to be accelerating with synthetic bacteria , archaen , and perhaps eukaryonten .
we &apos;re light years from improving people . our goal is only that we have a chance for survival of the long enough to do that , and thank you very much .
at the last ted conference , i gave a introduction to the lhc .
and i promised to come back to explain how the machine works .
so it &apos;s far . and for all those who were not there , the lhc is the largest scientific experiment that ever been -- 27 miles in diameter .
his job is to create the conditions that existed less than a second second of the universe , and that until 600 million times a second .
it &apos;s just breathtaking ambitious .
this is the machine under the geneva .
we take pictures of these mini-urknalle in detectors .
i &apos;m working on this one . it &apos;s called an atlas detector -- 44 feet in the mile , 22 meters in diameter .
so here &apos;s a spectacular picture of the atlas in the construction that you see the scale .
on 10th of september last year , the machine was going to go for the first time .
and this picture was taken by atlas .
it had a huge jubel in the control room .
it &apos;s an image of the first strahlenpartikels , which all the way the entire track around the lhc , then , by the way , to be able to kollidierte a part of the lhc to allow a rain to be able to put a rain in the detector .
in other words , when we saw this image on the 10th of september , we knew that the machine works , which is a great triumph .
i don &apos;t know if this was the largest jubel , or this , when someone went to the google side and the front page was so .
it means that we have a cultural impact on the scientific .
about a week later , there was a problem with the machine that had to do with these drähten -- these golden wires are over here .
these wires are leiten ampere when the machine is running on hochleistung .
now , the engineers under you will look at them and say , &quot; no , no , you don &apos;t do that . these are little wires . &quot;
they can do that because if you &apos;re very abkühlt , they &apos;re going to be called supraleitern .
so , minus 271 degrees , cooler than the space between stars , these wires can be the tension .
in one of the connections between the neuntausend magnets on the lhc , there was a manufakturdefekt .
so the wires heat up , and 13-tausend ampere , suddenly elektrischem resistance .
this was the result .
now , it &apos;s still a beeindruckender , if you imagine that the magnet weigh over 20 tons and then shifted around about 30 inches .
so we &apos;re damaged about 50 of the magnets .
and they had to take them away , which we did .
we konditionierten them , reparierten them .
they &apos;re all back to their way back .
the end of march , the lhc will be funktionsfähig .
we will turn it up and expect to collect the first data on june or july , and we go on and we go on and we go on to find out what the tiles are the universe .
now , of course , in a way , these accidents again , the debate , again , to be the debate about the value of science and ingenieurskunst at the borders . it &apos;s easy to reject it .
i think the fact that it &apos;s so hard , the fact that we reach beyond our borders , is the value of things like the lhc .
i &apos;m going to leave my words to a english scientist , humphrey davy , who , like me , he &apos;s verteidigte , his lehrling , his lehrling , was michael faraday , and he said , &quot; nothing is so dangerous to the development of human mind than assume that our scientific ideas are endgültig , that there are no mysteries in nature that our triumphe are vollzählig
thank you .
i &apos;m a writer .
writing books is my profession , but it &apos;s more than that .
it &apos;s also my great , lifetime and fascination .
and i don &apos;t expect that to change .
but , however , the thing is that the recent thing is a weird thing in my life and my career that has led me to rethink my relationship with this work .
this strange event was that i had written a book recently -- a biography called „ eat , pray , love “ -- which , decided , in different , and i decided to take all the previous books from some of the reasons in the world and a large mega-ereignis , international bestseller-ding .
the result is that i don &apos;t care where i get to be treated as if i was going to be geweiht .
seriously -- the end of the end .
for example , they come to me , and they say , &quot; fear you don &apos;t fear that they will never be übertreffen ?
don &apos;t you have a fear of that you can &apos;t live and create a book and never again , to make a book that anyone cares in the world ? never again ?
okay , that &apos;s really courage .
it would be worse if i didn &apos;t remember that i was going to remember about 20 years ago when i first told the first time i was going to be a writer , with the same kind of angstbesetzter response .
people said , &quot; „ , you don &apos;t worry to have success ?
do you not fear that you kill the demütigung of a absage ?
do you not fear that you nachgehst your life and never get something out of it and that you will die on a schrotthaufen of geplatzter dreams -- your mouth filled with the bitteren asche of the failure ?
so , you know , you know .
the answer -- the short answer to all of these questions is : „ yes .
yeah , i &apos;m scared of all these things .
and i had it all the time .
and i &apos;m afraid of that , and i &apos;m afraid of that .
like algae -- and other things that are furchteinflößende .
but , when it &apos;s about writing , i think i &apos;ve been thinking about it for a little bit , and i ask myself , why ?
is that reasonable ?
is it logical that someone should be expected to do that he &apos;s afraid to do the work he feels in it ?
and what &apos;s the very creative of the creative companies that you &apos;re making of the gegenseitigen of the mind -- in a way , how do they do not do jobs ?
my dad , for example , was chemists , and i can &apos;t remember a situation in his 40 years as a chemist , where he was asked if he was afraid to be chemists .
with your chemiker-blockade , john -- how about that ?
it just didn &apos;t work , you know ?
but to be fair -- the group of chemists have not been given the reputation of alkoholsüchtigen manisch-depressive people .
we writer that kind of call out , but not only the writers , but the creative of all the genres , they seem to be able to have this reputation , mentally , mental , ungeheuer .
all you have to do is look at the bitteren todeszahlen of the 20th century alone , the young and often died by their own hand .
and even those who don &apos;t actually begingen suizid , seemed to be really neglected from their own .
norman mailer said a long time ago in his last interview : „ , each of my books , i had a little bit more of a weiter .
a remarkable message that you can do about your work .
but we don &apos;t even take somebody to say something like this , because we &apos;ve heard this kind of statements for so long , somehow we have the idea so verinnerlicht and collective of people who are sort of natural and suffering , of course , zusammengehören and that art -- at the end of the seelenqual , is always going to be the seelenqual .
the question i want to ask today is : is this idea for you all right ?
feel you feel about it ? because i &apos;m looking at one centimeter of distance -- i don &apos;t feel like this idea of this view .
i find them .
and i find it dangerous . and i don &apos;t want to watch the way you &apos;re going to take over the next century .
i think it &apos;s better when we &apos;re going to live our great creative way .
and i definitely know that for me -- in my situation -- very dangerous , to start , this is a very dangerous path to sort of herunterzusickern , which is especially in the fact that i &apos;m in my career in my career .
that means -- you see , i &apos;m pretty young . i &apos;m only about 40 years old .
i &apos;ve probably got another 40 arbeitsjahre in me .
and it &apos;s extremely likely that all i &apos;m going to be in writing from the world as the work that came to the abgefahrenen success of my last book , right ?
i &apos;m saying it geradeheraus because we &apos;re all in a sort of friends here , and it &apos;s probably most likely that my greatest success behind me .
oh , jesus , what &apos;s a thought .
these are the kind of thinking that someone can get to do nine o &apos;clock in the morning , drinking the gin , and that &apos;s not what i want .
i &apos;d rather continue to do this work i love .
so the question is , how ?
after some time of the reflektierens , i seem to keep writing , a kind of schützendem psychological design , has to design .
somehow i have to find a way to do a way to play a safe distance from me to the true of my very natural beklemmung of what the reaction is going to be on .
while i was looking for models of this past year , i &apos;ve been looking for this , and i &apos;ve tried to find other societies , to see if they could be better or more vernünftigere ideas about it , as we can help creative , with the emotional risks that are linked to creativity .
and this search for me to do that ancient greece and the old rome .
please follow me , because the circle will be close .
but in the ancient greece and rome , people don &apos;t believe creativity comes from people , okay ?
they thought creativity was a kind of göttlicher diener-geist , which comes from a distant , unknown source of people -- from unerklärlichen , unknown reasons .
the greeks called these göttlichen diener-geister of creativity dämonen .
from the sokrates , he &apos;s known that he believed he would have a dämon dämon that would take him away from the distance .
the römer had the same idea , called this sort of körperlosem creative mind , a „ genius .
that &apos;s great . the römer didn &apos;t really think a genius was a very clever individual .
they thought that a genius was this kind of magisches göttliches creature , which was the believed that it literally lives in the walls of a künstlerateliers -- roughly like dobby , the hauself -- the rauskäme and the artist in the work of work , would make it invisible and the outcome of the work .
this is brilliant -- there &apos;s it , there &apos;s the distance i &apos;ve been talking about -- the psychological of the consequences of your work .
and everybody knew that it worked , right ?
the artist of the altertums was protected some things in particular , like , for example , too much , right ?
if you had brilliant work , you didn &apos;t have to look at everything for you , everybody knew that you had this körperlose genius that helped you .
when your work is floppte -- not entirely your error , or you know ?
everybody knew your genius was a little bit .
so people have really thought about creativity in the west .
and the renaissance came , and it was changed . we had this big idea . and this big idea was : let &apos;s put the human individual into the center of the universe -- all the gods and the mysteries , and there &apos;s no room for the mystische creatures that are given by the divine .
it &apos;s the beginning of rational humanismus and people started to believe that creativity was completely on their own individual .
for the first time in history , you hear people who or the artists call a genius , rather than that he has a genius .
i have to tell you , i think that was a big mistake .
you know , a very specific person to allow him to think , or it &apos;s like the gefäß and the essence and the source of all the divine , creative , unbekanntem , unendlichen mysteriums , a little bit of responsibility to aufzubürden her a fragilen , human mind .
it &apos;s like somebody to ask the sun .
the entstellt and verzerrt all of the sudden , and it creates all these unerreichbaren expectations of success .
i think that erfolgs-druck has been vernichtet our artists for the last 500 years .
and , if that &apos;s true -- and i think it &apos;s true -- is the question .
can we change it ?
perhaps a ancient understanding about the relationship between people and the mystery of the creative .
maybe not .
maybe we can &apos;t just auslöschen the gedankengut humanismus for 500 years of rational humanismus .
and there are certainly people in this audience , who are really berechtigte scientific doubt about the idea of -- basically -- feen , people who are nachfolgen and feenzauber on their projects and so forth .
i &apos;m probably not going to take all of you on this trip .
but the question i want to ask is why not ?
why not think about this ?
because it makes a lot of sense of how everything i &apos;ve heard when it &apos;s about explaining the absolutely crazy launenhaftigkeit of the creative process .
a process that &apos;s -- like everyone knows that it has ever tried to make something -- in other words , everybody here -- not always , is rational .
in fact , he can feel really geradezu .
i had recently met an encounter like i met the extraordinary american poet ruth stone , who &apos;s been dichterin for 90 who , but she told me that she was growing up in the fields in her dörflichen , she was looking outside in the fields . she said she would feel and hear , and hear about the landscape of the landscape .
she said it would be like a donnernder train .
that would be zurollen on the country .
she felt when it came , because it would take the earth to the beben .
she knew that she could only do one of the moment that she could do , and that was -- in their words -- „ race like the devil .
she ran out of the house for the devil as she was tracking by this poem . it was only one that she had to get quickly enough to a sheet of paper and a pen to get it through it , and then capture it through her and then hold on the paper .
at others , they weren &apos;t fast enough . she ran and ran and ran , but she didn &apos;t hit the house and she &apos;d rollte her poem through her and she missed it . she said she &apos;d go on to move over country and -- as she said -- „ according to another poet .
and then there were these moments -- i &apos;ll never forget -- she said that there were moments where they almost miss it .
so , she &apos;s running for the paper and she &apos;s looking for the paper and the poem goes through her and she picks a pen when it &apos;s durch and then -- she said -- she was like to reach and get it to get there .
she erwischte the poem to his tail and she moved back into her body and took it on the paper .
and the gelegenheiten came to the poem and intact on the paper -- but backwards -- from the last word for the first .
when i heard that , i thought that &apos;s a little bit about -- it &apos;s just like my creative process , and it &apos;s like a “ process .
that &apos;s not like my creative process -- i &apos;m not the channel .
i &apos;m a maultier . and i have to work on the same time every day and sweat and sweat and wirklich and really awkward durchquälen .
but even i have gestreift this thing in my maultierart .
and i guess that many of you have done .
even i had been working or ideas that hindurchkamen from a source of me that i really can &apos;t identify .
what is that for a thing ?
and how do we have to do with that relationship without losing our minds , but to keep ourselves in the opposite of the world ?
for me , the best living example is how to do this , the musician can do tom waits . i was allowed to interview him for a magazine .
we talked about this issue . and you know what ? most of the time of his life was tom the embodiment of the gepeinigten modern artist , who was trying to master and beherrschen these unkontrollierbaren creative impulses that lived in him and with them .
but then he became older and down , he told me that he was going to go on a schnellstraße in los angeles , and it changed all for him .
he was driving at high speed when he suddenly hear a little bit of a melody , which is a lot of hard time , it &apos;s hard tangible for it , and he wants to have it . she &apos;s prachtvoll . he lechzt it , but he can &apos;t touch it .
he doesn &apos;t have a piece of paper , he has no pen , he doesn &apos;t have a kassettenrekorder .
so he starts to go up to this old beklemmung in him , like „ , i &apos;m going to lose this thing and will be verfolgt by this song .
i &apos;m not good enough , i &apos;m not able to do it .
but instead of getting into panic , he just heard .
he ended the whole day and did something completely new .
he looked at the sky and said , „ sorry , can you not see that i drive a car ? &quot;
„ is i &apos;m looking at a song just like this ?
if you really want to exist , come to a günstigeren moment when i can take care of you .
if not , someone else is somebody else .
go and quäle &apos;s leonard cohen .
his whole arbeitsprozess arbeitsprozess has changed .
not the work itself . it was still a lot of dark as it was ever dark .
but the process and the heavy beklemmung that surrounds him , it was picked up when he took the genius out of himself , where he had nothing to trouble and then zurückließ it where he was sort of , and he realized that no verinnerlichtes , quälendes thing .
it could give a eigentümliche , wundersame , bizarre collaboration , a kind of conversation between tom and the fremdartigen , physical thing , which was not quite tom .
when i heard this story , it also changed a bit of the way i worked and it has been saved .
this idea was coming to me when i was in the middle of the schreibprozess of „ eat , pray , love love , and i fell into one of those gruben of the zweifels that we all fall to work , and it doesn &apos;t work . you start thinking that it &apos;s a disaster . it &apos;s going to be the worst book ever written .
not only bad , but the worst of all times .
i started thinking , i should just go to the project .
but then i remembered how tom was talking to the wild sky , and i tried to do it .
so i took my look from the manuscript and i spoke to my comment in a leeren corner of the room .
i &apos;m talking to the book , you know , „ , you know , you know , and i both know that if this book is not brilliant , it &apos;s not entirely my fault , right ?
because you see , i &apos;m looking at everything i have , i &apos;m investing . i don &apos;t have more than that .
so if you want to have it better , you &apos;ve got to show up here and get your percentage of the deal .
okay . but , if you don &apos;t do that , you know what the hell is .
i &apos;m still going to write , because that &apos;s my job .
and i want to go to the record , and i want to go to the record that i was here for my part of the jobs .
because ... -- at the end , it &apos;s like follows . before centuries ago , nordafrikas people have been versammelt mondscheinfesten with holy tänzen and music that were stopped for hours -- until dawn .
these strong were great , because the dancers were professional and they were fantastic .
but , and again , very rare , something special happened . one of the actors was actually überweltlich .
and i know you know what i mean , because i know you &apos;ve all seen a performance in your life .
it was like , the time of stillstehen and the dancers , the dancers had , and he did nothing different than he did before -- 1,000 nights before . but everything else .
and all of a sudden , he &apos;s not really appeared to get human .
it was lights up from the inside and down from the bottom and everything erhellte through a göttliches fire .
when something happened then , people knew what that was . they called it for his name .
they put together together and started singing : „ allah , allah , allah , god , god , god , god .
that &apos;s god , you know ?
interesting historical fußnote : when the mohren südspanien eroberten took this practice , the aussprache changed over the centuries of „ allah , allah allah , allah “ , allah “ zu zu zu zu zu “ “ “ , olé “ , which is still hearing and flamenco-tänzen .
if a actors in spain has something to be a little bit , something magical , olé allah , olé , olé , allah , allah , great , bravo , bravo , because it &apos;s a flüchtiger view of god .
and that &apos;s great , because we need that .
but , the tricky part is following the next morning when the dancers wake up and see that it &apos;s 11 o &apos;clock on a tuesday -- and he &apos;s no longer a fünkchen of god .
it &apos;s just a alternder sterblicher with schmerzenden knee , and maybe he &apos;ll never go up to those heights .
and maybe someone &apos;s will never call the god &apos;s name when he turns out , but what about the rest of his life ?
that &apos;s hard .
this is one of the schmerzhaftesten korrekturen of a creative life .
but perhaps it doesn &apos;t have to be so full of pein , if you didn &apos;t believe in the beginning , that most of the most extraordinary aspects of her existence was coming from .
if you may just believe that you &apos;re a leihgabe -- from a unvorstellbaren source for a erlesene period of your life that &apos;s going to be passed on to someone else when you &apos;re finished .
when we start thinking about this , it changes everything .
so i started thinking , and i think of security in the last few months while i worked on the book that &apos;s going to be coming out , and when the dangerous , frightening , strong nachfolger to my abgefahrenen success .
what i &apos;m constantly going to say to myself , when i &apos;m going crazy , i &apos;m not afraid .
don &apos;t be entmutigt .
just do your job .
be still on your contribution to your contribution .
if your job is dancing , dance .
if the stupid göttliche genius , which you put on , is deciding for a brief moment to show a hauch of wonder through your effort , then „ olé , “ !
and if not , dance , they are still .
and „ olé ! “ for you all this way .
i believe that and i feel like we should teach .
„ olé ! “ for you , despite you , just for that , you know , the mere human love and the eigensinn , for that .
thank you .
thank you .
olé !
last year , i showed these two slides to illustrate that the arctic eiskappe , which had the size of the bottom state of state , for nearly three million years , to reduce 40 percent .
but this doesn &apos;t really push strong enough to the ernsthaftigkeit of this particular problem , because it &apos;s not the thick of the ice .
in a certain sense , the arctic eiskappe is the beating heart of our global klimasystems .
it &apos;s growing in the winter and it &apos;s been schrumpft in summer .
the next slide i &apos;m showing you is a zeitrafferaufnahme , which is happened in the last 25 years .
the dauereis is made with red .
as you see , it grows to the dunkelblau , which is the annual ice in the winter ; it &apos;s been schrumpft in the summer .
the so-called dauereis , five years old , or older , is almost like blood that &apos;s herausfliesst out of the body .
in 25 years , it will be disappeared from here .
this is a problem because warming is the frozen reason for the arctic ocean , where there &apos;s a huge amount of carbon dioxide in carbon , which if it &apos;s auftaut , from microbes to methane .
compared to the entire amount of klimaverändernden materials in the atmosphere , it could double if we cross that critical point .
now , now , sprudelt now in some flat lakes in alaska , methane from the water .
professor katey walter in alaska , in alaska , was the university of the flachen see in the universität .
wow !
you &apos;re fine . the question is , how will it be ergehen .
and one reason is , this huge wärmespeicher , is rising up from the north .
this is a jährlicher tauwasserfluss .
but the volume are much bigger than ever before .
this is the kangerlussuaq river in südwest greenland .
if you want to know , the sea level of sea level rise to sea level is rising into the ocean .
these rivers are taking rapidly .
on the other end of the planet , antarctica , the largest eismasse on the planet .
last month , researchers have been reported that the entire continent has a negative eisbilanz .
and the westantarktis , which showed up on a few unterwasserinseln , is very strong in melt .
this is 20 20 meereshöhe , like greenland .
in the himalayas , the drittgrössten eismasse , they see new lakes that were glaciers in the upper few years ago .
40 percent of all people in the world get half of their trinkwassers from this schmelzwasser .
in the anden , this glacier is the trinkwasserquelle for this city .
the wassermengen have been vergrössert .
but if you &apos;re versiegen , the most drinking water is wegfallen .
in california , a 40 percent reduction of the schneedecke of the sierra .
this is the speicherbecken .
and the predictions , as you read it , are serious .
these austrocknung in the world , in the world , leads to a dramatic increase .
and the disaster all over the world have a really ausserordentlichen and never , before , dagewesenen , zugenommen .
so many of the last 30 years , like in the vorhergegangenen , are the vorhergegangenen .
this is a completely unhaltbares entwicklungsmuster .
if you look at this in historical context , you can see what it &apos;s anrichtet .
in the last five years , we &apos;ve been producing 70 million tons of co2 every 24 hours -- 25 million tons of tons every day .
look at the area of the eastern pacific , the west of the american continent , and beiderseits of the indian subkontinents , where there &apos;s a drastischen decline in the ocean .
the biggest single factor for global warming , besides deforestation , which is 20 percent , is burning the burning of fossil fuels .
oil is a problem , and coal is the most important problem .
the united states are one of the two largest verschmutzer , together with china .
and the proposal was to build a lot more kohlefabriken .
but we start to see a change .
here are the ones that were gestrichen in the last few years with some green alternatives that were proposed .
trotzdessen is a political argument in our country .
and the kohleindustrien and ölindustrien have spent a $ viertelmilliarde dollar last kalendarjahr to promote clean coal , which is a contradiction in itself .
this picture remembered me .
all around the christmas , at home in tennessee , a billion tons of kohleschlamm .
you &apos;ve seen it in the news .
this is in our country &apos;s country &apos;s country &apos;s country &apos;s country .
this happened to christmas .
one of the ads of the kohleindustrie for christmas was this .
frosty of the kohlenmann is a vergnügter , happy fellow .
it &apos;s in the shell and abundance in america , and it &apos;s helping our economy to grow .
frosty , the kohlenmann kohlenmann is going to clean up every day .
it &apos;s affordable and liebenswert , and workers are staying in the living and bread .
this is the source of most coal in west virginia .
the most powerful bergarbeiter is the director of massey coal .
let me tell you a very clear . al gore , nancy pelosi , harry reid , you don &apos;t know what you &apos;re talking about .
so the alliance for environmental protection has been a gerufen .
this is one , a part of it .
in the world , we see climate change as serious danger for our business .
so we set it to the top set of zeil , a beträchtliche geldsumme to take a werbeaktion on the way to get the truth of coal .
the fact is , coal is not dirty .
we think it &apos;s clean -- and it &apos;s all the way that you can smell .
so , don &apos;t worry about the climate change .
let &apos;s leave it quiet .
saueber coal , you &apos;ve heard a lot of it .
so let &apos;s make a tour of these modern , clean kohlefabrik .
fantastic ! this machine is quite loud .
but it &apos;s the sound of the clean kohletechnologie .
and yet , burning coal from the main main global warming is the remarkable clean kohletechnologie that you see here , changes everything .
look at it right now , this is what we &apos;re doing , clean kohletechnologie .
finally , the positive alternative to our economic challenge and our challenge of national security .
america is in a crisis , the economy , the national security , the climate crisis .
the red thread that connects all of these is our dependence on kohlenstoff-basierenden fuels like dirty coal and oil oil .
but now there &apos;s a bold , new solution to set ourselves out of this misslichen situation .
versorge america neu electricity , in the next 10 years , the next 10 years .
a plan to bring america back to work , to make us safer and help stop global warming .
finally , a solution that &apos;s big enough to solve our problems .
versorge america . find out .
this is the last one .
it &apos;s about a neuversorgung of america .
one of the fastest ways of our abhängigkeit , dirty fuels that we &apos;ve all ersticken our world .
the future is here . wind , sun and a new energy system .
new investment to create good job jobs .
versorge america neu . it &apos;s time to accept reality .
there &apos;s an old african saying , &quot; if you want to be fast , go alone .
if you want to go far , go together . &quot;
we have to go far , and it &apos;s fast .
thank you .
i &apos;d like to start asking you to zurückzudenken your childhood , when you were playing with bauklötzen .
while you realized how to reach out the hands and zugreift the klötze and move it , and you actually , you know , to think about and understand the problems of understanding what &apos;s changing the zusammenhänge .
the spatial thinking is closely connected to how we understand a lot of our environment .
as a computer scientist , i started wonder with my fachberater patti and my colleague jeevan kalanithi , which would be , if we were using computers that moves instead of a maus-zeigers , which moves like a digital fingerspitze on a flat arbeitsfläche -- -- what if we could intervene with two hands and anordnen it and anordnen it as we want to go and get them to organize
and this question was so ergreifend that we decided to explore the response and we developed siftables .
in short , a siftable is an interactive computer in the size of a kekses .
you can move with your hand , you can perceive each other , you can detect your movements and you have a screen and a funkempfänger .
and more importantly , are physically , so you can only move it like bauklötze just through the hands of hands and access .
and the siftables are an example of a new generation of hilfsmitteln to the manipulation of the digital data .
and when these tools become physical and develop a conscious of their movements , recognize each other and perceive the edges of our brain of the way that we can see , we can start with exploration new and more sophisticated technology .
i &apos;ll start with some simple examples .
this is a siftable siftable , and when i go to a richtung , the video will play forward , and if i go to the other direction , it &apos;s going backwards .
and these interactive portraits are taking each other .
so if i put them on side to each other , they &apos;re going to be interested .
when they &apos;re surrounded by voneinader , they &apos;ll notice that they &apos;re getting a little bit nervous .
and they &apos;re also feeling their movement and pitch .
an interesting consequence of the interactions that we started to recognize was that we could apply ordinary gestures gestures in data , like how color is so much like you do with the fluid .
in this case , we have three siftables als , and i can use them to put color in the middle , where they &apos;re mixed up .
if we &apos;re going to take it , we can do a little bit of zurückschütten .
there are also some kind of nice opportunities in education like languages , mathematics or logikspiele , where we give people the opportunity to fast and see the results immediately .
here i am -- this is a series of fibonacci i &apos;m going to do with a simple gleichungsprogramm .
this is a game with words that &apos;s a kind of mixture of scrabble and boggle .
and basically , you get each round on every single siftable of every single siftable letter , and while you &apos;re trying to make words , you &apos;ll be tested on a dictionary .
then , after about 30 seconds , again , again , again , it &apos;s going to be mixed again and you &apos;ve got a new new technology and new possibilities .
thank you .
these are some kids who came to a trip to the media lab , and i could move them to try and recorded a video of it .
they really loved it .
an interesting fact about this kind of applications is that you don &apos;t have to give people a lot of instructions .
all you have to say is &quot; form words , &quot; and you know what to do .
here &apos;s some people who test it .
that &apos;s our youngest beta-tester right there on the right .
it turns out he wanted to just stack up the siftables .
so for him , they were only bauklötze .
this is an interactive trickfilmanwendung .
we wanted to develop a lernmittel for sprachlerner .
that &apos;s felix .
he can put new characters in the scene by aufhebt the siftable of the table that shows this character .
here he &apos;s going to be able to be aufgehen .
the sun is going to go on .
now he &apos;s catching a traktor in the scene .
the orange one .
good work ! yes !
by shaking the siftables and she &apos;s standing next to each side , he can interact the characters .
... his own story .
hi !
it &apos;s a story with open end , and it can decide how they evolve .
flying cat .
the last example i have now is showing it for the time i have a musik-sequencer musik-sequencer for live-auftritte , which we &apos;ve recently developed and in as a sound , like führungsstimme , bass and schlagzeug .
each one has four different variations on the variations ; you can pick that you want to use .
and you can put these notes into the sequence that you can actually put in any patterns .
and you &apos;re speist them by just holding a ton-siftable on a sequenz-siftable .
there are effects that you can change live , like hall and filter .
you connect it with a specific sound and then tends to hire it to the einstellen .
and then even more übergeordnete effects like speed and volume that you &apos;re doing in the entire sequence .
so let &apos;s see .
we start in the dem of the führungsstimme , and we can expand them in a series , extend them and add a little bit more of the voice .
now i &apos;m adding a bass .
now i &apos;m going to do something more .
and now i &apos;m going to connect the filter with the schlagzeug so that i can control the effect of live .
i can accelerate the whole sequence by the way i &apos;m going to go to one or the speed .
and now i &apos;m going to add the filter to the bass , for something more expression .
i can change the sequence as it is happening .
and so i don &apos;t have to plan them to do it , but can improvise , and you &apos;re going to extend it or verkürzen .
and finally , i can ausblenden the whole sequence by running the lautstärke-siftable .
thank you .
so as you can see , my desire is to develop new mensch-computer-schnittstellen that make better fit the way our brains and bodies work .
and today , i had time to show you a part of this new design-welt and some of the ways we &apos;re working in our lab .
the idea that i &apos;d like to give you on the way is that we are at the threshold of this new generation of werzeugen to interaction with digital media , which is the information that we have to do in our world that is equal to our demands .
thank you .
i &apos;m looking forward to the conversation with all of you .
yes , good afternoon .
i &apos;m very happy to be there .
yes , so what &apos;s supposed to be biohacking ?
i have to take a little bit of a little bit of a little bit , and that &apos;s a beschäftigt with the modern biology .
i study molecular biology , and i &apos;ve been working on the biohacking for a few years now , and i started that because i just wanted to know and do it , and i wanted to do it , and i wanted to do what i was studying in studying theory .
so , that was my primary motivation .
so it was a curiosity , and i wanted to sort of get closer to the matter , so .
so i think that in general , the basic biology , in general , biotechnology , biotechnology , everything you count , synthetic biology and so forth .
extremely important , now it &apos;s extremely important , and much more , much more important is going to be more important .
there &apos;s so much more complex things like these , and they were changing plants on the äckern .
now , you know , craig venter in the u.s.a , which is trying to make biofuel , which is gasoline to do .
and then , under the things , there are things that are totally in the everyday life , which most people are at all , but for example , the waschmittelenzyme that allow us to wash 40 degrees laundry , are also gentechnisch enzymes enzymes .
and the list can continue on .
and so , from the interest of this , i &apos;m just going to keep on this technology .
so what &apos;s now going to do ?
most people know most people who know this from the softwarebereich .
computers are hacken , and it &apos;s always going to be like this , and it &apos;s going to go into the media , yes , the hacker are going to go somewhere and claws and claws and so forth .
it &apos;s kind of sad for the hackerszene , because it doesn &apos;t even true what they actually started , and what &apos;s actually about it .
and that &apos;s the software-hacker , the &apos; 70s , achtzigerjahren mit , and it &apos;s also created the internet .
and it &apos;s about a creative , creative , original way , to solve a problem .
and the problem , it &apos;s not just a technical problem , it can also be a social problem , it can also be a zugangsproblem , which is simplify things like things , so a matter of problemstellung , a question , and how can you do that , or how can you do that ?
and it was like , it &apos;s been großgeworden with software , but there &apos;s also in the elektronikbereich , there &apos;s a whole bastlerszene , which is doing all kinds of things that are doing all kinds of things .
and now , just like , i want to have this metaphor , which is the metaphor that i &apos;m going to take out of synthetic biology , is that biology is actually a informationswissenschaft , because the d.n.a code is a abstrakter code , which is , it &apos;s not quite equal like computers because it &apos;s more dynamic , because it &apos;s matter , so real matter ,
but it &apos;s also a code , and you can also program , and you can also do it , and you can also do it , and that &apos;s what i found amazing fascinating , and i just wanted to get a lot deeper into the dive .
it actually took a really zweitausend point of really , really , eight , really , really , really , really , really zweitausend .
there &apos;s hackteria dot , which is originally from switzerland , which is with europe and with a cooperation in india , basiertes network , but now members or active people all over the world .
this is a more artistic orientation , so there &apos;s a lot of artists and philosophers and working with scientists with scientists with these technologies , and we have to go and ask these technologies and to process that , and we &apos;re creative , there &apos;s museumsausstellungen and yes , all kinds of things .
but it &apos;s really about finding such a lockeren access to this , so you can use a lot of a spielerischen .
and then there &apos;s do-it-yourself-bio dot , d.i.y.bio .
this is from the u.s.a network , which is actually a kind of forum where you &apos;re going to stop and discussing online .
they &apos;re a little bit of technical ausgerichtet and also a little bit of businessmäßiger , and then they &apos;re going to ask , as well , i think , yes , angewandte questions .
and from those networks that have made the popular popular , it has a place that i &apos;d like to just porträtieren a little bit like that .
so here in the image on the left you see , it &apos;s a hackerspace , so basically a kind of school , a private school , nonprofit institution , where everyone can go .
children , old , all kinds of people go to just go through it , they have a laboratory in a laboratory and look at what &apos;s going to do when that laborprotokolle .
on the left is a group in indonesia , house-of-natural-fibers , which is , but that &apos;s been quite a long time .
it &apos;s longer than these other networks .
they also engage in such an artistic aspect of biological materials and , yes , elektronikbasteleien , and combine that in a fairly abgefahre way .
a group of ankara that i met for a while ago , which is a studentengruppe , which is like to have to convey the public more , what they learn in college , and they &apos;ve done so on straßenfesten little actions and try to explain what &apos;s d.n.a .
and i have a lecture in the other picture in copenhagen in copenhagen in the same museum in kombination with an exhibition .
and that &apos;s , yes , this is the fairly young people , but the only thing that really all of the united is this fascination with technology .
and what you can do with it , and you also , and you also put on the company with this , and you know , okay , so what you &apos;re going to do , you have got your interest to engage with this ?
so , o.k to hacken biology now , you need to sort of stuff .
you need to be biological materials , and you need also tools , and that &apos;s a lab .
or what you normally understand under a lab is sort of abgefahrene machines , extremely expensive , extremely distanziert , just for fachpersonal , trained academics and so on .
and we &apos;ve had to say , &quot; o.k , &quot; that you don &apos;t have to do that .
it &apos;s actually not necessary because every every one of every kaffeeautomat has actually developed the whole , sophisticated technology as most of the most laborgeräte , that &apos;s really like this .
and the premise with that premise , for example , brian degger in england , for example , brian degger in england , has a minimallabor zusammenzustellen , and then taken a dampfdruckkochtopf , a heizplatte , and , yeah , so suppenbrühe , and then it &apos;s been able to get bacteria .
so everyone who &apos;s a soup of soup that he has been doing too long before it has done .
i was going to put this in my lab a little bit , and then i &apos;d like to buy the second-hand-equipment on ebay and made a little d.n.a analysis , trying to vaterschaftstest a vaterschaftstest , so this d.n.a fingerprinting , even at home .
now that &apos;s not really a joke , right now .
and here in the picture you see the laboratory , in anführungsstrichen , so it &apos;s so much a zugestellte garage with the uni of college , a group in paris , which has established and quite successful with it , and also doing quite interesting things , and i &apos;m going to do a project for a second .
and this is biocurious , which is also mentioned hackerspace , this yes , such a kind of volkshochschule mechanism in the principle for molecular biology .
and yeah , so you see it &apos;s relatively relatively heterogen , so that &apos;s there &apos;s just people who are doing this alone , to large , larger organizations , which stop the more formal in the form of the form .
but always the idea of the approach that it &apos;s just going to be easy to be accessible .
the first project we did as an international group , when we were sort of aware of ourselves , o.k , there &apos;s now as real scene , and we &apos;re online , and we know the people that are always and the same thing .
and then , the do-it-yourself-bio org website of the founders , and i said , we &apos;ve got to make a really meeting , even real , make real , and then we have two events organized , one in london , zweitausend 10 , and a little bit of the u.s.a , in san francisco .
and , that &apos;s what we did , and i was doing , yes , who are , what are we , what do we want , what do we want to say ?
and what are our values and what are our zielsetzung , our basis ?
and then we got a code-of-conduct ausgearbeitet .
and that was right , so everybody has just so his desires , his and what it &apos;s like , put it .
there was , i think , a very good code .
and then we have not verbindlich , but that &apos;s the second , i think , i think , is relatively good , people are quite convinced of this .
and we actually tried to zurückzubringen it into the academic world , but there &apos;s no way to get there .
so i think we &apos;re in the biohackerszene , in terms of , in terms of the world , even more than the academic world .
so what do we do that ?
a project i did with the hackteria-netzwerk in switzerland was that we wanted to make an sogenannte falle falle or optical pinzette .
that &apos;s when you focus a beam in the room , you can capture little particles in the air or inside the liquid and then moving into this focus , so that &apos;s where you &apos;ve captured , so how such a traktorbeamstrahl principle .
this works , this is what &apos;s going on in academic setting , and we thought , we could get , we could get it , and we could take a webcam , the aufgeschraubt , the lens , and then , you know , a microscope , which is vergrößert around the vierhundertfach .
you see that .
and then we have a d.v.d brenner auseinandergeschraubt and the brenner the laser rausgeholt , and then we tried to focus on this camera .
and it didn &apos;t work , but we &apos;ve also learned a lot of it .
so another project that &apos;s from the french group in paris , which is , that &apos;s pretty cool .
and that &apos;s a sort of a hirnwellenmessgerät , such a e.e.g , such as a e.e.g or something , so he &apos;s been busy with neurobiologie , his his nickname is sam neurohack .
he &apos;s then he built this one of these helmet , and in cooperation with the museum , it &apos;s gone .
and then the visitors could go in the room , sit down to this chair , put on these helmet .
then their brain were measured , and depending on what they thought , or how they thought they were thinking , they &apos;re just different lights in space .
it was a pretty schickes project .
another thing from the united states that has also done with this vaterschaftstestgeschichte , is the p.c.r , that &apos;s the polymerase-kettenreaktion , complicated word .
so it &apos;s about copying genes , to reproduce , multiply , d.n.a , vermehren , so you can see them .
so if i do this , when i do this , the profiler , then go to the crime , and then they pick up any haarproben , and then they &apos;re going to apply this method , and then they can say , o.k , that hair belongs to this people .
and the machines that make this stuff are pretty expensive to buy the commercial , the cheapest are going to go on viertausend euro .
and that &apos;s not in the hobbybereich , but it &apos;s a really cool technology , which is also very much .
so this is just one application of many you can do with it .
and they have two two bastler rangesetzt , and they &apos;re getting easier and cheaper , and we have it made , and we have open source , so open hardware , so we have this device zusammengebastelt , and now , they &apos;re actually brought it to the marktreife and are the the cheapest of these devices around the world .
i think somehow , i think , sechshundert dollars or something .
but anyway , it &apos;s still not cheap , but it &apos;s definitely in a frame of a frame where it &apos;s clearly a lot of verfügbarer .
so , i think it &apos;s a very gelungener hack .
a project i started to do recently was building a gene-gun .
gene-gun is , yeah , like a luftdruckpistole , the schießt of about this far , two inches or so .
you invites d.n.a on goldpartikel and then the goldpartikel and then you put it on the zwiebeln , and then i &apos;d take it on the zwiebeln and then you get that to the light .
so the device you see here is not working .
but this is my prototype , but he looked pretty abgefahren so , so on a branch that you see on this thing , put electronics on top , and it was put on , and that was the pressure too high , the thing was broken .
and then i took a sahnespender and i put it on it .
a sahnespender , if you &apos;re full of water , it has enough pressure , so i think it &apos;s so 40 to sechtzig cash .
and so , you can get the particles strong enough and then go into the zwiebel .
and the commercial device costs about a fünfzehntausend euro or a aufwärts or something like that , in order to 50 .
so it &apos;s not the same efficiency , but it &apos;s basically a practical .
so , that &apos;s the same time that i think the same thing is to increase the availability of technology , and increase the information and the verständlichkeit that more people can get to get involved .
because , as the beginning , it &apos;s an extremely important technology , and most people have relatively little clue of it , and also no opportunity to make a good sense of .
because , if you &apos;re just reading about it , from sekundärliteratur , it &apos;s not the same as if you &apos;ve done it yourself or you &apos;ve seen it .
and i think technology will always be more important in our modern societies .
and if you can also make a good decisions in society , and you can also want to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to know the access to knowledge and to technology .
and you have to do it and understand it , and understand it .
and then , the firmiert , the firmiert and the citizen of science .
so , as a citizens , you &apos;ll be able to go to the situation and you can see this scientific technologies .
and that &apos;s the kernanliegen of the biohackern .
these are the people who at least offiziell eingetragen on the website , d.i.y.bio-dot-org website .
that &apos;s a relatively remarkable number of people around the world .
and also , interesting is , they &apos;re also in asia .
that &apos;s i think that there are fewer people on there , than actually exist .
so i know some of some people who don &apos;t have eingetragen .
and this is just the biohacker , the individual people .
in part , in part , with these hackerspaces , these places are eingetragen there .
and that &apos;s a very beginning .
as i said , it started .
and hackerspaces , so the computerhackerspaces , because the c-base in berlin was the first , neunzehnhundertfünfundneunzig .
and that &apos;s now a very large network of very good , yes , infrastrukturzentren , who are all over the world .
and we hope , of course , that we &apos;re also going to stop the same way , and also also vernetzt , so that stop can also be involved in the other .
and i would invite everyone to be concerned with this , and even try to do this .
now it &apos;s not so simple , but it &apos;s not impossible if you have enough curiosity and enough energy , you get too far .
thank you for listening .
that &apos;s it .
yes , hi .
how do we work ?
that &apos;s a question that really moves me as a designer designer , but also in the field of the forschungsbereich , and in front of all the things in the field of user .
it &apos;s about how you walk into an interactive media , so you can use this interactive media and make them a very different experience .
and i think that interactive media in our archaische , cognitive models , which is a paradigm paradigm in our biological memory , has been einprogrammiert very , very long time , and that we just can create the only media that we have now .
and this is very amazing , because you actually believe that these hochtechnologie that you &apos;ve met because that actually brings a difference into the future , but in fact , the future is right for us , in our archaischen roots .
what are actually archaische models ?
i &apos;ve been aufgeschrieben four stichworte and i want to explain that for a second .
now , to archaischen cognitive models , and that &apos;s the models that we &apos;ve been in the same days of our vorindustriellen times .
now , to these archaischen models , we &apos;ve heard that we have a natural natural relationship to the virtualität .
that sounds like this , in principle .
i &apos;m going to go to this moment and i &apos;ll show you an attempt to prove you that you have a natural relationship to the virtualität .
the second thing is that we &apos;ve been able to speak very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very sophisticated .
and the third area , which is actually explaining itself .
we all know that the interactive media is definition , which includes the verneinung of the sound , and what tells us that we think is the normal ones as normal .
the fourth point is that the story is a place of informationsweitergabe .
now , what &apos;s the virtualität with the virtualität that &apos;s actually the most important thing in the world .
i want to show you that .
how many doors have the house to live in ?
that &apos;s not going to be able to answer it immediately , but it will happen to happen , and it &apos;s going right now .
they go in the spirit of this house , in demn , and look at how many doors are there .
and that &apos;s what they do .
she &apos;s virtualisieren reality , and it &apos;s totally without computers .
fantastic , right ?
and there &apos;s been going to be mühe , for example , to show the virtual reality in our v.r.-labor , and we can actually do that all the time .
and this wealth of the virtual reality that the virtual reality is , which had needed people in the same days , because they had nothing .
they didn &apos;t have books .
or they didn &apos;t have any fotolitografie .
they didn &apos;t have a mass media .
the only thing that had had been her head .
and in that mind , the memory was playing .
in this head , knowledge became abgerufen and through these virtual images , the imagination , were also passed on .
and so it &apos;s so much in us that we can deal with the virtualität of the world .
the interesting thing about this is when i can do a little trip .
yeah , that &apos;s going .
the interesting thing about that is that at that time , the human being the same time and the medium was .
now , if you &apos;re going to think a little bit more .
what are media today ?
then you &apos;ll notice that it has been a change .
but i &apos;ll come to speak to that .
the most important tool of the informationsvermittlung have been stories since history .
schamanen , priest , so-called wissenswächter , were extra abgestellt to keep knowledge in stories .
and also today , we are still very , very strong .
the author of the book &apos;s author , jonathan gottschall , according to verbingen , and we still verbingen stunden hours a year and rezeption stories .
that means a kid that &apos;s been spent on the top of the großjährigkeit that most of his life has spent with the rezeption of stories .
now we think our love is to stories on the story that we have a child on the lap of our parents .
no , no , no .
this goes back to the cultures of the vorindustriellen times .
but for me , in the field of interactive media , as a particularly impressive , we have a verankert gedächtnis in our biological memory , the ability to think of the capacity .
i &apos;ve taken one example of the north american tribe of the nootka-indianer .
and the life lived in the küstenregion of british columbia .
and as you can see , it &apos;s a very inselreiches area , and you had to navigate , sort of , navigieren , from island to island to get food .
and they &apos;ve done this with what &apos;s called the lead-landkarten .
you know , you know , if you &apos;re interested in a little bit of the australian people .
they have similar principles .
they don &apos;t have a lead-landkarten , but they &apos;ve used the same gennanten as well as well as well as traumpfade .
and what &apos;s interesting about that is that the navigation and the topographie of regions could be recorded on songs .
in which the language was rang by untergeordnetem .
that means you &apos;re navigierte with sound and the rhythm .
and these sounds and the rhythm , have the geology that represented the topographie of a region , and it also allows you to be able to defragmentieren these songs and build different and then move it to the left , to the right and even back to the ausgangsort .
why don &apos;t we sing anymore to get from the top of a to b ?
anyway , to navigate .
what &apos;s actually happening ?
it &apos;s what &apos;s like that .
we &apos;ve moved in the same way that we &apos;ve called the genannten .
the age of the age of the age is the book and it &apos;s happened , and it &apos;s happened , it &apos;s the fotolitografie .
and that &apos;s exactly what &apos;s happening that we have the responsibility for our memories and the ability of our individual memories in external media .
the book and the picture .
so , we unfortunately , we have to virtualisieren god &apos;s a piece .
and so , in fact , i have become fremd fremd from the way that &apos;s fremd , and it has nothing to do with the reality .
bruce brown , a famous designforscher , gegangen , is so far to say that this mass mass , he &apos;s thinking the book and the image , so not the television , the internet and so on , what we call a mass mass of mass mass and our ability to virtualisieren .
let &apos;s make a little zwischenbilanz .
from the vogt-zeitalter to the age of the age .
what has einflüsse our thinking on our thinking and our erinnerungsvermögen ?
then the verblassenden einflüsse of the vorindustriellen cultures .
and they are more and more überschrieben over the course of the centuries , and more of the einflüsse of the maschinenzeitalters .
that means , instead of being able to remember , we have a very common , far common , spread of memories of memories that we can hang on our personal memories .
we don &apos;t produce anymore .
we have an abstract language .
we don &apos;t think of the thing in pictures of things that don &apos;t do in pictures , but we &apos;re kodifizieren our language .
we used to get used to that things happen linear .
and we &apos;ve accepted the linearität as a law , and there are only exceptions , like the non-linearität .
what we &apos;ve remained is , is the storytelling .
still , as a informationsvermittlung , we are very , very strong .
the question is , what &apos;s going on ?
we had the vogt -zeitalter , we had the age of the age , and we &apos;d go to this call the so-called cyber-zeitalter .
this sounds very spacig , and it sounds very , like fiction fiction , i know .
but these concepts of the cyber-zeitalters , which gives us to discover these possibilities back again .
it &apos;s about virtualität , it &apos;s about non-linearität , it &apos;s about storytelling .
i want to explain a little bit a little bit .
there &apos;s technical concepts like , like the augmented reality , which is the extended reality .
so if you look at google glasses for example , then a concept of what makes us combine the virtual world with the real world , which means that our affinität to the virtualisierung , the virtual world , to do , is angesprochen .
another example is the so-called virtual reality .
so , of course , this is how crazy that sounds like my talk , because we &apos;re moving physically in existenten , virtual worlds , quite after the model of the holodecks .
and other example are the ambienten , smart systems .
these are rooms that can respond to people .
all this needs the ability to accept our ability to accept the virtualität of the world .
i &apos;ve been in graduate , and i hope that video works , a very , very beautiful project , which is the bachelorarbeit of michael burk , ann-kathrin krenz , joris klause and jan-moritz müller .
and the two letzteren are here today .
you might have to get up for a second , so you can talk to the pause in the break .
and this project , i &apos;ve brought as an example , as again , again , is to be able to be adressiert in cognitive models .
the whole game is , i have to say .
what the storytelling of course is extremely entgegenkommt and it &apos;s a game game .
and if i &apos;m writing , you know , you have very likely to see that people who are people from some konsolen herumhappeln , or they &apos;re playing with some of the konsole in the hands .
anyway , they do that in the inside .
this is a game for outside .
and that &apos;s what &apos;s been thinking that i &apos;m going to discover the world outside , so i &apos;m going to see the real world .
and this game is connecting the virtual world , so the data that we produce , the real world .
i &apos;m sorry to have a strong abkürzen .
you can explain that a lot more , because there &apos;s more much more behind it .
and that &apos;s what i &apos;m doing a city by looking at what &apos;s positive or negative .
and so i get a very different sight of the city , a very different impression , which is i see negative and positive zones of a city and getting a very different , virtual map of a very real city .
and we can now look at that .
ah , what you can see here , sorry , is a little explanation of what you see in the same .
of course , this virtual world in the walls of our cities , is clear .
and with a kind of a flashlight , we can make these virtual worlds .
so , i &apos;d like to put this up my talk , and in the sense that the properties and the skills that we &apos;ve acquired from the vogt -zeitalter , and that we &apos;ve gone into the age of the age of the maschinenzeitalter , that the so-called cyber -zeitalters can be activated again , and that we &apos;re not going to be in this way of complex ,
thank you .
yeah , i &apos;m very happy to be able to be .
i &apos;ve been asked , whether this is a sack bag , and i &apos;ll talk to my instead of this .
it won &apos;t do it .
i &apos;m going to get a bit of a minute , which is in there .
but i &apos;m just doing it just about n little .
yes , children are curious about nature or should be curious , designers .
i &apos;m a creator of the house , so i &apos;m also looking at the theme of curiosity , and how transformed curiosity our thinking , and why lose it also curiosity , and we need to neu it again and we need to neu it again and so forth .
it &apos;s a whole range of things that you &apos;re doing next to your actual dasein as a creator .
when professors are curious , they &apos;re often reingeschoben in the same forschungssemester .
and that &apos;s what i had in the last half of the year .
a forschungssemester zum , the subject of the natural interface .
now you &apos;re going to ask yourself , why are all the gestalter of the gestalter of the gestalter of communication and interaction and so on .
and i &apos;m just going to give one of these little devices up because things are always intuitive , and more and more and more natural , benutzungsfreundlicher , and you have to stop , what &apos;s actually , of course , for us , of course , what &apos;s benutzungsfreundlich or intuitive .
and before the background , i have a natural interface , so the next generation in the relationship of the human being in the relationship of the human being , in the relationship of the human , is how our tools or how the computer is changing from the machine to digital digital .
so i &apos;ve been busy when , of course , or , you know , what &apos;s or intuitive .
maybe you have to see a view .
why does that happen ?
so if we look at the development of our society , just represented here , then we &apos;re moving from the third in the fourth gesellschaftsgeneration or gesellschaftsform .
so from the modern ones to the computergesellschaft .
every society is shaped by a primärmedium .
in the beginning , the stammesgesellschaft in the language .
that means , it &apos;s found that you could speak a common language , you could communicate with each other , and it was in the same cave or in other areas , created cities , or villages , and has created the nen stammesgesellschaft .
but the primärmedium was the language , something very natural , something very living .
so you had to learn , so no , a kleinkind can talk about nature , but we learn to sukzessive and verhältnismäßig .
this was then abgelöst by the ancient society and the first form of the abstraction .
and that was a riesen-aufschrei , because of course , the living language was anfing into manifestieren in form of writing , which means what &apos;s going on and alive , and i put it in stone and i &apos;m going to do it too .
the after i meißel and when i meißel , it &apos;s a very different coverage of , when there &apos;s a living kind of a life alive .
but then the sukzessive was then , then , the script was erhielt .
then the next generation that we actually did is actually living lives in this day .
this is just because of the printing and print geprägte with gutenberg and others .
at the time , it was a affront , where adel , klerus and others , are you really crazy when the people are starting to read , then , after that , then , after that , and that &apos;s totally fatal .
and now we &apos;re coming into the next generation , and the exciting is , so a generationswechsel generationswechsel is just a few hundred years , and we &apos;re really in this period of this period that we &apos;re going to be a part of that .
and that &apos;s what really verwirrt us , because we see the new media , social media media , facebook and so on .
with total transparency , what the new thinking is what &apos;s going to be in the old thinking , don &apos;t say that in the lasagne , no beef is more or a beef , and the other phenomena , i want to just vertuschen , and just want to do that .
and these two worlds , pop , pop together , new and old ones .
the exciting thing is , if you look at this , this new society , these computergesellschaft , entlehnt , many mechanisms , principles and archaischer paradigm from the stammesgesellschaft .
now , not at the local level , but at global level .
we &apos;ve understood that the weather is global .
that the theme of ecology is a global global .
not , if i &apos;m making green and ökologisch , and the neighbor thinks less , it &apos;s not going to work .
that means , from the local village , it &apos;s actually a global village with the same principles , of course , of course , as well as well as well as the intuitive , but also total transparency .
so , as you know in the village , who had what to whom and when , and so on this erweiterung , this is what &apos;s happening today , through this mobile endgeräte .
it &apos;s that we know global power , and faster and better and better .
and so , as it happened , it was happening in the village .
and i &apos;ve been looking at this background , which is , what does it mean , which is , of course , what &apos;s natural for us , which is , what we might have , but also , what &apos;s also instinctively , so what makes the difference ?
because they &apos;re often people , they can &apos;t do it , so they can &apos;t deal with it .
so you have to engage with this , which is , what does it mean , and not just change it , it &apos;s different , but it &apos;s also going to be better .
and when , of course , it &apos;s a intuitive , and how a creator of it can be an einfluss , and you can make things like that , so you &apos;re very intuitive , so you &apos;re having fun and you &apos;re just using fun .
you &apos;re going to be busy , as well as a student , with the subject of perception and the wahrnehmungspsychologie .
and that &apos;s , of course , where you start and look and look , and say , okay , now i &apos;ll just look inside the inner self .
and what &apos;s it going to be in there ?
so how do we work when we &apos;re going to get there ?
and what &apos;s actually , of course , intuitive , and how do our channels of perception and how does the cognitive use work ?
because steve jobs said you , you know , you know , you know , to dig to dig deeper to understand it .
so you really have to look at the details , if i want to make something more or intuitive handhabbar , which means that &apos;s the core .
and you see , you see , you know , a lot of our own senses , most of us think , only five , but it &apos;s actually seven already , and certainly , there &apos;s going to be the next , more , more , more eighth sense , and as an extension of our self .
and to look , how do we process information , how do we take information ?
to say alone , what is information ?
information is every difference that makes a difference .
a lot of people use the word , but don &apos;t know what it means to do it .
but i have to understand at the heart , when information becomes information , when from data to information and from information , again , i know how to do things , or , of course , make things happen to , or natural , natural things .
and of course , design is also taking sense of perception .
so we see that when i &apos;m going to do things , i can make them confusing like the right side , where i don &apos;t know what &apos;s salt and pepper , or i can make it intuitive , by showing you .
so very much natural , in a gefäß , but i &apos;m looking at right , where is salt and pepper .
and if i &apos;m going to say to someone , give me salt or pepper , then it &apos;ll be thinking about where it is in .
and so , in the left , you know , i can &apos;t access and then hopefully that there &apos;s no sugar in it , the salt would give you the salt .
but also our perception , how do you think , is it also täuscht us .
so for example , these perception in context .
the right circle is bigger than the little , although it &apos;s not the case , but it &apos;s just equal to the same size , and yet , our perception changes depending on what context we are doing things .
anybody know what that &apos;s ?
come on .
pattern recognition should work .
there &apos;s been more like my glasses .
so it &apos;s an n circle .
a second circle is already beginning to relate to certain or assoziieren .
and then , when i stop a halboval dazusetze , then we don &apos;t see a unit of one unit , which is a circle , circle and , but we see a unit , we don &apos;t see more of three parts , a circle , a circle , a circle .
it &apos;s called gestaltgesetz or gestaltpsychologie , which also affect us in perception .
important for the designers , who are the most commonly in the first part of the semester , the great gestaltgesetze .
gestaltgesetz the distance , gestaltgesetz of the continuity and so forth .
often , in third , again .
but that &apos;s a essential important part of the value , if you want to design things as well as well as well .
the next phenomenon , which is very interesting to see that .
sounds very simple , but it &apos;s very exciting when you &apos;re going to get closer to it .
so we have the eyes in front of the eyes , and now you think , we &apos;re looking at the beginning of the back .
that &apos;s wrong .
you &apos;ll actually look back from the back .
and so they projiezieren a assumption , and they see something that you recognize , beispielweise circle .
that means we &apos;re not going to see what we see before we see it back back to the back of our seheapparat , to say , okay , okay .
i have a cognitive cognitive rückkoppelung , you have what you want to see .
and that &apos;s what it &apos;s coming back .
and then it goes back , because the back of the front is not the back and says , now , now , look at the back , and you know , if you see what you see , what you want to see .
and then it goes back to back , and it &apos;s actually going to be seen .
so a very , very spannender process , like certain things , and what &apos;s happening for these things are happening .
i don &apos;t know who knows this picture .
there &apos;s exactly what i described to .
now , everybody &apos;s trying to see something out of this pattern .
i don &apos;t know who recognizes what &apos;s going to recognize .
does anybody see anything ?
a dalmatiner , right .
if i saw that , that there &apos;s a dalmatiner in there , you know that .
you &apos;ll never forget it , because i &apos;m going to show you where the dalmatiner is .
now you see the dalmatiner .
and on , now you &apos;re going to see it .
that means i actually verdorben it , you don &apos;t see any patterns of dadrin , but i have a konditioniert in a short time , and i &apos;ve been able to see this dog in this very verworrenen picture .
and this is this projection of vision , rückkopplung .
now i know it , and now i &apos;m going to go forward , i see the dalmatiner .
i see the dalmatiner .
so , very exciting processes , which then , yes , gray , you don &apos;t actually , but here &apos;s what i &apos;m doing in this rosanen crowd .
does anybody know what three seconds are ?
long , yeah .
that &apos;s our present .
so , it &apos;s also interesting to know what &apos;s interesting as designers .
if i know something about three seconds , until i speak to the presence of the vergangenheitsschleife , i can also überbrücken very well wartezeiten , where i &apos;m doing it with three seconds .
that &apos;s what it &apos;s got to process as a present .
then it moves into the past , and so i can überbrücken very elegant wartezeiten for example , if i know this phenomenon .
what does fünfundzwanzig milliseconds do ?
yes .
it &apos;s also a very interesting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the period of fall in love .
that means , you know , if you know this , you &apos;ll notice you who you look like for a long , because i don &apos;t have a gewähr for what &apos;s going to happen to happen .
and sechzehn milliseconds , also a very interesting phenomenon .
that &apos;s the zeitraum of the perceptions that we have .
that means that first impression is going to happen in a very fast speed of how we perceive things .
and as we see things , we see things , and how we are sort of absichern ourselves against our environment so we can think that .
of course , the creator of the subject is not just engaging with the subject of perceptions and neural verarbeitungen , or kognitionsergonomie , but of course , with the subject of mensch-objekt-beziehung .
so , how a human being is going to do a little bit of things .
there &apos;s a practical functions , so that sort of formale aspects or formalästhetische aspects .
there are anzeichen-funktionen , where i know exactly where i actually have to reach .
but there are symbolic functions , why is somebody for such a little bit of a täschchen , where does not have any reinpasst , so horrende , summen , summen money , even though it &apos;s not so practically that ?
there are more of the symbolischen , on the bedeutungsebene , which we are also gestalter as a creator of , of course .
back to my actual subject of natural interface and the subject , which is also dahinterliegt , is usability .
usability means , as i can do , i can do a certain goal , or how can a user users do in a particular level , effectively , efficient and zufriedenstellend a goal .
and that &apos;s how it says that &apos;s the norm .
how can i do something more important ?
i can use that directly , or i need your n , or i need to do this , i need a ne .
and less usable or benutzungsfreundlich is .
i &apos;m making it just differently and make it beautiful , doesn &apos;t mean it &apos;s better handhabbar .
you have to understand that .
and then , if you look at the software that we &apos;ve seen , you &apos;ll also understand why neunundneunzig percent of our current software is little intuitive or not to be anhieb , das i-pad in many areas or i-phone , although it &apos;s a lot more intuitive than classical software .
and so , intuitive benutzbarkeit is not only a elementarer wirtschaftsfaktor , nen elementarer , if i &apos;m going to use technology devices to use people .
why ?
because in the rule , we usually , through this new kind of nutzbarkeit , which is the natural user to ínterfaces , for example , five times the average of our goal .
you have to imagine that if you do something of the classical softrware , five hours , and it &apos;s just an hour of the natural software , and it &apos;s just an hour .
that doesn &apos;t mean you can probably take four hours a day , but your arbeitgeber or anyone falls into the four hours it &apos;s been working on it .
but i want to say , of course , a entsprechende leistungssteigerung , for us , is to do some things .
and then , when we put ourselves back into the field of software , the first command line interfaces that were very abstract , where you needed for months to deal with these systems .
and then the next , which now , with a nem brain &apos;s model , or mental model like the software software , worked , worked , you have an idea of something that metaphor , the metaphor of a desktop , to be able to use the computer .
so no longer ones and ones or kryptische code , but a metaphor .
that &apos;s what &apos;s going on for all the way , but it &apos;s also much better .
the next generation of graphischen benutzungsoberflächen is working on a lot more .
so , as a creator , i &apos;m going to be a creator , a lot more more of the behavior that looks like this .
that &apos;s also a paradigm shift .
i think that this is always a unwichtiger thing for success , the usability is going to be a app .
and then , if i &apos;m going to go to these natural user interface , where i &apos;m using voice , by language , by touch , by the gesture , and not more and cursor that , and cursor the things , i &apos;m still faster and even more .
but that &apos;s also going to take me back to the point , when are the things that actually intuitive ?
and when you &apos;re intuitive , and then i have to go back to my little friend here and go to see what &apos;s going to be like , &quot; what &apos;s going on , &quot; is a little intuitive , when is it actually intuitive ?
and that &apos;s always a little intuitive for us , and i think that &apos;s a little intuitive , if i think i have to think about it .
so , he doesn &apos;t seem to think he &apos;d like to think , but it just kind of verhältnismäßig .
the less i think about it , the more intuitive it is .
and what does that mean for designers ?
that means , if we look at that we can take some existing handlungsmodelle from one on something else , for example , the metaphor , then i can do that as a creator .
that means , i can just translate a intuitive human handlungsmodell to a software , and it &apos;s a much more benutzungsfreundlicher software .
well , of course , the question , of course , what is the most intuitivste handlungsschema of us , and now i &apos;ve been able to tell it .
this is called the osit-modell .
that &apos;s all of us , and osit is an akronym and it &apos;s an akronym and it &apos;s akronym , selektieren , informed .
that &apos;s all of you all the time , but it &apos;s unbewusst , and you know , intuitive or , in some sort , intuitive or , you know , instinctively .
the model is going to be in the womb and interkulturell , so it works at young and old , and it &apos;s used to be used by us all the time , without the most people who have been to have this model .
osit osit is about 50 to siebzigtausend times of us as the activity of activity , so in sleep , you &apos;ve found that it &apos;s a little bit more often strapaziert than the day .
i can now orientieren this mental handlungsmodell , selektieren , informed , transagieren , übertragen .
and through this kind of transmission , similar to the metaphor of the desktops , but not a metaphor of a physical object , but a metaphor of a handlungsmusters , a handlungsprinzips .
and this is on a higher grail of the benutzungsfreundlichkeit , as the übertragung of a classic metaphor , which is the desktops .
and so , as i &apos;m going to take you through a übersicht of a übersicht , selektieren , informieren , where it comes to me , i can look at it in the details , and i can look at it , and i can send it somewhere , or send it somewhere , or send it to someone or buy a shopping thing , and i &apos;ll buy
and then i can translate that .
i &apos;m trying to give it through a beispiels .
i &apos;ve had a cake all of the time .
and so , now , i &apos;m now interacting with the object , can wieder , reinzoomen .
i &apos;ll get all of the überblick , can now filter this , and can say , just show me , just show me just a point of cake .
and once again , a interface , which is a lot more intuitive and a lot of natural .
because i can take the things like the pieces , and it can be touchen , and it come to me is far more natural than if hierarchisch organized pages or other mechanisms , sort of , can make these things available .
imagination is more powerful important than knowledge , and with that phrase , i &apos;d like to close to a and to give the evidence , as well as designers , designers have to think differently to come to new solutions , and in that sense , thank you very much for your attention and i thank you .
i want to give you a very specific point of curiosity .
the first thing you &apos;re big when you &apos;re a kid , when baby is , you know what the ausscheidungen you have , yes ? and depending on whether your parents allows them to play more or less in the töpfchen and move , the more , and more , in , of course , their curiosity , of course , will be in the curiosity .
and curiosity doesn &apos;t let me learn .
so , all of these are all here and curious , in fact , people who have a property that you can &apos;t learn .
i &apos;m going to do it now , basically this whole umweltdiskussion , weltuntergang , 40 years of club-of-rome , in quality .
and there &apos;s a central point in it .
and that &apos;s on phosphorus .
give pee a chance .
every day , you give you , you give you spend , you give you four grams of phosphorus , and every day , you have to capture two grams of phosphorus .
otherwise they don &apos;t have teeth .
you can &apos;t store energy .
you can &apos;t have a bone .
we could just lie to the weltmeere mollusken .
if we don &apos;t take a phosphorus and we &apos;re going to take a phosphorus .
and the thing is , what &apos;s amazing is we &apos;re dealing with something that would be really selbstverständlichkeit , but not that .
because everybody talks about energy , but nobody talks about the phosphor-problem .
the phosphor-problem is a lot more critical .
we &apos;re living in two countries .
we only have only for two years , and now , by the world &apos;s phosphor-bergbau , is now being brought into the environment , as in all the atomanlagen .
in the last 20 years , fünfzehntausend tons of uranium is distributed in the field of fields in germany .
and that &apos;s what we take on .
it &apos;s doing leukemia with children .
and we think we would protect the environment , if we &apos;re a little bit less harmful .
so , for example , schütz the environment , the fahr .
schütz the environment , make a lot of waste .
schütz the environment , verbrauche less energy .
that &apos;s not protection .
that &apos;s like if i would say , if i would say , your kid , it only blow three times a five times .
that &apos;s just a little bit of destruction .
if we think of the wiege to the bahre , our entire earth will be back or later a friedhof .
so , the wiege of the wiege to the wiege .
and the most important thing is to look at the ground , as a result .
the ground is on 60 percent of the ice .
at the moment , we &apos;re building corn and losing 11 pounds of food per hectare , or in the square foot .
that means we &apos;re losing to the ground , for example , five times more than new .
we can , of course , look at the müllproblem .
and everything is packaging or content .
in offenbach , for example , the hausmüll twenty percent of the müllmenge has been windeln .
and because we &apos;re older , the windeln are going to be larger .
that &apos;s all of them in the vorwindelphase .
yes ?
one baby takes about six thousand .
we could reduce that by 10 percent , but what does that do ?
this is going to be balanced in china in a second .
it &apos;s completely trivial .
so the question is , how do we go to this windeln ?
here &apos;s one of the proof that men are not pigs .
i want to tell you .
because phosphorus is going to be abgegeben by the festen parts of the ocean .
in the people over the urine .
yeah .
so , there are no men who are not going to be pigs .
because that &apos;s what it &apos;s done , or ?
we think , we think , in the world &apos;s umweltdiskussion , we &apos;re too many in the world .
and if you are people who are when you put it on people , if you say that , it would be better , you don &apos;t have to be there , then you &apos;ll be raffgierig and feindselig .
and so , somebody like al gore , one of our big hero , there &apos;s nothing more wichtigeres than to stabilize the human population .
in israel , you say , if you &apos;re rettest a human human , you &apos;ll get the earth .
here &apos;s the more you get more , the better .
yeah .
the first question is , are we really too much ?
if you look at the ants , the weight of the ants on earth , the ants weigh more than four times more than we do .
i could also take a pig , but in the united states , nobody like termiten , so far , although they &apos;re a vegetarier .
that means the ants are much more than we do .
and because they &apos;re physically working much harder than we do , and because they &apos;re only three to six months , it &apos;s in their weight , in the energy consumption , something 30 billion people .
that means we &apos;re not too many , we &apos;re too stupid , yes ?
and where you see how far we wanted to do , and how sad we could , and how sad we are , that we are at all on earth , can you see that , for example , offenbach have a program , to 20 40 40 , what you want to be here , you know , zwanzig 40 .
they can only be klimaneutral if they don &apos;t exist , yes ?
the only opportunity .
have you ever seen a klimaneutralen tree ?
yes ?
one ?
that means , our whole intelligence means we want to be a bit of a tree , right ?
yes ?
no tree is kohlenstoffneutral .
luckily , yes ?
there &apos;s no überbevölkerungsproblem in trees .
there are still six billion trees in the world alone .
and of course , you &apos;ve heard some of a überbevölkerungsproblemen from trees ?
that means all of our intelligence means that we want to be a bit of the trees .
and where you see , even in something like demeter , the strikteste bio- of agriculture , it doesn &apos;t allow our own to go back .
every year we lose so three million tons of phosphorus that would have to go back in the same cycles .
and so we &apos;re too many .
alone .
that means we feel so guilty on earth , that we say , there &apos;s no bio-landbau , no bioland , no nature-et-progrès , no nature-et-progrès , and as you &apos;re all saying , that allow our own exkremente to go back .
isn &apos;t that sad ?
so we &apos;re too many .
it &apos;s safe to make a less harmful to be less harmful .
but where are we useful ?
we &apos;re trying to minimize our ecological footprint , but it &apos;s about having a big footprint that &apos;s useful .
we want to be good for society , we want to be good for the economy , but when it comes to the environment , the highest , not being there , yes ?
nullemissionen , yes ?
they can only have a nullemissionen if they &apos;re not there .
even if you were shooting up now , you would have emissions .
so you can &apos;t solve it .
we can do it differently .
we can get our nutrients back .
we &apos;re doing in brazil agriculture where we get the nutrients back .
and we can directly get nutrients in agriculture , and we can zurückkriegen nutrients .
we &apos;re doing this in china , for example , where we &apos;re going to take the trash .
in china , a nachttopf is still honigtöpfchen , so , sort of , yes ?
and in our western world we were always too stupid , our nutrients .
this means , the whole western zivilisationsgeschichte , which is what &apos;s been recording in the city , but the farmers never returned to a little bit .
and so the cities had to grow more and more and more because the farmers go into the cities and the cities have to keep going to get their nutrients .
so all the western rich are always expanding , until they don &apos;t have the infrastructure , and they &apos;re implodiert .
yes ?
in china , it was different .
you &apos;ve done bruchlos civilization over the five years , because you could always be able to zurückzubringen the nutrients .
even today , if you invited to eat , you &apos;re expecting to eat , you &apos;re expecting to eat that they &apos;re going to stay long until you see the toilet .
because it &apos;s unfreundlich to go to the nutrients .
you &apos;ve got them to get them to dinner , not to the nährstoffdiebstahl .
that means you can see on the internet , how you can get the nutrients back .
it &apos;s really nice about this , so agriculture is power , biogas , making a hectare of a hectare of a hektar of a fünftausend of a fünftausend of the favelas , and they can do a farmer , about $ eintausendfünfhundert dollars , and they &apos;re waiting for a farmer to grow chickens and chickens and chickens and vegetables and fish .
and the great thing about this is the verbrechensrate in the favelas to go back about neunzig percent .
so we don &apos;t need to control people , just to be very bad .
we can support them to be good .
it &apos;s high-tech-landwirtschaft , of course , but the facilities are carrying themselves .
the nebenprodukt is clean water .
and they &apos;re designed to design , by design , that can just be able to do a farmer .
that means that the verbrechensraten go back .
and none of these facilities , we &apos;ve now built over hundertfünzig over the last 20 years , none of these facilities has ever been sabotiert .
they could easily reinwerfen a liter of altöl altöl , and then it would be ruined by years .
not instead of it .
that means we don &apos;t need to control people , so we can &apos;t be bad at all .
we can support them to be good .
that means we need to zurückkriegen phosphorus .
and by the way , if you want to do what , they &apos;re going to write , in germany , best is best designed to all the treatment treatment in the frankfurt .
unfortunately , not in offenbach , but maybe you can help the frankfurtern a little bit .
because the frankfurter facility could be the best one .
and it has to go back .
we see that phosphorus is really critical .
and we see it &apos;s absolutely a good job .
we &apos;ve been using it for three years in holland .
the dutch government explained , they will be the first country in the world , which phosphorus is zurückgewinnt .
but we need the total .
you know , there are two countries that are controlling nearly 70 percent of the world &apos;s population .
there &apos;s opec a bunch of waisenknaben .
these are sechsundzwanzig countries that control 40 percent of the control .
and the oil will be replacing by other energy .
but the phosphorus is not going to replace .
so it &apos;s not about making the existing thing a little bit less , but it &apos;s about making something right .
and first of all , one of them is to ask what the right thing is .
that means it &apos;s about efficiency , not efficiency .
in holland , you understand that , obviously , because in holland , the country is built on flowers .
yes ?
imagine if you can &apos;t imagine your wife , if you have your wife sad , when you have them , and you come to 50 .
very inefficient .
but really , really effective , yes ?
or take a lippenstift .
a woman in germany eats about six times three pounds in their lifetime .
and that &apos;s what .
now this isn &apos;t not exactly correct right because we don &apos;t know how much weggeküsst is going to do .
but a lippenstift , even at this lighting , i can tell you , is completely inefficient , but it &apos;s very effective , yes , yes ?
one thing in life is not efficient .
that &apos;s not what efficiency , but efficiency .
to ask , what is the right thing ?
not to burn the klärschlamm a little bit better and abzulagern it and abzulagern it and lose all the materials for the cycles of the cycle , but first to ask , how do you make the cycles ?
so , you know , you know how to do it .
yes ?
if i put them out for dinner , and i say , yes , there &apos;s a pill with offenbach-geschmack and a glass of water .
wonderful , &quot; ne ?
that &apos;s efficient .
all of the things that are beautiful is not efficient .
when you fall in love with somebody , efficient ?
yes ?
that means everything that counts in life is not to be saving , it &apos;s not to be too .
all the umweltdiskussion .
we say people , oh yeah , you &apos;ve got no green to the south .
no , the throw is right right now , yes ?
every place you &apos;re doing , where you &apos;re wegwirft , from , yes , you &apos;ll get back to lebensmöglichkeiten .
but the wrong things .
if you put the wrong things , you have a müllproblem .
in how we think of north .
there &apos;s every footprint in the footprint .
if you walk , yes , everyone &apos;s zerstört the ground .
because the ground is going to die , and the wind will die and the water is going to wash away the ground .
if you &apos;re in italy , every footprint means that the water remains longer in the meadow .
so , it &apos;s about creating a big footprint that will be a feuchtgebiet .
not schuldmanagement .
we &apos;re in germany , in germany .
yes ?
but when i ask you , how about your wife ?
what do they say ?
sustainable .
then i say , herzliches beileid , yes ?
that &apos;s just the amount of light .
so not save , avoid .
every waste is nährstoff .
and it &apos;s a lust , when you see in italy , how people rausschmeißen out of the car , they &apos;re rausschmeißen out of the car .
because you know , that &apos;s a lustvoller process .
it &apos;s a ne form of revierverhalten , yes ?
you can show , i was there .
but with the right design , i &apos;m going to ask .
so , for example , we &apos;ve developed a eiscremeverpackung , which is at room temperature , ne liquid .
they can wegschmeißen where they go and stand .
in two hours , they &apos;re building it all over .
and it contains seeds from rare plants , so they &apos;re contributing by the wegwerfen of biodiversity .
that means we &apos;re useful , not less harmful .
so there are two cycles cycles .
not all of course , to be kompostierbar .
a television or a washing machine , they &apos;re just using them , they don &apos;t use it .
just the things that verschleißen , like schuhsolen , like bremsbeläge , like autoreifen , like autoreifen , which have to be , you know , you &apos;re going to go in biological systems .
the things that are only used to go to technical systems .
but today , we &apos;re only talking about biological systems .
yes ?
for example , the sneaker , yes ?
so direct ads , not for the company puma , but for that , they &apos;re now helping this company to make these products successfully .
because we don &apos;t do the things that are free of it .
yes ?
so , if i &apos;m eating them to eat and say , it &apos;s free of hähnchen , and then you don &apos;t help it .
no , we &apos;re stuck in what &apos;s inside .
positive .
so not like detox .
don &apos;t get in .
it &apos;s all useful .
these are the first shoes you can do the kavalierstart on the fußgängerampel and go to the rubber in biological cycles , yes ?
everything is kompostierbar .
and if it &apos;s done , we can do it for adidas , for nike , for hennes and mauritz and the whole industry industry .
and that &apos;s half of all the world &apos;s abwasserprobleme worldwide , which are caused by the manufacturing industry .
so , they &apos;re helping with this , ask people for people .
hey , puma , do you really seriously ?
because they &apos;ve already changed the vorstandsvorsitzenden .
and i &apos;m not sure if you really dabeibleiben it .
so , help me a little bit .
but it &apos;s going .
yeah .
what &apos;s been shown .
this is going .
so we can make things so that if you verschleißen , if you &apos;re kaputtgehen , you can fit in biological cycles .
technical cycles are the same .
there &apos;s a direct rücknamesystem .
this is the first green rucksack , actually , which is made for this , and go into the circulation .
so , that &apos;s what you can do , in any store , you can do things .
when you get to that , yes ?
do you remember the windel of the windel ?
when the moment is the trash .
all around you are nahezu .
in the countries where people are coming to money .
there &apos;s the deponien on the front of the world , but also in the landscape , yes ?
if we change the plastics , so it can go into biological systems , if we change the wasserspeicher , the inside that they can back in zellulosebasis , then they can plant a baby in israel , or in tunisia hundertfünfzig trees .
yes ?
alone , if you take this windel , you know , sterilisieren , and you take the powder to plant trees .
so the baby &apos;s kohlenstoffpositiv for the whole life , and it &apos;s beginning to go .
so , we don &apos;t need to be klimaneutral , we can be klimapositiv .
it &apos;s kind of a beneficial poop .
yes , i mean .
yes ?
we can do that .
we can even reinvent it all .
i started an institute .
now , there are a lot of people there , and they can all engage .
there &apos;s an extra group to do a group of cradle-to-cradle-verein , where everybody can participate .
so not saving , not avoid , avoid , reduce , not schuldmanagement , but smart waste .
does it matter ?
thank you .
the work of the interpreten .
music as a language .
in the description of my speech , i wrote that i was a interpretin , as a übersetzerin , so i understand , in the english , the english .
interpreten is the geschriebenen notes in music music .
that as a translator , you can &apos;t just überträgt the text to a different language , but also to understand the deeper sense of words and wortzusammenhang , so it makes a reasonable translation , everyone knows that it has to do with fremdsprachen .
already from the english into english , you can also require more knowledge , and it &apos;s a little bit when you go to poetry or poetry .
but it &apos;s a fremd thing to be fremd from laien , which we do to do a musician with our musiksprache .
as a interpretin , i was just the geschriebenen notes .
you think the music komponist has just hineingeschrieben everything in the notes , what he imagined .
in fact , the notes are very vage and ungenau .
these notes are about exactly the same or ungenau , like a verbale , if it &apos;s very seemingly penibelst , description of a landscape .
because in this verbalen landschaftsbeschreibung , the smell of the flowers is not smell , the degree of the grüns , the grad of the grüns , not to hear the säuseln of the noise , not too .
so the interpret , the interpret , has to put these ungenauen on the notensprache into another , which is , namely , übersetzen , concrete , nonverbale musiksprache .
now i want to you today , what i would say , &quot; musikalisch , &quot; so interpretiere , even in a language language .
so basically a translation translation .
so i prefer to do it in german , because if i had to translate it into english , it would be gleichbedeutend to me with translation translation into translation .
so , the music works to me as much as the spoken language .
the notierten notes have the function of the letters of a script .
so it &apos;s not so much to learn to learn notes and they &apos;re going to put it on the piano or the right place to a violinsaite .
and that &apos;s just the letters that you &apos;ve learned to paint .
the point of the letters is when you can see the language .
so , for the learning process of music , you need to musiksprache at least as long as the spoken language .
there &apos;s also abstufungen , whether you learn it for the hausgebrauch , and you can only understand passive , or you can also talk to the musical speaker .
the work of the interpreten is a similar way to do the one .
after you &apos;ve chosen a piece of play , because you &apos;re thrilled by that , you &apos;re actually forscht the emergence of the composition .
you collect information about the piece of the sekundärliteratur .
you read in the letters , tagebüchern , notes , or whether it &apos;s words , thoughts by composers itself .
you study the works that he created earlier and after .
you think of comparison .
the beweggründe to write it .
how about what he felt ?
how were the circumstances of the society and the politics ?
all of this interest me .
you think in that time , you &apos;re looking at contemporary pictures , or you know , you know , you know , contemporary pictures .
but at the time , you also have a reiches knowledge to the composers that you play with a lot of time , and it &apos;s always a lighter and easier to feel in it and feel it .
the composer is becoming more and more to the friend you live with .
his cause to write the piece is increasingly , more and more , more and more , to be able to play it .
now , since the notes , as a very precise record of the end of the composers , it &apos;s just a framework , i turn this framework to make it sense and meaning it back and meaning it back .
i then say to my own words what &apos;s going to be written between this framework .
i &apos;ll play a erklärend , which could have these notes to mean .
now for me and for composers , and what they could mean now for him today .
every note , every phrase gets a sense , because i feel it myself , because it &apos;s entspringt out of my own personal gelebten .
it has to be here in this and now stimmig , otherwise i can &apos;t convince my audience to convince my cause .
it &apos;s always a very happy concert , if i may have the experience , the piece that i &apos;ve worked as long as i was going to neu .
so you have to neu a happy new day , even though the same rituals of life , get up , breakfast , work , work , as well as i have the same piece of time to go back .
i &apos;ve been eating a day back to seasons , my pulse goes down in the morning , when it &apos;s a konzertsaal , it takes longer that sound back back at home .
i take the breathing of the audience , consciously , unconsciously .
and all of this affected me and all that affected my experience with the composition .
and it &apos;s a wonderful thing , when i stand on a duo-partner on stage , and we have the same one .
then the same thing happens in a good , angeregten conversation .
you get a new idea , and you get a sogleich , and it &apos;s going to be sogleich .
it &apos;s exciting because things we don &apos;t have to do so , and what you can &apos;t do .
it &apos;s great fun making music , and you have the audience , you know , you have experienced how the music is communicating alive .
so every concert is another concert .
i &apos;m never going to play more like this , as i &apos;m going to play .
i can &apos;t play as in 20 years now .
and i &apos;m going to have more lebenserfahrung than today , and so i &apos;m going to have a lot more farbnuancen , emotions and emotions as today .
sure , i &apos;ll also have some farbtöpfe rausgeschmissen , but for that new dazubekommen .
and i have a nice concrete example .
it was on a klavierkursus for musikstudenten , professor lehrer , professor jürgen ude , a famous beethoven-spezialist , konzertpianist and langjähriger professor of the musikhochschule in stuttgart .
unfortunately , i was still too young , so he was already emeritiert when i finally started studying .
but i was very lucky to be able to get him very early , and i was going to know , and i was in my high school .
i was 17 when i was teilnahm at one of his class again and i was playing the last one from the four balladen by the chopin , a spätwerk .
he asked me what the introduction of this ballade was for me .
that &apos;s a getragenes part .
and in my jugendlichkeit i said , expectation .
and so he schmunzelte and he said , this ?
that &apos;s what the altersunterschied must be .
because for me , she &apos;s memory .
he was on sechzig .
well , with 17 you have to have dreams , but not really significant memories .
i play the piece of all over the few years , and it &apos;s always , although it &apos;s not a single note .
so every time it &apos;s exciting , because i &apos;ve been reading something new .
one example , in a very different area , and it &apos;s a monet gemalt .
it &apos;s always the same garden , but it &apos;s a different tageszeit , in verschiedenem light .
he translated the seerosen verschiedentlich , as he saw her , as she was looking at it in this moment .
his personal impressionen of the seerosen .
the x-malige interpretation of a piece is comparable .
now , i &apos;m also older than a chopin and a chopin years old , when he wrote the piece .
he lived for a neununddreißig years .
and it &apos;s important to me to look at the notes , even though i can &apos;t know it .
to keep zwiesprache , right with the composers .
because the notes are the only connection to him .
especially , if he died .
now , how do you start talking to the language of music ?
i said yes , you need to do something like the spoken language .
and often the musikunterricht is so that you only learn the notes .
and you learn to learn that , in practically first , you know , before you just talks one word .
you learn to find notes on the musical instrument .
if all your finger on time and right as it &apos;s going to be able to move in the notes , then they &apos;ll come out notes that sound like music .
when the exact thing happens , the student gets the nächstschwierige piece .
and the interpretation of interpretation is barely speaking in the anfängerunterricht .
all right , there &apos;s the front of the front , which is a quick piece .
lento , slowly .
loud and leisezeichen , the r and b , etc .
now , i know what most here are .
but even though you put these data on , it &apos;s still just a little bit of technical .
and yet , it &apos;s always no interpretation .
i &apos;m going to wonder .
i wonder you often forget something very elementares .
because , to make music on the instrument , do your musical musical and feel that should be there before .
because that &apos;s singing .
a kid that doesn &apos;t learn to sing because it doesn &apos;t have the parents vorgemacht , it won &apos;t do it .
that &apos;s like sprechenlernen .
it &apos;s necessary to have its own experiences and idea of music , and then you can get it over a more possibility , so you can sound a instrument .
people who never have been singing , have never felt a moment in your body , as it is , how it &apos;s to form a sound .
gestalten a phrase with his own breath .
the music game is , which is the extension of our body .
our vocal message to sing , our hands and feet to dance .
so the hammerköpfe in the piano is the sequel of my fingers .
the melody is coming out of the gesungenen and the rhythm from the dance .
the dauernde berieselung nowadays , with music , is not förderlich .
you don &apos;t need to do more yourself if it &apos;s boring to be boring .
no longer need to whistle a liedchen or sing .
every music is plattgemacht , if you &apos;re constantly beschallt with music .
and sure , there are some of you who say , yes , but what do you do if i can &apos;t sing ?
the question i &apos;m , can you not sing , a , a , because you believe they can &apos;t sing ?
or b , because they don &apos;t have learned to sing ?
and both of them , it &apos;s not too late to do that , to find out , whether you can &apos;t do it or learn how to do these little muscles that are einstellen the vocal vocal that &apos;s really used .
and that &apos;s what you can train .
or c , because you &apos;ve got it to you , you &apos;re untauglich .
so , i wonder how fachlich kompetent was this diagnosis ?
have you already put a zweit- or a drittmeinung , how do you say it ?
or d , you don &apos;t like music , and you want to do that for that too .
but what i would regret is because music is a beautiful , kommunikative thing .
but maybe you can also even umstimmen them .
well , you see , all of the cases have to be a aussichtsloser candidate .
but don &apos;t say , i don &apos;t understand the classical music .
i can &apos;t tell if it &apos;s good or bad .
i &apos;m saying , but i &apos;m sure you can tell you whether it &apos;s like you like it or not .
because i don &apos;t think it says , i don &apos;t know if it &apos;s tastes to me because i don &apos;t cook .
so , they don &apos;t get to eat , because they don &apos;t cook .
so , you don &apos;t have to get rid of classical music , because it doesn &apos;t play an instrument .
listen to them and tell them whether it &apos;s tastes to them or not .
whether the music is too gepfeffert or sweet .
tell you what you &apos;re feeling .
at the time , you get a bit of money , and you want to get something more gewürze , or taste even fine differences .
why am i asking the audience to listen to action ? &quot;
because the music is a language , and a language is a language .
a piece of art that you never look at has no force to work .
the food that &apos;s cooked from a chef or a chef is liebevoll to be eaten , not just looking at or rezepte .
so you hear a moment when a music is played .
it &apos;s not just a nice geräuschtapete .
if in an environment where adults are doing active music or at least active music , a child grows , it &apos;s very easy for a musiklehrer to ask , which color has your flower ?
can you also play it in blue ?
and the child is playing , after a gedenkpause , rather than a red flower , a red flower now .
and this sounds very different .
and that was the very first beginning of a musical expression .
so the first step to take on .
and what happens when you play a piece today that was originally written before a hundred ago before zweihundert or even three years ago ?
now the tools have been fortentwickelt .
there was no way to be a piano at the time .
it was not yet invented .
i think that the stream would be thrilled if he had the klanglichen possibilities of modern klaviere .
i can now have the klangvorstellungen that the stream has had to sound on the modern wing , which is a barockes cembalo .
and you know , beethoven knows that he heard more than he had been deaf .
today , a modern orchestra is able to play everything , which is a orchestra of the time .
so the composers angewiesen angewiesen , which is angewiesen to reinvent the pieces .
so they &apos;re going to be able to be hörbar , which they only imagined in the mind .
and also , what you would think in the mind today .
or what i &apos;m doing today , because what they thought might be .
thank you .
do you know what &apos;s envy ?
were you going to be neidisch ?
and how did that feel ?
suck .
i have a friend who drives a passerati .
when i come from my little v of the v , and i was going to see that feeling .
i &apos;m going to take a look through the head .
i &apos;m saying , ulf , what are you need to do so much a car ?
that &apos;s the first year half of his value .
and at all , you work much less than i do .
why would i have to do such a little car ?
and then i immediately falls , that &apos;s not .
it &apos;s against justice .
and as i say the word justice is that awkward feeling away .
our organism has invented a great method to make such feelings like your heart out of the heart of envy .
you can also try that in words like revenge or gewinnsucht or a ähnlichem .
i want to explain to you a bit of a mechanism , or something you know , which you &apos;re familiar with .
the mechanism is from the lie .
but don &apos;t think about the lie , as you may have heard when people say , nobody has to build a wall .
and then auftürmt rocks so he would give you the view .
in a lie , you see the liars themselves don &apos;t believe what he says .
it allows you to see a überdies easily that he has very different .
he &apos;s just not täuscht them .
no , the lie i &apos;m talking about , which has to do with it , you know , you know yourself .
they need these lie to get a lebenslüge to sustain a selbsttäuschung .
they can easily easily , yes , nachprüfen , or even the einsturz .
they need time .
from that time , an anecdote that you may know .
the spanish painter picasso hat a woman .
this woman has been beschwert , the portrait would not look like it .
picasso , wait for it .
it &apos;s going to be more similar .
and at this point , and when you laugh , you know how important these lie is and how much time you need to learn something about what artists can tell us .
because artists have a gestörtes relationship to lie .
the artist is sharing with them , and especially this lady , which she doesn &apos;t see if they just look in the mirror .
the artist is sharing with them in a portrait of a portrait where they &apos;re only familiar with , when you look at this piece of art .
and then that awkward feeling , it may not be similar to you , and it &apos;s going to be more similar to you .
so here they have this mechanism where we can use the lie as a great invention to the stabilisierung of our lebensverhältnisse .
and not only in art , even in the volksmärchen , in the mythology , in stories , again , shows it up again .
you may know this idea of the lady who looked in the mirror every morning and asked him who &apos;s the most beautiful in all the country ?
one day , this mirror says , yes , there &apos;s a schönere .
behind the seven mountains and so forth .
and you know how much of the feindseligkeit of this true world &apos; s , the mirror can &apos;t lie , from this true world .
but we should just be familiar with that one woman can &apos;t tell a woman that there &apos;s a schönere somewhere else .
here &apos;s what it takes , which is , what we understand under the politically , is the anzubringen .
we need to have these lie that lie that we need to do that deception , without that we can &apos;t even live .
we don &apos;t only have in art , in the volksmärchendichtung , but also in the science of this great lie .
and there &apos;s this story of the woman &apos;s frau .
she heard about this book by charles darwin , the origin of species and the origin of the man .
that the human being should abstammen and the person should be abstammen and , yes , there &apos;s a common ancestor between people and monkeys .
and then she ran her to her husband and she said , &quot; well , that &apos;s not true what charles wrote . &quot;
the human being to abstammen or have a common ancestor .
no , no , that &apos;s not going .
and if it &apos;s true , we need to prevent people from the time of that .
why do we have to prevent people from something that is true , if it &apos;s true ?
because we can &apos;t live without those lebenslüge .
because we &apos;re selbsttäuschung , this feeling of being great , abstammung of the highest creatures , not from one such naturebene , from something like an organism that has still been able to do a stone and whatever things that are unaushaltbar for us .
so , we can &apos;t even bear these things .
we need to prevent people from things about things , especially if they &apos;re true .
so you can see how slowly this mechanism is going to be auflöst and like the trace , which are leaving to something else than on this great picture of ourselves , i want to give you another story .
a very beautiful story , as i &apos;m talking about .
my wife told me .
she came one day from school , she &apos;s a teacher , and she told her a student .
a autistischer student .
she likes to love it , because he &apos;s an neigung for the aufrichtigkeit .
and she asked him , what are your hobbys ?
and he says , well , i &apos;m at the fire fire .
and because i &apos;m at the fire department , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
yes , you feel it when you &apos;re heiter at this point . there &apos;s something wrong .
i told my wife , whenever a human in a moral way is because of a moral way , because we should try to replace it with the wörtchen .
take that one and then you experience the sentence .
even though i &apos;m at the fire department , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
they feel that , that &apos;s the actual truth of the world &apos;s world .
so a little bub , which is not interested in the feuerlöschen .
and that &apos;s what &apos;s interested in the feuermachen .
but there &apos;s no vereine , where we can look at us where you learn how to do fire .
there &apos;s only the second second , just the fire .
he started to get up .
and überdies , you don &apos;t tell his teacher , that you like to go and get brände somewhere , and i &apos;m happy if the fire hochlodert .
no , it looks much better when we show that we are in charge of to eliminate the dangers that others just get when they put fire .
here , they have this little mechanism .
this verweis , the innersten of the bub , had to be related to the fire , but he doesn &apos;t know that loud .
here you have this zensor between the unbewussten and the bewussten that immediately anspringt , without any of you can do something about it , and the things you know that they look very different , so designed that they can sound much better for you and others .
so then just these words , which we also have to do in the language of the political state of the state .
in fact , we know something else is .
but we know if we do that , the social verhältnisse is very sensitive .
we can &apos;t just do that .
it &apos;s impossible , that kind of stuff that &apos;s going to work in a society that should be working .
i want to tell you what we &apos;ve found in my institute .
according to what &apos;s logic , these deception , these selbsttäuschung , the willingness , a different reality than that we actually know in the unconscious that they &apos;re gültig to spread out .
so , i want to give you two examples , maybe three examples .
the first example is a prediction of what many of you know and some of you , very few , very few .
i mean the soul .
what is the soul ?
the soul &apos;s such an geistiges , says , about a leibniz .
it &apos;s something which is not about stop stofflicher , physical nature .
and if you have people , you know , you have a soul , or you can also say that you have been erweckt from your soul , then you imagine that the soul would be so much like the soul , you know , as if the soul were so geistiger a framework of them , not from matter , they &apos;re just aus of flesh and blood ,
and from that soul , you think it &apos;s kind of in this wolkigen nature , in this luftigen nature , anima , in latin , the lufthauch , present .
and then when that lufthauch then ergießt over the people , it &apos;s filled with the dignity with spirit , with nature that can only live , and that &apos;s a soul .
and then he can davonlaufen .
that &apos;s the idea of the soul .
so it &apos;s supposed to be a hinzukommen from the outside .
so we &apos;re supposed to perceive it as something that &apos;s really about our lives .
and if you have those premise , you understand the logic that we &apos;re experiencing to improve the happiness , through a lie in our world .
because now you can apply a dreisatz .
dreisatz you know from school .
now this is a dreisatz that describes a logic .
this is the most part part of my talk .
here you need something logic , but also lies the willingness .
because , to lie , you can just apply these logic wrong .
in that dreisatz , three sentences come from .
the first sentence is , klaus , is saying , there &apos;s no soul .
so the second sentence is , if klaus has right , he &apos;s not a soul .
now there &apos;s a third sentence .
i &apos;m very special here .
a third sentence that immediately comes up with people who have a strong sense of a soul .
they say who has no soul , who &apos;s dead , and can &apos;t say anything .
and here you feel it .
here &apos;s the logic in this , yes , in this täuschenden talk to the expression .
you see it immediately .
the first two sentences , which are logical correct .
and i can say everything .
the logic doesn &apos;t make a point about the reality .
i can say the kanzlerin is a man .
and if i &apos;m right , the kanzlerin is a man .
if i don &apos;t have right , the kanzlerin is not a man .
the logic doesn &apos;t make a point about what &apos;s true .
i can argue .
but critical is , if i &apos;m right , it &apos;s true .
so when klaus says , there &apos;s no soul .
second , if he &apos;s right , he &apos;s got no soul .
these things are logical .
and now , your consciousness feels immediately , you can do something .
it depends on a third sentence that has nothing to do with the first two sentences to do , and that &apos;s the opposite of the first sentence already proven and that &apos;s possible .
because we actually had to prove whether it &apos;s the soul or not .
but with this logic that it &apos;s easy to use two sentences of logical logical , and a third dazuhängt that looks like he could do something with this , so we can save our lives .
so , we &apos;re doing it , as if it &apos;s actually impossible to live without a soul .
and we &apos;re very happy about it .
we can continue these things in different examples .
in the presence of the present , we have a very modern example that &apos;s going to fill the tageszeitungen .
now , for example , they have to be a more philosophisches subject , a dauerbrenner of philosophy , present .
this has to do that we go back into the vierzehnte century .
there was an gelehrten who was called johannes buridanus , and after that is called the buridansche esel .
the buridansche esel is a esel that &apos;s made of pure nature .
it doesn &apos;t have this soul .
this is a naturding .
and if you put the exact in the middle between two gleichgroßen of the heuhafen , it &apos;s verhungert .
because he doesn &apos;t know what to do it first .
so it &apos;s right in the middle .
so the naturdinge is introduced .
gleichgroße forces with gegensätzlichem vorzeigenzeichen , solving each other .
there &apos;s nothing happening at all .
but only if you put another example , so if you immediately make the one a little bit bigger , it doesn &apos;t need a reason , and nothing to do it .
and it &apos;s automatically going to be the right thought .
so if you have this idea that you &apos;re kind of driven in nature , you know , the larger piles that will put one immediately , then they have a very quick sense that it has to be something like a free will .
and if we &apos;re in frankfurt , too , on the main , i remember the max-planck-institut in brain science .
there &apos;s a gelehrten , who &apos;s called wolf singer , and you sometimes say , &quot; wolf singer , &quot; there &apos;s no willensfreiheit .
now we can form the second sentence and can say , if the wolf singer is right , he &apos;s not willensfreiheit .
these sentences are absolutely logical and correct .
and what we can now read in the daily newspaper , and you can find that in the same sentence .
it looks like this , who has no willensfreiheit , can &apos;t be drawn to its actions and behauptungen to be a responsibility , and it &apos;s been unzurechnungsfähig .
again , they have it again .
actually , you &apos;d have to prove yes to whether it &apos;s like willensfreiheit .
but the logic of deception allows us to do that , as if the first sentence of the vornherein is wrong , as you should take the opposite of the opposite without evidence .
and now you can easily , if you want to do anything , if you want to test something , and especially , if you want to make people happy , the guts of the lie .
and practice that for example , if you meet a person who you can say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
and so , please don &apos;t use the german word for vorhersager , which is called the prophet .
they won &apos;t call them , that would be a little bit more politically inkorrekt .
they say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
and immediately , you &apos;ll have a vorhersager for which you have vorhersager , you know , that you can &apos;t prove .
and you have a problem .
because while they &apos;re busy doing it , they &apos;re not able to prove that there &apos;s no vorhersager , the man is very happy .
he &apos;s very happy about it because he &apos;s been fooled .
because he led them to a fährte , which he doesn &apos;t even aufhält .
because actually , this man is not even interested in evidence .
he &apos;s only interested in the need to prove themselves from the need to prove that there are vorhersager .
so , in the way the shift of the world &apos;s shift , they &apos;re experiencing the großartigkeit of the lie .
and once again , once you have a chance to feel that dreisatz , you do it , because they &apos;re going to make others happy , if you don &apos;t remember your selbstlüge .
thank you for your attention .
yes , good afternoon .
i &apos;ve been allowed to ask me if i &apos;ll mention her .
she &apos;s one of the veranstalterinnen here of this great event , and i asked myself if i wanted to give a talk and i give my idea .
i have to say , you know , you &apos;ve got it , it &apos;s hard to talk about my idea .
and i may be able to imagine my favorite inselprojekt i &apos;m trying to imagine .
but it &apos;s obviously the sum , all of the ideas .
i &apos;m probably one , the two nice girls are still there , i &apos;m probably one of the generation that &apos;s got to have the bad öko image , because i started studying engineering in college engineering , engineering college , today , i think , a lot of stuff .
and i verschlagen it in the mitte &apos; 80s to berlin because i wanted to do renewable energy , and that was not in karlsruhe .
there was the kernforschungsanlage leopoldshafen .
the hießen were all kfa , and the jülich was kfa .
the hot are projektträger .
because a good engineer has either built great cars or atomkraftanlagen .
but that doofes like an n solarpendel that &apos;s a hundred watts out of the square meter that was a toy .
and in berlin , there was a crazy ingenieurkollektiv .
i &apos;m grateful to rehabilitiert the word again , because after the mauerfall , you didn &apos;t have to use the word , because everything left was bad .
but , in the years , it wasn &apos;t that way .
and there was so that there was selbstverwaltete alternativbetriebe , and one of them was sitting in kreuzberg in the mehringhof , where you were doing evil .
the place of the terrorismusses , but it was called wuseltronik and did wind and sonnenenergie and i started the achtziger .
and yes , a lot of what i was being said , very much , because many , many beautiful expressions that i &apos;ve lived through .
i worked in the collective of 11 years , and that was a basisdemokratisch .
we were 20 people .
if no , the vetoprinzip has been a völlig , and i &apos;ve got a completely zermürbt vetoprinzip , and i &apos;ve got a hard time to get a schwer , if i could really do it at a schwachsinnige thing , because all my father &apos;s father used to have zugeredet him , you &apos;ve got the money to go back to your kid .
it &apos;s been busy with the schwachsinn .
and it was really , very bitter , and then you also put it into this , you know , and you put it in a picture of durchhalten , where i asked myself for 10 years , a thousand d-mark , and then , grundlohn , einheitslohn , of course , in the collective of , of course , if that &apos;s really the great thing .
and i then ausgehalten , and then we ausgehalten up to the sechsundneunzig , and then we &apos;ve become a mitbegründer of the company , who then became the spin-off q-cells of the world &apos;s largest zellenhersteller .
but there &apos;s a riesenerfolgsgeschichte , but we have a riesenerfolgsgeschichte , but we have a little group of course , and we have a little group of zweitausendsechs , and we decided that we &apos;re going to start small and go back and go back and forth the next subject of the future , and that &apos;s the same crazy thing , and it &apos;s a little bit crazy
and i &apos;ve brought you a project i want to introduce you .
and the title of the talk was , yes , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know .
and we just started to ask a relatively einfach-verrückten story , where could you do that , you could use memory of a sense of value .
on this island , this is the island of graciosa on the azoren .
yes , that &apos;s the data .
there &apos;s a viereinhalb thousand people .
they have a erneuerbaren energieanteil in 15 percent today .
and the question is , why don &apos;t they have more ?
that &apos;s just not going to work .
if you zubauen more windkraft each other , the system starts to fail .
i &apos;m always going to tell you the politicians when you &apos;re besichtigen our facility in berlin-adlershof .
they &apos;re always saying , why ?
we have a twenty percent in germany .
but , really , it can &apos;t be a problem .
but right , we have seven percent in europe , and our network is the european world .
if we had 20 percent , and we had 20 percent , and then we &apos;d have the same problems that people have on this island .
the question was easy , the number of the things that was zweitausend2006 , the first people started with the island , just rechne .
it &apos;s like big , because it &apos;s actually going to be a battery that you &apos;re going to be like a insel , 30 , 30 , 40 , 50 , maybe even 70 percent renewable .
and yes , i &apos;ll go again a slide .
the conventional system looks like this .
by the way , a hundred gigawatt , elektrische , elektrische , on the world .
it &apos;s the power of a hundred nuclear power plant , because it &apos;s all very fast .
the world &apos;s energiehunger , which is happening , will be gelöscht with the diesel , because you don &apos;t need to be permission .
that &apos;s going to happen .
you can go to the box .
and then it looks like this .
in the run three of the dieseln , two will always wait .
yeah , this is the burden on the bottom .
we have very detailed data .
and the windkraftanlage or the solaranlage or whatever it is , is in the rule , in the rule , is a system that &apos;s a system that &apos;s going to be a system , which is only in small amounts of it .
and the goal was to say , okay , okay .
the diesel is going to be back-up , and the wind , the sun , the load of the wind , that they can map the larger percentage .
and if you want to go about 20 , 30 percent of renewable energy , so energy per year , not the performance at the moment , then you have to turn off the shelf .
that means , in the moment , you have to worry that renewables can kind of play the entire net .
you can , of course , if you &apos;re going to be gemanagt in some way in some way .
that &apos;s not one of the other people in the world .
that &apos;s in a small style , so you can also operate your car on a small wechselrichter car .
people are always asking me , what do they do that in adlershof ?
it &apos;s all about .
but if you want to go through and build a lot of these wechselrichtern , and you should build a network , it &apos;s extremely complicated .
and our goal was to go to siebzig to the neunzig percent renewable , and then it stays down here , the last rest , the last 10 , 20 percent renewable , and that &apos;s going to be very , very expensive , and it &apos;s not going to work that you do that from batteries .
that &apos;s going to be a double energy , and then , hydrogen , methane , power , power , you know , you know , or sch , it will be .
you then have to go to a saisonalspeicher and winter-sommer and not just balance .
we just wanted to know what &apos;s going on , and with a normal , stinknormalen battery battery .
how far is you going to get there ?
and then they did a whole bunch of simulation .
and they have wind and sun and the last and the burden , and the result , a very interesting outcome , that you need to take a mittleren system , after 20 years , a mittleren strompreis , about 50 cents a kilowattstunde , about vierundvierzig cents .
so that was the very first calculations of six years ago .
and then we said , okay .
and it &apos;s great , and then we have a business model .
we &apos;re cheaper like the diesel-system , if the average five percent per year is rising .
and then we started to negotiate with the insulanern .
what would have to do ?
have negotiate with investors , i &apos;ve looked for new gesellschafter .
we were only five people at the time to rebuild the society .
and here &apos;s the impression .
the brown is sort of the conventional system , the green one is our system .
that our system also has a preisanstieg , because we &apos;re still 20 percent of them , and we don &apos;t even durchschlagen a preissteigerung on other things .
and the power-utility that the elektrizitätsversorgungsunternehmen on the island , has meant that , we &apos;ll find it quite great .
we want to support , but we don &apos;t think you can solve the technical problem .
and so we decided to build a hall in berlin , where we sort of map the electric verhältnisse of the island of the island of the island of scale .
that means we &apos;ve been looking for , and we &apos;ve looked for the world &apos;s largest battery .
here is it .
it &apos;s naturally from asia , in the case of japan .
and witzigerweise , in the &apos; 70s , sie mannheim , and the abb , and now , heute , was developed and then became auslizensiert .
you can see it &apos;s a very , very large battery .
it has a power of power , and it can bring six hours of this achievement and that &apos;s the battery that we kind of simulationstechnisch .
and then they set up .
we also have one of these diesel-aggregate in the same size , as he &apos;s standing there in the hall , actually , the complete dynamic behavior from this web , so in the hall , the diesel is the diesel , and there &apos;s the big battery , here &apos;s the whole umrichter , which is simulate the grid .
over here , we simulate the entire übertragungsleitungsystem , the kilometer-physik of the cable , to sort of map the schwingungsverhalten in the grid .
and here you can see this thing .
we can also aufschalten zweihundert kilowatt onto the net .
here we see this again again again , again , the diesel , again , the whole thing .
and what we did was , since zweitausendneun , the hall was finished , until now , almost all of which was in the same system of electronics , in software , to develop software , we did .
so we &apos;re not a batteriehersteller , but we define ourselves as a company that &apos;s only between the subject of battery and the theme of the net , and everything in between .
you have to communicate to the battery , you know , you have to communicate in the web , and that &apos;s very complicated .
the beauty is on the subject that you &apos;re basically genommen on this island , which is basically the vorwegnehmen , to problems that we get when we &apos;re going to increase our percentage of renewables .
so this whole discussion , how is going to go back and herbewegt , energiewende , like this , on the island , for example , for fünfundzwanzig to 30 percent exzessenergie , so we müdsen wind and the sun .
natürlicht is then smart-grid .
so smart-grid , a riesenthema .
we can start to integrate the island , rumzufragen , rumzufragen , can be able to do the burden .
that means if you &apos;re in 70 percent renewable , you can &apos;t do that without any memory .
you can smart-grid by the n , you can ausbau , yes , that should be done , and you should do , you know , the percentage of erhören , but you will never be able to get rid of memory .
and that &apos;s the message that you have .
so many people are coming up and look at this because you can see what you get .
if we shut down the trash , you don &apos;t have a mass of this mass mass that causes a certain kind of habitat in the grid .
and our europäisches verbundnetz is essentially , is essentially rotierenden masses of large kraftwerken , where the wave is all over the middle of europe .
we &apos;re looking at this grid , and you see 50 hertz , and when it &apos;s going to be neunundvierzig , it &apos;s going to be a few ventilchen hertz , and then we start a little bit of ventilchen , and then again , a little bit of a merh steam in it , we &apos;ll come back up .
that &apos;s the system .
and of course , this is incredible .
if you runterreißen it somewhere , it &apos;s a little bit .
the spinning reserves has at least 10 seconds to keep the network stable .
and at the time , they can respond to another .
if you don &apos;t have that , this rotierende mass , then you have to replace it with leistungselektronik and elektrochemie .
and we can rein-rausschalten with that big battery at two milliseconds .
there &apos;s already what enormous geschwindigkeitsmöglichkeiten is there .
and the message is , we have to get rid of these rotierenden masses , if we &apos;re in a zwanzig , 20 percent , 20 percent , 20 percent , 20 , 30 , 30 percent and so on , if we &apos;re going to do at all .
then we have to cut our must-run capacity on the net .
must-run is simply called the power power station to keep the frequency .
yes , that &apos;s a riesendebatte right now , zubau from the kohlekraftwerken , because we don &apos;t do it or gasturbinen , because it doesn &apos;t go .
and we &apos;re just trying to make that you can go down the capacity , the must-run capacity , and also put on the grid of memory .
and so , fortunately , there are now a lot of research .
and to that purpose , people always come and look at our versuchsstand on the way that we &apos;re looking at our inselteststand .
and yes , the discussion is always about the question of how far you can get a bit of a future .
and a lot of discussions i had in the last six years was similar to the discussion i had in the last 30 years , in the subject .
don &apos;t go , schwachsinn , kinderspielkram , we &apos;ve all been going to get out of all the numbers .
we have an dreißig gigawatt in germany .
this is vorbildlich .
and i just go out of that , in the next 30 years , the same capacity for elektrochemischen store on the world .
just , it &apos;s going to come .
there &apos;s going to be so much of widerständen and the streitereien .
the beauty is that i &apos;ve been experienced in the last two years , that the scientists are going to be on my side .
we &apos;ve got over 10 million förderprojekte now , even to klemmen the german net .
that &apos;s going to take place in the next april .
so , you know , from that , you know , there &apos;s a change that &apos;s there and only from that abwehrhaltung , to the idea , a hundred percent renewable , yes .
and if you have a hundred percent renewable , it &apos;s like a autarkes system .
so far , in arguments , in arguments , these insulaner , they &apos;re doing a little bit of a network , that has nothing to do with our own business .
the question is , but it &apos;s very simple , if you &apos;re completely independent from any fossil or uranen energierträgern that are going to be rausgebohrt somewhere in the world , and they &apos;re hingebracht , then they &apos;re an island .
then they &apos;re just using the one thing about the sun and wind there where they live .
and that &apos;s a little bit of our vision of an vernüftigen energy , and i &apos;m also grateful that they &apos;ve said , you know , solar energy .
and that &apos;s what we do , and we &apos;re going to come in , and the talk of premium kola , that you can be a collective of it and use the solar energy , which is a little bit .
and yeah , i just want to encourage you , in the sense that you can be quiet a little bit crazy and also have a vision .
and you have to really stay pretty much , but i think it &apos;s going to go .
thank you .
when steve lopez , the kolumnist of the los angeles times , one day , a day , went through the streets of los angeles , he heard a wonderful music .
she came from a man , an afro-amerikaner , sympathisch , rau , homeless , who played on a violin who had two strings .
many of you will know the story , because from steves articles , a book , which was verfilmt , with robert downey , as steve lopez and jamie foxx as a nathaniel anthony ayers , who was a nathaniel anthony , who was a kontrabassisten , who was on the juilliard-konservatorium , and he was finished his career in his paranoide schizophrenia .
nathaniel left juilliard , suffered a nervenzusammenbruch nervenzusammenbruch and 30 years later , he lived on the streets of skid row in the center of los angeles .
i &apos;m going to suggest to you all to read and look at the movie , so it doesn &apos;t just understand the wonderful bond that came out between these two men , but also how music helped make this connection , and how it ended up , when this is a wortspiel , is allowed the mithalf , nathaniel away from the street .
i met mr. ayers in 2008 , two years ago , in the disney disney hall .
he had just heard a copy of the beethoven &apos;s first and fourth symphony and came out the stage to imagine .
he spoke in a very heiteren and geselligen clay on the yo-yo and hillary clinton and on how the dodgers would never do it in the baseball world , and that &apos;s all the way that the tückischen passage of the first violin in the last sentence of beethoven &apos;s fourth symphony .
we came to speak to the theme of music , and a few days later , i got an email , which was that , i was interested in the geigenunterricht for the geigenunterricht .
i have to mention that , nathaniel ablehnte a medical treatment , because he had been treated with the elektroschocks and thorazin and handschellen , a trauma that he had his whole life to have been following his life .
so as a result , it &apos;s particularly susceptible to these schizophrenen stages , and they &apos;re sometimes so bad , and he goes away for days , herumwandert in the streets of skid row , always exposed to the horror and the folterqualen of his own mind .
and in fact , in the same way , nathaniel was on the same way that we started with our first unterrichtsstunde hall in the disney disney hall , he had this irre flackern in his eyes and he did completely lost .
he was talking about invisible and smoke and the smoke and about how someone wanted to get him to poison in sleep .
i was scared , not meinetwegen , but i was afraid that i could lose him to be able to go into one of his states and that i could destroy his relationship to the violin , when i started talking about tonleitern and arpeggios and other exciting forms of the didaktischen geigenpädagogik .
so i just started playing .
i played the first sentence of beethoven &apos;s satz .
and while i was playing , i realized that in nathaniels eyes , a complete change was going on .
it was as if he was standing under the impact of a invisible arznei , a chemical reaction that was the katalysator .
nathaniels manischer anger transformed into understanding , in a quiet curiosity and anmut .
and as a miracle took his violin and started playing some of the ausschnitte of violinkonzerten , and then asked me to play it , mendelssohn , tschaikowski , sibelius .
we then started talking about music , started from bach to beethoven , brahms , bruckner , bruckner and all the other bs , from bartók to esa-pekka .
and i realized that he didn &apos;t just have a enzyklopädisches knowledge of music , but it &apos;s also connected to a tight personal relationship with her .
he was talking about her with a passion and a understanding that i would just know from my colleagues in the philharmonie of los angeles .
by playing music and talked about music , he was out of this paranoiden , verwirrten man who was just drawn through the streets of los angeles , a liebenswerter , gebildeter , ausgezeichneter , in , in juilliard training .
music is medicine . music is changing .
nathaniel means a lot of health .
because the music allows him to be able to do his thoughts and wahnvorstellungen with his imagination and creativity in something real .
and so he entflieht his quälenden state .
i understood that that &apos;s the nature of art .
and this is the reason we make music , so we &apos;re doing something that &apos;s inside us all , deep inside , our feelings , through our artistic lens , through our creativity , to make a reality .
and the reality of this is the way that we &apos;re all going to move , and move , inspired and vereint us .
what nathaniel was doing so much of the music brought back into a community of friends .
the erlösende force of music brought it back into a family of musicians who understood the way that he recognized and achtete him .
and i &apos;m always going to play with video , whether in the disney disney hall or in row , because he reminds me of why i became a musician .
thank you .
bruno giussani : thank you . thank you .
robert gupta .
robert gupta : i want to play something i &apos;ve stolen for the cellisten .
i hope you forgive me .
so i &apos;ve known a lot of fish in my life .
i only loved two .
the first one was more like a passionate thing .
it was a beautiful fish , wohlschmeckend , good , gute , gehaltvoll , a bestseller in the speisekarte .
what a fish .
even better , it was formed in aquakultur after the angeblich of the sustainability .
so you could feel like selling it .
i had a relationship with this beauty over several months .
one day the leader &apos;s boss called the company and asked if i could give you a veranstaltung about sustainability on the farm .
&quot; of course , &quot; i said .
here was a company trying to solve , which has become this incredible problem for our food food , how do we keep fish on our speisekarten ?
over the last 50 years , we &apos;ve been able to have the ocean gefischt that we &apos;ve been beaten by forests .
it &apos;s hard to überbewerten the destruction .
90 percent of the big fish we love to do , the tuna , the heilbutte , the lachse , the lachse , they &apos;re collapsed .
it &apos;s almost nothing left .
so , i think , probably , aquakultur , fischanbau , fischanbau , part of our future .
a lot of the arguments , fischzuchtanlagen the environment , most of you , and they &apos;re inefficient , take tuna . a huge disadvantage .
he has a futterverwertung of 15 to one .
that means 15 pounds of wildfisch are needed to get a pound of zucht-thunfisch .
not very sustainable .
don &apos;t taste very well .
so , finally , a company that was trying to do it right .
i wanted to support her .
the day before the event , i called the head of öffentlichkeitsarbeit for the company .
let &apos;s call him don &apos;t call him .
don &apos;t say , &quot; don &apos;t , &quot; just to have the facts right now , you &apos;re famous for anzubauen the sea , that you don &apos;t verschmutzt the environment . &quot;
&quot; that &apos;s true . &quot; we &apos;re so far outside that waste is distributed to the waste of our fish , not concentrated . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; we &apos;re basically a own world .
this futterverwertung from 2.5 to one .
&quot; the best in the industry . &quot;
2.5 to one , great .
&quot; 2.5 to one thing ? what do you feed ? &quot;
&quot; sustainable proteins , &quot; he said .
&quot; great , &quot; i said .
and that night i was in bed , and i thought , what is a sustainable protein to hell ?
so i called the next day , just a minute before , don &apos;t go .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t go , what are sustainable proteins ? &quot;
he said he didn &apos;t know that . he &apos;ll be .
now , i &apos;m telefonierte with a couple of people in the company . no one could give me a proper answer . until i finally telefonierte the senior biologists .
now let &apos;s call him a don .
&quot; don &apos;t , &quot; i said , &quot; what are sustainable proteins ? &quot;
now , he mentioned some algae and some fischmehle , and then he said , hühnchen-pellets .
i said , &quot; hühnchen-pellets ? &quot;
he said , &quot; yes , feathers , skin , knochenmehl , reste , getrocknet and eat . &quot;
i said , &quot; well , how much percent of your futters is chicken ? &quot;
in the assumption of maybe two percent .
&quot; well , that &apos;s about 30 percent , &quot; he said .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t go , what &apos;s sustainable , the chicken of fish ? &quot;
there was a long pause in the line , and he said , &quot; there &apos;s just too much chicken in the world . &quot;
i &apos;m going to get a fish .
no , not because i &apos;m a selbstgerechter genießer and gutmensch .
i &apos;m actually .
no , i actually have micht from this fish because , i swear to god , who &apos;s been geschmeckt a fish after that conversation .
this second fish , this is another kind of thing .
it &apos;s romantic , the way you know the better you know your fish , you love the fish .
i was eating him in a restaurant in südspanien .
a befreundete journalist was spoken for a long time .
it &apos;s kind of verkuppelt us .
he came on the table with a bright , almost schimmernden white color .
the chef had verkocht him .
stop twice .
and it was still delicious .
who can taste a fish so well after he got verkocht ?
i can &apos;t , but that guy can .
let &apos;s call it miguel . in fact , he &apos;s called miguel .
and no , he doesn &apos;t have the fish , and it &apos;s not a chef , at least in the way they understand .
he &apos;s a biologist at veta la palma .
this is a fischaufzucht in the südwestlichen corner of the südwestlichen .
she &apos;s close to the mündung of the river .
until the 1980s was the farm in the hands of argentiniern .
they were growing fleischrinder on what they were in the essence of the feuchtgebiete .
they did that by entwässerten the country .
they built this complicated consequence of kanälen , and they drängten water from the country and out of the river .
now , they couldn &apos;t make that work , not economically .
and it was ökologisch .
it took about 90 percent of the birds to be a lot of birds for this place .
and so , in 1982 , an spanish company in green bought the country .
what did they do ?
they &apos;re vice the flow of the water .
they literally have the levers of the levers .
instead of using water , they used the water to hereinzuziehen the water .
they were fluteten the water .
they created a $ 11.000 acres of fischaufzucht -- barsch , meeräsche , shrimp , shrimp -- and they have miguel and its company , the ecological destruction completely opposite .
the farm is incredible .
i mean , you &apos;ve never seen anything like this .
you look at the horizon , which is a million miles away , and everything you see is geflutete channels and that density , the üppige march .
i was there not a long time ago .
he &apos;s an incredible guy , three parts charles darwin and a part of &quot; a crocodile to the kiss . &quot;
okay ? there we were , and we were fighting through the feuchtgebiete and i keuche and schwitze , matsch to my knee , and miguel hält in quiet .
here he picks a rare gleitaar .
now he mentioned the mineralbedürfnisse of phytoplankton .
and here , here he looks a pattern of bündeln that reminds him of the tansanische giraffe .
it turns out that miguel has spent the largest part of his career in the national national park in africa .
i asked him how he became such a fisch-experten .
he said , &quot; fish ? i don &apos;t know anything about fish .
i &apos;m an expert on relationships . &quot;
and then he goes and fall over more gerede of rare birds and algae and weird wasserpflanzen .
and don &apos;t understand me , that was really fascinating , you know , the biotische community , so in the way that way .
it &apos;s great , but i was in love .
and my head was weak about this verkochte piece of köstlichen that i had on the vorabend .
so i cut him . i said , &quot; miguel , how does your fish taste so good ? &quot;
he showed the algae .
&quot; i know boy , the algae , the phytoplankton , the relationships , that &apos;s incredible .
but what do your fish eat ?
what &apos;s the futterverwertung ? &quot;
now , he &apos;s driving me , that it &apos;s such a rich system that the fish eat what they would eat in the wild .
the biomass biomass , the phytoplankton , the zooplankton , which is what the fish feeds .
the system is so healthy , it &apos;s completely selbsterneuernd .
there &apos;s no food .
depending on a farm that doesn &apos;t feed their animals ?
and then on this site , i was driving on this site , and i asked him , &quot; for a place , which seems to be so natural , &quot; unlike any farm i &apos;ve ever been , &quot; how does you measure success ? &quot;
it was when a director would have an bühnenwechsel .
and we bow around the corner , and we offered the incredible sight of thousands and thousands of thousands of thousands of thousands of thousands of thousands and a half of a sudden carpet .
&quot; that &apos;s successful , &quot; he said .
&quot; look at your bäuche , pink .
they schlemmen . &quot;
schlemmen ? i was completely confused .
i said , &quot; miguel , don &apos;t you put your fish ? &quot;
&quot; yes , &quot; he said .
&quot; we lose 20 percent of our fish and fischeiern to the birds .
well last year on this site , 600.000 birds were over 250 different species .
it &apos;s the largest and one of the most important private vogelreservate in all europe has become .
i said , &quot; miguel , is a good gedeihender vogelbestand , not the last one that you want to have on a fischaufzucht ? &quot;
he kept shaking his head , no .
he said , &quot; we &apos;re building extensiv , not intense .
this is a ökologisches network .
the flamingos eat the shrimp .
the shrimp eat the phytoplankton .
so the reflection the belly the way the system is . &quot;
okay , let &apos;s rethink this . a farm that doesn &apos;t feed your animals and a farm that measures your success at the health of their predators .
a fischaufzucht , but also a vogelreservat .
oh , and by the way , this flamingos of the vornherein don &apos;t even be there .
they &apos;re brüten miles away from a city where the bodenbeschaffenheit is better for the nestbau .
every morning , they fly for a half kilometers .
and every night , they fly to go to go .
they do that because they can follow the gestrichelten white line of the landstraße .
seriously .
i had imagined a sort of reise journey , so i looked at miguel .
i said , &quot; miguel , fly miles to the farm , and then you fly to the night , you know ?
do you do that for the kids ? &quot;
and he looked at me as if i had just been quoted a song of the whitney .
he said , &quot; no . they do that because the food is better . &quot;
i didn &apos;t mention the skin of my loved fish that was delicious , and i don &apos;t like fischhaut . i don &apos;t like it . i don &apos;t like it .
it &apos;s this beißende , verkohlte taste .
i &apos;m almost never cook .
and yet , when i tried to her restaurant in this restaurant , she didn &apos;t even take a fischhaut .
she liked sweet and pure , as if you would take a bissen off the ocean .
i mentioned to miguel and er .
he said , &quot; the skin works like a sponge .
it &apos;s the last abwehr , before something happens into the body .
it has evolved in evolution to aufzusaugen . &quot;
and then he added , &quot; but our water doesn &apos;t have a unreinheiten . &quot;
okay . a farm that doesn &apos;t feed your fish , a farm that measures its success at success .
and then i realized when he says , a farm that doesn &apos;t have a unreinheiten , he gewaltig massive , because the water that comes from this farm comes from the river river .
it &apos;s a river that leads all the things with each other , from those rivers , they tend to lead them to their own , chemical pollutants , abfluss of schädlingsbekämpfungsmitteln .
and if it fought through the system , and it &apos;s dependent on the water , as it &apos;s like hereingekommen .
the system is so healthy , it &apos;s clean the water .
so not only a farm that doesn &apos;t feed their animals not only a farm that measures their success at the health of their predators , but a farm that &apos;s literally a wasser-aufbereitungsanlage , and not just for those fish , but for you and me .
because when the water water , it &apos;s the atlantic .
a drop in the ocean , i know , but i take it , and you should do it , because this love story , as romantic as romantic , is also aufschlussreich .
you might say that you &apos;re a recipe for the future of the future , whether we &apos;re talking about barsch or fleischrindern .
what we need now is a radical new concept of agriculture , from one that &apos;s actually taste good .
but for a lot of people , it &apos;s a little bit radical .
we &apos;re not realisten , we &apos;re genießer . we &apos;re liebhaber .
we love wochenmärkte . we love little familienbetriebe . we &apos;re talking about local food . we eat food .
and if you say that these are the things that the future of the future is there somewhere , and says , &quot; hey people , i love pinke flamingos , but how are they going to feed the world ?
how are they going to feed the world ? &quot;
may i be honest ?
i don &apos;t like this question .
no , not because we make enough calories to feed the world more than just to feed .
one billion people are hungry .
one billion -- that &apos;s more than ever before -- because of krasser ungleichheiten in the distribution , not the gesamtproduktion .
now , i don &apos;t like this question because you &apos;ve been about the logic of our nahrungssystems over the last 50 years .
the food grain of the pflanzenfresser , schädlingsbekämpfungsmittel on the earth , chemikalien chemicals on the earth , chicken , and the agrarindustrie has simply said , &quot; if we feed more people cheaper , how awful can it be ? &quot;
that was the cause . it was the rechtfertigung . it was the business of american agriculture .
we should call them what she is , a building in abwicklung , a building that &apos;s auffrisst , fast , ökologisches capital , which is what makes this production .
this is not a gewerbe , and it &apos;s not agriculture .
our kornkammer is threatened today , not because of abnehmender zufuhr , but because of the abnehmender resources .
not through the latest mähdrescher- and traktor-erfindungen , but by a country , not by pumps , but by frisches water , not by kettensägen , but by forests , but by forests , and not by fischerboote and nets , but with fish in the sea .
they want to feed the world ?
let &apos;s start with the question : how are we going to feed ourselves ?
or better , how can we create conditions that can enable every community to feed itself ?
to do that , don &apos;t look at the agrarindustrie-modell of the future .
it &apos;s really old , and it &apos;s done .
capital , chemistry and machines are in the obenan of it , and it never produces a really good thing for food .
let &apos;s look at the green model instead .
this is that , that &apos;s zurückgreift on two billion years .
look at miguel , farmers , like miguel .
in fact , the ones that are not worlds for themselves , the wiederherstellen , the wiederherstellen of aufzubrauchen , betriebe , which are not only anbauen , farmers who are not only erzeuger , but experts in relationships .
because they are the ones who are experts in taste .
and if i really honestly be honest , you &apos;re a better chef than i will be .
you know , that &apos;s right , because if it &apos;s good food , it &apos;s going to be delicious .
thank you .
if i want to tell you a bit of the data that we consume , is bigger than the sum of its parts , and instead of thinking about informationsüberladung , i want you to think about how we can use information that we can do , and we see trends that otherwise never have become visible .
so what we &apos;re seeing here is a typical sterbediagramm .
the program i &apos;m using here is a little experiment .
it &apos;s called pivot , and what i can do with pivot is that i can filter after a particular cause , let &apos;s say accidents .
and i immediately see another pattern that makes you .
and that &apos;s because , in the mittelbereich , the people are the most active and they &apos;re over here .
we can step up and then ordnen the data and see that kreislauferkrankungen and cancer are the usual suspects , but not for everyone .
if we go to go on and go to age , we &apos;re going to see 40 years or younger , we see accidents actually have the key to be concerned about people .
and who &apos;s looking at the world that &apos;s true in men .
so you can see that this is a very ansehen of information and data that &apos;s a very schwimmen informationsgrafik in this way .
and if we do this for raw data , why not also do the content ?
now what we &apos;re here is the titelbilder of every single sports illustrated , which has ever been printed .
it &apos;s all here . it &apos;s all online .
you can actually test it after my lecture in your zimmern .
with pivot , you can dive into a decade .
you can dive into a particular year .
you can jump at a certain copy .
now , if i look here , i see the athletes that appear in this copy and the sportarten .
i &apos;m an lance armstrong , so i click on this , which i &apos;ve been going on here , which is all the ausgaben that i &apos;ve mentioned in the lance armstrong .
now , if i want to get a gröberen track , i could think , &quot; ok , what if i look at all the subject of fahrradfahren ? &quot;
so i go back and take the perspective .
now i &apos;m seeing greg lemond .
and so you get an idea that if you &apos;re trying to pick this information , you know , gezielter , large , reinzoomen , rauszoomen , you don &apos;t want to be sucht or not just surft .
you do something that &apos;s actually a little bit different .
it &apos;s something in between , and we think it changes the way information can be used .
i want to take this idea a little bit more and more than something crazy about something crazy .
what we &apos;ve done here is we took every single one of the wikipediaseite and reduce them to a little summary .
the summary of it contains a short of a übersicht and a symbol of the area that &apos;s coming from .
i just show the top 500 of the popular ones .
but even in that eingeschränkten , we can do a lot of things .
and immediately we get an idea about the topics that are on the popular .
i &apos;m going to choose the issue of government .
now , after i voted voted &apos; government , i know that the wikipediakategorien , most of the time they &apos;re most decken time by the year .
this is really important , because this is a realization that &apos;s not in a single wikipediaseite .
this is only to see when you go back and look at the whole .
so , in a particular one of these words , i can then go in the theme of time , &quot; people of the year &quot; and all together .
now , when i look at all these people , i know that the majority of them are regierungsbeamte . some come from science . some of them are even less , come from the economy . here &apos;s my boss . and one comes from the musikbereich .
and interestingly , bono is also a ted prize winner .
so we can jump and throw a look at all ted prize .
you see , we &apos;re on the grid the first time as if it &apos;s actually a web , not just from page , but a lot of abstrakter .
and so i &apos;d like to show you what a little surprise might be .
i &apos;m just going to show you the new york times .
pivot , this application -- i don &apos;t want to call it a browser ; it &apos;s really not a browser , but you can look at sites that -- and we bring these zoom-technologie to every single website like this .
so i can go back and go back and jump into a specific sektion .
so that &apos;s important because you only look at the look at web sites in this way , the whole way of the internet-verlauf that you can look at the same way .
so i can zoom in my process in a particular time .
here is the one of the demonstration that i kept to go back to this .
and i can sort of , sort of , what i &apos;ve looked at today .
and , if i take a step back and look at everything , i can neu my course , maybe after my such-vergangenheit , and here , i looked for nepotistisch , and i &apos;ve looked for bing , or here &apos;s going to live in live .
and from here , i can go into the site and go back to it .
it &apos;s a metaphor which is used again and every time it makes the big bigger than the sum of the datenteile .
now , in the world , we think that data is a fluch .
we &apos;re talking about the fluch of the informationsüberflusses .
we &apos;re talking about drowning in information . &quot;
what if we could turn this situation and put the internet on the head , so instead of going to go from one to the other , you can go from many things to many things and see patterns that were otherwise hidden hidden ?
if we can do this , this one &apos;s going to be datenfalle , maybe a new source of information .
and , instead of just moving in information , we can get knowledge from that .
and when we know knowledge , we might even be able to weisheiten .
so i hear that thank you .
i grew up with a gehörigen portion of science fiction .
in my high school i was driving school to school , every day an hour per track .
and my nose always put in a book , a science-fiction-buch science-fiction-buch , which would be entführte my thoughts in other worlds and auf in my deep curiosity , unersättliche curiosity .
and this curiosity , as i was in school , when i was not in school , walking through the forests , walking around and samples and &quot; samples , &quot; frogs and snakes and bugs and teichwasser and betrachtete and looked underneath the microscope .
i was completely wissenschaftsbegeistert , you know .
it was all about trying to understand the world and explore the limits of what we did .
and my love to science fiction seemed to be widerzuspiegeln in my environment , because in the late &apos; 60s , we went to the moon and we were exploring the deep sea .
jacques cousteau came into our living rooms with his fascinating shows that we showed us animals and places and a world of miracles that we never would have imagined before .
and that &apos;s what i think was very good at the same science-fiction-rolle .
and i was an artist .
i could draw . i could paint .
and since it wasn &apos;t video games nor the übersättigung film that was still the world &apos;s painting in the media landscape , i had to create the pictures in my head .
we had to all of that time . when we read a book when we read a book , we took the description of the autors and we put it on the screen in our minds .
my reaction to this was drawing and paint from aliens , alien worlds , robots , raumschiffen and all of that .
in the matheunterricht , i was caught up the teacher , as i was hidden , hinterm the textbook .
creativity had to sort of out of creativity .
and something interesting happened , which was , which was fascinated to me , jacques cousteaus &apos;s sendungen , was the idea of a completely unknown world of our earth itself .
i would never have to do an alien world with a spaceship . it seemed quite unlikely .
but here was a world i could actually walk on , and it was also fascinating and exotisch as all of the things i &apos;d imagined to myself when i read these books .
so i decided when i was 15 to be able to diver .
the only problem that i was in a small village in canada was , 1,000 miles away from the next ocean .
i didn &apos;t get to get a entmutigen of it .
i nervte my father until he finally had a tauchschule in buffalo , new york , found exactly on the other side of the border where we lived .
i made my tauchschein in a pool of ymca in the middle of the winter in buffalo , new york .
but the ocean , but a real ocean , i got to have two years later on my face when we moved to california .
since then , in the 40 years that has been verstrichen , i &apos;ve spent about three thousand hours under water . 500 hours of it in tauchbooten .
and i &apos;ve learned that the world of deep deep ocean , even in the most flacheren oceans , is so rich in the faszinierendem world , like we can &apos;t really think of it .
nature &apos;s imagination knows no limits , unlike our own , kläglichen human imagination .
until today , i feel very deepest awe for what i see on my tauchgängen .
and my love to the ocean is holding the same intensity as ever .
and then when i was an adult , it was the filmemachen .
this seemed the best way to tell my inner , to tell stories , with my need to be able to make images .
as a kid , i was drawing in and the comicbücher .
so movies were the way to bring images and stories together .
of course , the stories i aussuchte out of the science-fiction-bereich : &quot; terminator , &quot; &quot; aliens , &quot; and &quot; abyss . &quot;
at &quot; abyss , &quot; i could connect my vorliebe for the unterwasserwelt and the tauchen .
so , sort of , my two passions .
something interesting happened in &quot; abyss , &quot; to solve a erzählerisches problem in this movie -- and that &apos;s where we had to create a kind of liquid wasserwesen -- we &apos;d griffen on computergenerierte animation , cg , cg .
what came out of this was the first computergenerierte soft-surface-figur ever ever seen in a movie .
the film didn &apos;t take money , and that &apos;s exactly what he was doing , and i was doing something fascinating : the audience around the world was hypnotisiert of the magic that was turned off .
according to arthur clarke &apos;s law , you know , fortgeschrittliche technology and magic are not different from one another .
so you saw something .
and i found that incredibly exciting .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s really to be involved in the filmkunst . &quot;
so we went to &quot; terminator 2 , &quot; my next film , even more .
together with ilm , we created the guys of liquid metal . the success was on the way that effect would hit .
and it worked . again , we had done something called a little bit , and the effect in the audience was the same . we &apos;ve been doing a little bit more money with the movie .
and from those two experiences , a whole new world was done , a whole new world of creativity for filmschaffende .
so i started a company with my good friend , stan , who was the best make-up- and creature-designer , and she was called &quot; digital domain . &quot;
the idea of this company was , the phase of analoger processes , and then on visual things and on the same time , and then start with digital produktionen .
and we did that , and we did a wettbewerbsvorteil for a while .
but in the &apos; 90s we realized that we were in the creature- and character-design -- what we did was actually , in the company -- to slow down .
i had written this piece of &quot; the feedback , &quot; which should be schieben into the messlatte effects of visual effects and computergenerierter effects in new heights with a realistic human , ausdrucksvollen characters , who had been made with cg , and the hauptfiguren should be all the cg . and the world should be cg .
but the messlatte put it all right . and people in my company said that we were not able to do that .
so i took this and made this other film about the big ship that &apos;s going to go .
i was selling this as &quot; romeo and julia and julia &quot; auf . it became an liebesfilm epischen order , a passionate movie .
but i wanted to actually hinabtauchen the real wrack of the titanic .
so i made the film .
that &apos;s the truth . the studio didn &apos;t know that .
i believe you , i believe , by saying , &quot; we go to the wrack . we &apos;re movies the real thing .
we &apos;re going to show it in the eröffnungssequenz of film .
it &apos;s hugely important . it &apos;s a good marketing for marketing . &quot;
and i &apos;m going to get them to fund an expedition .
sounds crazy . but that &apos;s going back to the fact that your imagination can create a reality .
we then actually created six months later , a reality that i &apos;m in a russian tauchboot wiederfand , four miles under the surface of the north atlantic , and i looked at the real titanic through a bullauge .
this was not a movie , no hd , that was really .
so , that really blew me .
and the vorbereitungen , they were enormous . we had to have cameras and the lights and all kinds of things .
and i noticed , like this tiefseetauchgänge , a weltraummission .
well , they were also hochtechnisch and bedurften umfangreicher .
you go up into these capsule , and you &apos;re going to be down to this dark , feindselige environment , where there is no hope on rescue , if you don &apos;t get it back .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s just like i was in a science-fiction-film .
it &apos;s really cool . &quot;
i was obsessed with the deep deep sea .
anyway , of the part that has curiosity and science . it was all . it was adventure , it was curiosity . it was an imagination .
and it was an experience that i could not give to hollywood .
because , you know , i could imagine a creature , which we could make a visual effect , but i couldn &apos;t imagine what i would see outside of the fensters .
so on some of the following expeditions , i &apos;ve seen creatures in thermalquellen , and sometimes things i haven &apos;t had before before , sometimes things that had never seen before before , and that was the time we saw them , even no words .
so that &apos;s really umgeworfen me , and i wanted to do more .
and so i met an unusual decision .
after success from the titanic , i said , &quot; okay , i want to put my hauptberuf as a filmmaker as a filmmaker in hollywood to ice and i &apos;ll go for a while . &quot;
and then we started , we started to bismarck , and we were exploring them with roboterfahrzeugen .
we went back to the wrack of the titanic .
we took small robots that we built that would be a fiberglaskabel abwickelten .
our intention was to go back and see the inner of the ship , which had never been done before .
nobody had ever been the internal internal internal center . you didn &apos;t have any means for it . so we developed the technology .
so i &apos;m sitting on the deck of the titanic , in a tauchboot , and see planken , which are quite similar to this brettern , and i know that the band has been playing .
and i fly with a little roboterfahrzeug on the gänge of the ship .
i &apos;m actually bediene it , but my consciousness is within the vehicle .
it felt like i was going to be in the schiffswracks of the titanic .
this was the most surrealste form of a déjà-vu that i &apos;ve ever experienced . because before i was bog around a corner , i &apos;d always know what would be in the lichtkegel of the vehicle , because i had run for months of the time when we were doing the movie .
the set was , the set of the baupläne , the baupläne .
so this was a very strange experience .
she made me realize that you were using such a roboterhafte avatare and so that you can move your consciousness into the vehicle , in this other form of existence .
it was really immensely profound .
and perhaps a little view of what might happen in some decades when you have cyborg-körper , to explore something , to do something , to do other things , in all possible post-humanen of zukunftszenarios that i can imagine as a science-fiction-fan .
after these expeditions , we began to appreciate what we saw in the bottom , for example , the tiefseequellen , where we saw these incredibly amazing animals , and that &apos;s sort of alien , but here on earth .
they live with chemosynthese .
they don &apos;t exist in a sunlight that &apos;s a system that we do .
and so you see animals that are right next to a 500 degrees celsius , that they can survive .
at the same time , i was also interested in weltraumwissenschaft , which was the science-fiction-einfluss from my childhood .
and so i ended up with the people who are interested in nasa and they &apos;re going to be in the nasa-sachverständigenrat and right weltraummissionen . they go to russia , go through the mission of the biomedizinische protokoll of all the time and off , flies the international weltraumstation , and take our 3d-kamerasysteme .
that was fascinating .
but at the end , it ended out that i took a weltraumwissenschaftler to the deep sea .
i took them to the world at the bottom , and the welt , planetenwissenschaftler , planetenwissenschaftler , people who were interested in extreme situations . i took them to the sources so they could take samples and test and test and test instruments and so on .
we were doing a dokumentarfilme , but actually , science , more specifically , was weltraumwissenschaft .
so the circle between my existence was a science-fiction-fan , then as a child , and the actual thing to do that .
and over the course of this discovery i learned a lot .
i &apos;ve learned a lot about science . but i &apos;m certainly thinking , you know , a director must also have to be able to be a leader or something like that .
i didn &apos;t understand much of leadership before i antrat these expeditions .
because at a certain point i had to say , &quot; what do i do here ?
why do i do that ? what &apos;s coming out ? &quot;
these blöden films don &apos;t make us a money .
we &apos;re just playing the cost of the cost . you don &apos;t trace any trace .
all think i was between titanic and &quot; the avatar &quot; and i &apos;d have gefeilt the nägel on a towel on a towel on a beach .
i &apos;ve all done these films , these dokumentarfilme , for a very small audience .
no credit , no honor , no money . what are you doing ?
you &apos;re going to do it for the task of the challenge , and the ocean is the most herausforderndste environment that exists . you &apos;re doing it because of the entdeckerrausches connection , which is emerging when a small group of people are making a team .
because we &apos;ve done all of this with only 10 to 12 people who worked for years for years , sometimes we &apos;d be 2 to three months in the sea .
and in this community , you realize that the most important thing is the achtung you have , because you &apos;ve been dealing with a task that you can &apos;t explain to you .
when you go back to land and say , &quot; we had to do it , the fiberglas , the schallschwächung , the whole technology , and the trouble , the human leistungsvermögen , if you &apos;re working on lake , &quot; you can &apos;t explain the other , and that &apos;s like police officers or the soldiers that have gone through something together and know that they can never
there &apos;s a connection , a gegenseitiger .
so when i came back to make my next film &quot; the same film &quot; and i tried to apply this leadership , which is that you would be respected and deserve to be a team of respect .
so the dynamic really changed .
so , i was back with a little team on a unbekanntem terrain , and we were doing &quot; avatar &quot; with a new technology that we had never been before .
hugely exciting .
an incredible challenge .
and we &apos;ve been in a richtigen family for a period of four time .
it changed my way of making movies .
there were people who said we had these ozeanwesen , really , really well , gut , and are transported on the planet .
for me , it was more a prinzipielle way to do my job , the actual process that changed in the result .
so what can we close from all of that ?
what lessons do we learn ?
i think it &apos;s the curiosity .
it &apos;s the most powerful human property .
our imagination is a force that can even create a reality .
and the achtung of your team is more important than all the world &apos;s lorbeer .
to me , a young filmmaker who &apos;s like , &quot; give me a advice to me how to do something like this . &quot;
and i say , &quot; schränke yourself not .
it &apos;s getting others for you . don &apos;t you do yourself , bet not against yourself , but take risks on you . &quot;
nasa has such a lieblingssatz , &quot; failure is not an alternative . &quot;
but in art , and in the study , failure has to be an alternative , because there &apos;s a vertrauensvorschuss .
no important effort that was demanded , has ever been considered at the very risk of the risk .
you have to be ready to take these risks .
that &apos;s the idea that i &apos;d like to give you on the way , and failure is not an alternative , fear but not one . thank you .
today i &apos;m speaking to you about energy and climate .
and this may be surprising to a bit , because my vollzeitbeschäftigung is basically a lot of vaccines and seed , and the seed companies are about to make things that we have to invent and deliver the poorest two billion a better life .
but energy and climate are extremely important to these people , even more important than any other on the planet .
klimaverschlechterung means that their saaten will not grow over many years , and it &apos;s too much rain , and things will change how it can &apos;t be able to be able to sustain its fragile environment .
that leads to hungersterben . it leads uncertainty . it leads to the unruhen .
so , a climate change will be terrible for you .
and also , the energiepreis for them is very important .
the fact is that if you could reduce the price of one thing , the energy is about energy , it would be far from the most effective .
now , the energiepreis is like to go over time .
in fact , the fortschrittsgesellschaft is based on energiefortschritten .
the kohlerevolution drove the industrial revolution and even in the 20th century , there was a rapid case in the elektrizitätspreis , and so we have refrigerators , air , we can make modern materials and do so many things .
so we &apos;re in a wonderful situation of power in the rich world .
but , if we &apos;re cutting the price -- let &apos;s cut the price in half -- we &apos;re going to hit a new barrier , and that barrier is going to be on carbon .
co2 is warmer , and the equation for co2 is actually quite clear .
they summieren the ausgestoßene co2 , which lead to the temperaturerhöhung , and these temperaturerhöhung have some very negative effects . effects on the weather and perhaps worse , the indirekte result that the natural ecosystems can &apos;t adapt and somit all the systems .
now , the exact correlation between a co2-anstieg and the process of resultierende and where their other consequences are , there are some of these , but not very many .
and there &apos;s certainly unklarheit about how bad these are going to follow , but they &apos;re going to be extremely bad .
i asked the top-wissenschaftler several times , &quot; do we really have to go to zero ?
does not enough half or a quarter ? &quot;
the answer is : until we get close to zero , the temperature will go up .
so it &apos;s a big challenge .
it &apos;s very different from saying , we have a 3,5 hohen truck , which has to be under a three feet bridge , and that &apos;s what you can put in it .
this has to go down , at zero .
now , we &apos;re running a lot of kohlenstoffdioxid every year , over 26 billion tons .
every americans are about 20 tons . people from poor countries , less than one .
on average , it &apos;s about five tons of everybody on the planet .
and somehow we have to create changes that lower zero .
it &apos;s always been up .
only different economic changes have changed at all , and we have to go from rapidem increase to reduction and to go to zero to zero .
this equation has four factors . they have a little bit of a bit of a little bit -- and you have to have co2 -- co2 -- that will depend on the number of people , from the service that every person is using average , the average energy for every service and co2 that will be emittiert per unit of energy .
so let &apos;s look at each one factor , and we &apos;re thinking about how we get that to zero .
and you probably have to get one of these numbers very close to zero .
now , this is basic algebra , but let &apos;s go through it .
first , we have the population .
today &apos;s life 6,8 billion people .
and it &apos;s going on nine billion zu. that go on nine billion .
if we &apos;re very successful with new vaccines , the gesundheitsvorsorgung and reproduktionsmedizin , we could reduce that to 10 percent to 15 percent , but at the time , we &apos;re seeing a slope about 1.3 .
the second factor is the services we use .
it &apos;s all the food we eat , clothing , television , heat .
these are very good things and armutsverringerung means that they &apos;re accessible to almost every one on the planet .
it &apos;s great that this number goes up .
in the wealthy world , in the upper billion , we could make a guess abstriche and less use , but in average , that number will rise every year , and so much more than double , the number of services that are being given to the person .
and here we see a very basic service . there &apos;s at home , you can read the homework ?
and these students don &apos;t have it , so they go out and read their schulaufgaben under the straßenlicht .
now , for efficiency , the e , the energy per service , there &apos;s finally good news .
we have something that doesn &apos;t go up .
because of many successes in the lichtsektor , through other autotypen , through new methods in the häuserbau , many services , their energy levels are going to be reduced by 90 percent .
in other service , like düngemitteln , 105 00 : 56,000 -- &amp; amp ; 00 : 05 : 58,000 or luftverkehr , or luftverkehr , is the spielraum for improvement a lot .
in total , we might be able to reduce a reduction to a factor of 3 or maybe even a factor of six .
but the first three factors , we &apos;re now from 26 billion to maybe 13 billion tons , and that &apos;s just not enough .
so let &apos;s look at the fourth factor -- and this will be a key thing -- that &apos;s the amount of co2 that will be emittiert per unit .
it turns out , if you can get that to zero .
if you burn coal , no .
when they burn natural gas , no .
almost every single herstellungsmethode of electricity today &apos;s co2 today , except renewables and nuklearenergie .
so what we need to do on a global level is to create a new system .
we need energiewunder .
now , if i use the term &quot; miracle , &quot; i don &apos;t mean the impossible .
the mikroprozessor is a miracle . the computer is a miracle .
the internet and its services is a miracle .
people here have helped the development of many of these miracles .
usually , there &apos;s no way that you need a miracle to a particular date .
normally , you &apos;re just daneben and some of them , and some people don &apos;t .
in this case , we have to give vollgas and get a miracle in very short .
now , i asked myself , how can i really do that ?
is there a natural illustration , a demonstration that the idea of people here are ?
i remembered last year when i got mosquitoes , and somehow people liked this .
the idea was really tangible for them , you know , there are people who live with mosquitoes .
and i fell to energy for energy .
i decided that the freilassen of fireflies would be my diesjähriger contribution to the environment .
so here &apos;s a couple of natural bugs .
you &apos;ve told me that they don &apos;t bite . actually , you don &apos;t even have to leave the glass .
now , there are all kinds of spielereilösungen like this , but they don &apos;t get a lot .
we need solutions , either one or a multiple scaling and unvorstellbare of that , and although there are a lot of directions that people are looking for , i really see five that can afford those large demands .
i have the gezeiten , geothermal , fusion and biokraftstoffe .
now , you can take a moderaten piece and if you expect to do better than i expect , but my favorite line here is that we have to work on all the five , and we can &apos;t give up of them because they &apos;re going to be happy , because all of them have significant problems .
let &apos;s first look at burning fossil fuels , burning from either coal or natural gas .
what you have to do is just seem simple , but it &apos;s not . you have to capture all the co2 that you &apos;re burning from the schornstein , and you can capture under pressure , and then store and hope it &apos;s going to be there .
there are some pilotprojekte that are done to 60 percent , 80 percent level , but getting it to 100 percent is going to be very difficult , and to get an einigung for the co2 of co2 , but the biggest problem here is the lagerzeitfrage .
who will make it ?
who can guarantee something , which literally many billion times more billion times more than any kind of trash you can imagine from nuklear- and other things ?
that &apos;s a lot of volume .
so this is a hard way .
next : nuklearenergie .
it has three big problems . the cost of everything in the hochregulierten countries are high . the question for security , which is , you know , you really feel that nothing can go wrong , despite human engagement , that the fuel is not used for guns .
and what do you do with the trash ?
because even though it &apos;s not very big , there &apos;s a lot of concerns .
so three very difficult problems that might be soluble , and that &apos;s why you should work .
the last three of the five have put me .
they &apos;re renewables , as they &apos;re often called .
and also , they have -- although it &apos;s great , you don &apos;t need a fuel -- you have some of the nachteile .
one is the energy density that these technologies are getting dramatically less than the kraftwerken .
these are energiefarmen , you &apos;re talking about a lot of quadratkilometern , a thousand times more than a normal power station .
and also , these sources unterliegen .
the sun doesn &apos;t seem all day , it doesn &apos;t seem every day , and the wind doesn &apos;t always go all the time .
so , if you depend on these sources , you have to have a path , and you have to get energy in times when it &apos;s not available .
so there &apos;s big preisherausforderungen here . there are challenges in transmission . if we say that the source of energy is outside the country , it doesn &apos;t just need the technology , you have to deal with the risk of that the energy from where it comes from .
and there &apos;s the lagerungsproblem .
and to show the dimension , i have all sorts of batteries that are made , and i &apos;ve got all the batteries that are made , the computer , computer , cell phones , for everything , and i have this with the amount of electronic energy that the world is using , and i found that all batteries that we could make , less than 10 minutes of
so we need a big breakthrough , something that will be 100 times more likely than the way for the way to go .
that &apos;s not impossible , but it &apos;s not so easy .
this happens when you try to say these unterbrochenen sources over , you know , 20 percent of the world &apos;s energy .
if you want to rely on 100 percent on it , you need an incredible wunderbatterie .
now where we should go , what is the right approach ?
a manhattan project ? how do we get to the goal ?
what we need are many companies working on it . hundreds .
in each one of those five areas we need at least 100 people .
you &apos;ll say , you &apos;re going to say , &quot; these are crazy ! that &apos;s good .
i think there &apos;s a lot of people in the ted group that you &apos;ve already got in .
bill big has several companies , among other companies , one called esolar called the great solarthermaltechnologien .
vinod khosla invest in dozens of companies that make great things and interesting opportunities and i try to support this .
nathan myhrvold and i fund a company , which , perhaps surprisingly , is going to be tracking .
there are some innovations in the nuklearbereich ; modular , liquid .
the development has stopped in this industry a few time ago , so it &apos;s not a big surprise that some good concepts are lying around .
the terrapower-konzept means that , instead of a part of the urans , one percent , the u235 , we decided to burn the 99 percent , the u238 .
that &apos;s a fairly crazy idea .
but in fact , you had been thinking about it , but you could never simulate a reasonable thing if it was going to work , but since then modern fusion , you can simulate it and see that , yes ! it &apos;s going to be done , it &apos;s like that it &apos;s going to be done .
and because you &apos;re going to burn this 99 percent , it &apos;s a lot better .
you actually burn the trash , and you can actually use the waste of these reactors as a antriebsstoff device .
instead of breaking the head over it , they just burn it . it &apos;s a great thing .
so uranium is used to use , a little bit like a candle .
you see , it &apos;s a kind of pillar , often , as a &quot; wandernde wave of reactor . &quot;
that really solve the treibstoffproblem .
here &apos;s a picture of a place in kentucky .
this is the waste , the 99 percent . you have the part that &apos;s burned , so you &apos;re herausgenommen , so it &apos;s called aufgebrauchtes uranium .
the u.s. u.s. u.s. u.s. u.s. u.s. u.s. u.s.
and if you &apos;re cheap cheap and simple , you get enough fuel for the rest of the planet .
you know , there are many challenges , but it &apos;s an example of many hundreds of ideas we need to get forward .
let &apos;s think about how we should measure our success .
what should our evidence look like ?
now , let &apos;s go to the goal we have to do , and then we talk about the zwischenschritt .
many people talk about an 80 percent reduction by 2050 .
it &apos;s really important that we get there .
the rest of 20 percent will be produced in poor countries , and still a bit of agriculture , and hopefully waldrohdung and zement to be clean up to the point .
so to reach those 80 percent , the developed world , including countries like china , are completely changing their elektrizitätsgeneration .
the other note is , if we &apos;re using the null-emissionen technology , whether they &apos;re used in all developed countries , and we &apos;re on the way to get them to the rest .
that &apos;s great important .
this is going to be a key key .
if we go back from there , what should the 2020 say ?
it should be back to the two elements .
we should use the effektivitätsmaßnahmen to take reduction on the way , the less we emittieren , the less that the co2-summe will be , and it &apos;s the temperature .
but actually , this note for the things that we do not completely lead to the big reduktionen , just the same , or even slightly less important than the others , which is the speed of innovation for these breakthroughs .
these breakthroughs have to be track with the vollgas , and we can measure that : in firmenzahlen , in pilotprojekten and regulierungsänderungen .
there are lots of great books on this issue .
the al gore book , &quot; we have the election &quot; and david mckays &quot; sustainable energy without &quot; the hot air . &quot;
they really go through and create a frame where this can be discussing the broad , because we need for all the pages of all the pages .
there &apos;s a lot that has to be done .
that &apos;s a wish .
a very konkreter wish , we &apos;re inventing this technology .
if you just want to pick the president , a vaccine , and i love a vaccine , and i love that , or i could choose that wish , which is , halbierter energiepreis , without co2 , i &apos;ll take that wish .
this has the biggest impact .
if we don &apos;t get that wish , the dig between the long and the short term will be terrible between the u.s. and china , between poor and rich and rich , and almost all of the lives of that 2 billion will be much worse .
so what do we need to do ?
for what kind of services do i do ?
we need to use for more research .
when countries are meeting in places like koppenhagen , they should not just talk about co2 .
they should discuss these innovationsstrategie , and they would be shocked by the silly little geldern that are spent on these innovative approaches .
we need marktanreize , carbon taxes , cap &amp; amp ; trade , which creates a preissignal .
we need to spread the news .
we have to lead dialogue and complete and we have to go and also the things that are being done by the government .
it &apos;s a very important wish , but i think we can do it .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you . thank you .
thank you . just to understand the difference of the things -- first , can you give us an idea of scale of that investment ?
bill gates : to get the simulation simulation at a supercomputer , we have all the great scientists to get what we &apos;ve done , we need only some 10 million . and even if we tested our materials in a russian reactor , to make sure that it works , you only have to be in the 100en million .
the difficult step is building the first world &apos;s building , to find another billion , the regularien and the place that actually builds the first one .
when the first finished is , when it &apos;s going to be so long , it &apos;s all clear , because the economy , the energy density is so different from the nuklearenergie of the way we know it .
to understand that , that means to build deep in the ground , almost like a vertical pillar of nuclear brennstoffs , this verbrauchten , and then the process starts to go up and it &apos;s still working down .
bg : right . now you have to neu the reactor , so there &apos;s lots of people and lots of control that can go wrong . this thing where you open it and you get things hinein- and sachen , and that &apos;s not good .
but if you have very cheap fuel , you can befüllen it for 60 years -- think about a pillar that you buried , without all the complexity .
and it &apos;s sitting there and it &apos;s burning 60 years , and then it &apos;s finished .
a nuklearreaktor , which is a solution to the trash itself .
bg : yeah . now , what happens to the trash : you can sit it -- there &apos;s a lot less waste with this method -- then take him and put it into the next reactor and burning it on .
and we start by taking the waste that &apos;s already exists , which is in these kühlbecken or trockenbehältern , and it &apos;s our startbrennstoff .
so what these reactors have been a problem is what we put in our own rooms , and that &apos;s what we &apos;re going to have to reduce the müllvolumen dramatically in the process .
but while you &apos;ve been talking about these people with different people in the world .
where is the biggest interest in this ?
bg : now we haven &apos;t set us down a place , and there &apos;s a lot of interesting offenlegungsregeln to everything called &quot; nuclear &quot; in the name . there &apos;s been huge interest and the people of the company were in russia , india , china -- i was here and i talked to the energieminister and talked about how this fits the energieagenda .
i &apos;m optimistic . you know , the french and japanese have done something in the direction .
this is a different version of one thing that was done .
so this is a more important step forward , but it &apos;s like a faster reactor and some countries that built this , so everybody who has actually done a fast reactor , a kandidatat for our first .
in your mind , you can see , in terms of time , and chance of calling something like this .
bg : now we need one of these skalierbaren , stromgenerierenden things that are very cheap , we have 20 years for inventing and then for 20 years .
that &apos;s kind of the kind of the deadline that we have to show the umweltmodelle that we have to do .
and , you know , terrapower , when everything is fine , and that &apos;s a big wish , could be easy .
and fortunately , there are dozens of companies , and we need hundreds of , who , as well as their approaches work , working for their pilots , to be able to do for that .
and it would be best if it &apos;s done several , because then you could use a mixture .
anyway , we need a solution .
and then , the big possible breakthroughs , is this the biggest thing you know ?
bg : a energiedurchbruch is the most important .
it would be without the umweltherausforderung , but it &apos;s the power of it more important .
in the nuclear sector , there are other innovative companies .
you know , we don &apos;t know what work as well as these , but there &apos;s the standard method , which is a different approach .
there &apos;s a liquid reaktortyp that seems hard to do , but maybe that &apos;s what that &apos;s about us .
and so there &apos;s different , but the beauty of it is that a uranmolekül has a million times a lot of energy like a , say , a kohlemolekül , and that &apos;s why you can deal with the problems , and that &apos;s mostly the radiation , the footprint and the cost , the impact on the country and other things , almost in a very liga .
if that doesn &apos;t work , what ?
do we have to go to notfallmaßnahmen to try and keep the erdtemperatur stable stable ?
bg : when you get into this situation , it &apos;s like you &apos;ve been eating too much , and you &apos;re going to have a heart attack in a heart attack , and what do you do ? you might need a herzoperation or something like that .
there &apos;s a forschungsrichtung that &apos;s called geoengineering , which is dealing with various techniques to verzögern the warming , so we &apos;d get 20 or 30 years longer to get away .
that &apos;s just a versicherungsmethode .
you hope we don &apos;t need it .
some people say , not only to get insurance because you should not do it , because you might make it a little bit , you know , you know , because you know that you &apos;re going to save the herzoperation .
i don &apos;t know if you &apos;re going to be able to do the importance of this problem , but there &apos;s a conversation in geoengineering , whether you should have that , if things come faster , or have this innovation longer than we expect .
klimaskeptiker : do you have a or two sentences to convince you ?
bg : now , unfortunately , the skeptiker in very different camp .
those who make science arguments are very little .
tell you that there are negative effects that have to do with the clouds that move things off ?
there are very , very few things you can ever tell you , from which there is a chance in a million .
the hauptproblem here is similar to aids .
you make the mistake now , and you pay for it much later .
and so , the idea , if you have all kinds of dringenden problems , which you have to do , and you just get to invest in something that &apos;s not so clear about -- and it &apos;s not that the investment is so clear . actually , the latest report is not necessarily the worst scenario , and there are people in the rich world that are going
the fact is that this uncertainty should be worried .
but my dream here is that if you can do it economic , and the skeptiker , then , say , &quot; okay , i &apos;m not interested in the co2 , i wish it did that , but i &apos;ll accept it because it &apos;s cheaper than the previous method . &quot;
and that would be the answer to the björn lomborg argument that , if you use all of these time and energy to solve the co2 problem , all the other goals , the armutsverringerung , the bekämpfung of malaria , and so on , that it &apos;s a stupid waste of resources , while there are better things that we can do .
bg : now , the actual spending for research -- let &apos;s say u.s. should spend 10 billion a year more than they do today -- that &apos;s not so dramatic .
and that &apos;s not something that other things should suffer .
you go to big geldsummen , and you can disagree with some reasonable people if you have something that &apos;s not economic , and it &apos;s trying to fund that . for me , most of the waste is going to be .
it &apos;s because you &apos;re very short about a kostendurchbruch and funded , and i think we should try and do more things that have the potential to be much less cheaper .
if the abstrich you get , you get a very high energiepreis , you can only keep the rich .
i mean , every one of us here might spend five times as much for our energy without changing their lifestyle .
the lower two billion , but it &apos;s a disaster .
and even lomborg thinks .
his new masche is now , &quot; why is not going to talk more about research ? &quot;
he &apos;s still going to be associated with his former stories , with the skeptiker-camp , but he understood that this is a very einsame group , and that &apos;s why he &apos;s going to get the forschungsargument .
and that &apos;s a kind of a gedankengang that i think is appropriate .
the research , it &apos;s just crazy how little it &apos;s going to be supported .
bill , i think i &apos;m speaking to almost all people here , if i say i really hope your wish will be true . thank you , thank you .
bg : thank you .
a few years ago , here at ted , peter skillman asked a design-wettbewerb called &quot; the marshmallow-herausforderung . &quot;
the idea is quite simple . vierer-teams have to have the most significant freistehende structure with 20 spaghetti , about three times , about three and a half of the faden , about three feet of a faden .
the marshmallow has to be on top .
and , even though it &apos;s really easy , it &apos;s actually really hard because people are doing very quickly .
and so i thought this is an interesting idea , and i turned it into a design-workshop .
it was a huge success .
since then , i &apos;ve done about 70 workshops of the world with students , designers and architects , even with ctos of the fortune-50-unternehmen and there &apos;s something that allows deep to the nature of collaboration and i want to share some of them with them .
usually most people start to think about themselves in their task .
you &apos;re talking about what it &apos;s going to look like , it &apos;s rangeln .
and then you invest a little bit of time in planning and organization . you put it out , and you put it out .
they invest in a lot of their time in the zusammenbau machine .
and finally , just before you don &apos;t have time , someone takes the marshmallow , and you put it very carefully at the top , step back and ta-da , &quot; ta-da , &quot; and admire your work .
but then , almost always , what happens is that the &quot; ta-da &quot; is going to be &quot; uh-oh &quot; because the weight of the brain is going to be able to get it to the whole thing .
there &apos;s a number of people who have a lot more uh-oh than others , and under the worst are fresh bwl-absolventen .
they lie , they cheat , they &apos;re confused and they make really dürftige things .
and of course , there are teams that have a lot more ta-da , and under the best , are fresh absolventen of the kindergartens .
and that &apos;s quite amazing .
as peter told us , not only do it the highest towers , but also the most interesting structures of all .
what you might be asking is : how does this happen ? why ? what about those ?
and peter tells : &quot; neither of the kids spend a time to be the spaghetti &apos;s boss . &quot;
they don &apos;t invest in machtkämpfe .
there &apos;s another reason yet .
and that is that bwl-studenten were trains to find a real plan , ok .
and then it &apos;s going to realize .
what happens when you put the marshmallow on the top , you don &apos;t have time and what &apos;s going on ?
it &apos;s a crisis .
sounds familiar , what &apos;s familiar ?
what &apos;s been doing so much different is that they start with the marshmallow and build prototypes , successful prototypes , always at the top of the top , so they could have the opportunity to repair baufällige prototypes .
konstrukteure , you know , erkennen the way of working as a core of a iterativen .
and with each trial , the children get immediate feedback , and what &apos;s not .
so the power of work with prototypes is much , much -- but let &apos;s see how different teams are operating .
the average for most of the average , the average average , bwl-studenten , schaffen , are getting the lawyers up , but not much , more kindergartenkinder are better than the adults .
who &apos;s the most successful ?
architects and engineers , fortunately .
three times is the highest thing i &apos;ve seen .
and why ? because they understand and sich-selbst-verstärkende and sich-selbst-verstärkende geometric patterns are the key to build robust structures .
and the ceos are something about average , but here &apos;s what &apos;s interesting .
you put a exekutive administrator on the team , you &apos;ll be significant .
it &apos;s amazing . you see and see , &quot; this team will win . &quot;
you can predict that . why is that ?
because they have special skills of the prozessbegleitung .
they &apos;re running the process , they understand it .
and the team that regelt and the work is going to work better improve the work .
so , spezialisierte skills and prozessfähigkeiten and their combination of success .
if you have 10 teams , the typical thing , you get about six and the robust structures .
now i was trying to do something .
i thought we &apos;ll make the pokereinsatz .
so i offered a $ $ prize prize for the winner for the winner .
what do you think happened with these design-studenten ?
what was the result ?
this happened . not a team had a stable structure .
if anybody had built a 2,5cm high construction , he would have carried the price home .
so , isn &apos;t it interesting that high wetteinsätze have a strong effect ?
we &apos;re doing this practice with the same students .
what do you think happened ?
now , they understood the advantage of the &quot; dune . &quot;
so , from the same , bad team one of the best .
they &apos;re produced the highest construction in the least .
so there &apos;s tief-greifende lessons for us , about nature and success .
you like questions : why would someone actually spend time to create a marshmallow-challenge ?
the reason is , i &apos;m using digital tools and processes to help teams , to make cars , video games and visual effects .
and what the marshmallow-challenge is doing is , it helps to identify the hidden assumptions .
because frankly , every project has its own marshmallow .
the challenge offers a shared experience , a shared language , or to build the right prototype .
and this is the value of this experience , this kind of simple practice .
and those of you who are interested in , can go to visit .
it &apos;s a blog where you see the marshmallows .
there &apos;s a schritt-für-schritt-anleitung there .
you find crazy examples of all the world , like people optimize the system and raffinieren .
there &apos;s also a weltrekorde .
and the most important lesson , i think , is that the construction is actually an verbindender sport .
it requires that we all set our senses on the task and we think we &apos;re thinking about how our feelings and our doing , in the challenge that lies before us .
and sometimes a little prototype of this experience is everything that it takes to take us from a &quot; uh-oh &quot; -- to a ta-da moment .
and that can make a big difference .
thank you .
we &apos;re going to have this machine , and we have a machine .
a big machine , a cool machine machine , and that &apos;s a machine machine .
and everybody in this room has to go inside .
and you can go into the past , you can go into the future ; you can &apos;t stay in here and now .
and i wonder what they would choose because i &apos;ve been asked my friends in last time , and they wanted to go to the past .
i don &apos;t know . you wanted to go back to the time before you have cars or twitter or twitter , or &quot; america &apos;s seeking the american . &quot;
i don &apos;t know .
i &apos;m convinced you &apos;re kind of hingezogen to the nostalgie , zu .
and i understand that .
i &apos;m not part of that group , i have to say .
i don &apos;t want to go into the past , and that &apos;s not because i &apos;m a abenteurer .
it &apos;s because there &apos;s no way of the way that you don &apos;t go back on this planet , you go forward .
so i want to go into this machine , and i want to go into the future .
this is the greatest time that it has ever been on this planet , no matter what scale they put : health , wealth , mobility , opportunities , declining krankheitsraten .
there was never a time like this .
my ur-großeltern died , all of them died .
my grandparents are drängten this number to 70. .
my parents are the 80 on the fersen .
so there should be a nine at the beginning of my todeszahl .
but it &apos;s not even about people like us , because this is a larger thing than that .
a kid who &apos;s born in new delhi can expect to live as long as the richest man in the world 100 years ago .
think about it . this is an incredible fact .
and why is this ?
smallpox . smallpox has killed billions of people on this planet .
they have neu the demografie of the earth , as it has no war ever done .
they &apos;re gone . they &apos;re disappeared .
we &apos;ve bezwungen them . puff .
in the rich world , diseases that millions of us still have threatened in front of one generation of us , hardly yet .
diphterie , röteln , kinderlähmung .
does anybody know what that &apos;s ?
vaccines , modern medicine , our ability to feed billions , that &apos;s the scientific method of scientific method .
and from my perspective , the scientific method of trying to do things , if it works , if it doesn &apos;t do it , one of the greatest achievement of humankind .
so that &apos;s the good news .
unfortunately , this is the good news , because there &apos;s a couple other problems , and they &apos;ve been erwähnt to be mentioned .
and one of them is that despite all our achievements , a billion people on this world are hungry to bed every day .
this number goes up , and it &apos;s increasing very fast , and that &apos;s embarrassing .
and not only that , we &apos;ve used our imagination to verwüsten the world .
drinking water , urbares land , rainforests , oil , gas , they &apos;re disappearing , and that &apos;s soon , and if we don &apos;t go out of this chaos , we will go away from this chaos .
so the question is , can we do that ? i think i think .
i think it &apos;s clear that we can produce food that will feed billions of people without the country they live in .
i think we can supply this world with energy that doesn &apos;t destroyed them at the same time .
i think that &apos;s really , and no , that &apos;s not a wunschdenken .
but this is awake me at night -- one of the things that keeps me awake at night , and we &apos;ve never need scientific progress like now , never , never , ever .
and we were never able to make it reasonable einzusetzten , as we can do it .
we &apos;re on the verge of astonishing , astonishing events in many areas , and yet i really think we have to go back and find a time , 300 years before the enlightenment , to find a time where we have progress in which we have getritten progress , in more lines than now .
people are hüllen in their faith , and that &apos;s so closely that you can &apos;t free them .
not even the truth is free .
and listen , everybody has a right to think , even a rather to make progress .
but you know , what you don &apos;t have right ?
you don &apos;t have a right to your own facts . &apos; tschuldigung , you don &apos;t have them .
and i took a while to find out .
about a decade ago , i wrote an article about the impfungen for &quot; the new yorker , &quot; a little article .
and i was amazed to storm resistance to resistance to what &apos;s the most effective health care of the human history in the end of human history .
i didn &apos;t know what to do , so i did just what i was doing , i wrote an article and drove an article .
and soon , i wrote an article about gentechnisch transformed food .
the same thing , only bigger .
people were playing crazy .
so i wrote an article about it , and i couldn &apos;t understand why people thought that would be &quot; frankenfood , &quot; why they thought molecules was a certain rather than a random kind of herumzuschieben a übergriff area in the field of nature .
but you know , i do what i do . i wrote the article , i kept on .
i mean , i &apos;m a journalist .
we &apos;re typing , we pass a way , we &apos;re going to eat , that &apos;s okay .
but these articles were worried me , and i couldn &apos;t figure out why , and eventually i found it out .
and that &apos;s because these fanatiker who were crazy me were absolutely not even a fanatiker .
these were people who were people , educated people , decent people .
they were just like people in this room .
and that &apos;s what made me mess .
but then i thought , you know what , we &apos;re honest .
we &apos;re at a point where we don &apos;t have the same relationship with progress .
we &apos;re talking about zwiespältig .
we &apos;re talking about a little bit about this with little anführungszeichen about it .
okay , there &apos;s reasons , and i think we know what causes that .
we have the trust in institutions , in authority , and sometimes in science , and there &apos;s no reason why it should not be .
you can just call a few names and people will understand .
in fact , tschernobyl , bhopal , vioxx , mass destruction , the us-präsidentschaftswahl of 2000 .
i mean , you know , you can choose your own list .
there are questions and problems with people who we thought they were always right . so , be skeptical .
ask questions , ask for the evidence , ask you to see .
take nothing for granted .
but now , it &apos;s : if you get evidence , you have to take this evidence , and we &apos;re not good at it .
and i can say that , in an epidemic of fear , i &apos;ve never seen them and hopefully will never see again .
about 12 years ago , a story was published , a terrible story that brought the autismus-epidemie to the masern , mumps , and röteln vaccine .
very scary .
there were a lot of studies done in order to see if that was true .
so , you should have been done in a lot of studies , which is a serious issue .
the data came in .
the data came in from the united states , from england , from sweden , from canada , and they were all the same , no correlation , no connection , no connection .
it doesn &apos;t matter . it doesn &apos;t make any difference because we believe in anekdoten , we believe what we see what we see , what we see , what makes us feel .
we don &apos;t believe in a bündel documents of a regierungsangstellten that &apos;s data , and i understand that , i think we &apos;re all doing that .
but you know what ?
the result of this was katastrophal .
and in fact , in fact , the united states is one of the only countries in the world that the impfrate of the masern is falling down .
that &apos;s skandalös , and we should be ashamed .
it &apos;s awful .
what happened is we could do that .
now , i understand that . i do that .
because anybody &apos;s got to get a chance ?
has one single person ever ever die of anyone in the audience ?
not very often .
in this country , not all of that , but 160.000 times the last year .
these are many deaths from the masern , 20 per hour .
but because this is not what &apos;s happening here , we can verdrängen it , and people like jenny mccarthy can walk around and messages from fear and analphabetismus of platforms like oprah and larry king of king .
and they can do it because they don &apos;t connect cause and correlation .
they don &apos;t understand that these things seem to be equal , but almost never the same .
and this is something we need to learn , and it &apos;s very fast .
this guy was a hero , jonas salk .
he &apos;s befreite us from one of the worst human humankind .
no fear , no qualen , kinderlähmung , puff .
the guy in the middle is not so much .
he &apos;s called paul offit .
he &apos;s just developed a rotavirus-impfstoff with a few other people .
it can save the lives of 400- , 500,000 children per year in the developing world .
pretty good , not ?
now , that &apos;s good , except for paul walking around and over vaccines , and says , how valuable they are , and that people should just stop too .
and that &apos;s actually saying that .
so paul is a terrorist .
when paul speaks to a public public box , he can &apos;t tell the bewaffnete of the bewaffnete .
he gets calls at home because people like to tell him they know where his children go to school .
and why ? because paul did a vaccine .
i don &apos;t need that , but vaccines are essential .
you go away , you go back to the disease , horrible disease , and that &apos;s what &apos;s happening .
we &apos;ve now been a masern .
and that &apos;s going to worse , and pretty soon children will die back to this because that &apos;s just a question of numbers .
and they &apos;re not only dying of the masern .
what &apos;s kinderlähmung ? let &apos;s take that . why not ?
a kommilitonin of mine wrote me a couple of weeks ago and said that i &apos;m a little bit of schrill .
nobody ever said that .
she would not kill her child against kinderlähmung . no one .
fine .
why ? because we don &apos;t have a kinderlähmung . and you know what ?
we didn &apos;t have a kinderlähmung in this country .
now , i don &apos;t know , maybe , you know , maybe you have to get to a plane and fly to go to los angeles , and he &apos;s about ohio .
and in a few hours , he lands and mietet a car , and it comes to long beach , and he &apos;ll go to one of these fantastichen ted-dinner tonight .
and he doesn &apos;t know he &apos;s infected with a lähmenden disease , and we don &apos;t know that , because this is how the world works .
that &apos;s the planet we live . don &apos;t do that as if it &apos;s not .
we love to hüllen ourselves . we love that .
is they all taken their vitamine all morning ?
echinacea , a little antioxidantium , which helps you to do it .
i know you &apos;ve done this because half of americans do it every day .
they take this stuff , and they take an alternative cure , and it doesn &apos;t make any difference , as often we find out that they &apos;re useless .
the data shows that all the time .
they &apos;re verdunkeln their urine . they &apos;re almost never .
that &apos;s okay , you want to pay 28 billion dollars for the dark urine .
i &apos;m totally with you .
dark urine . dark .
why do we do that ? why do we do that ?
well , i think i understand -- we hate the industry .
we hate a strong government . we don &apos;t have an trust in the system .
and we should not do that . our healthcare system is mies .
it &apos;s cruel to millions of people .
it &apos;s absolutely amazing cold and seelentötend self to ourselves that can afford it .
so we walk away , and where we go ?
we &apos;re running in the arms of the placebo-industrie .
that &apos;s great . i love the placebo-industrie .
but you know , this is really a serious issue , because that stuff is crap , and we spend billions of dollars .
and i have all kinds of little requisiten here .
none of them -- gingko , betrug , echinacea , betrug , acai , because i don &apos;t even know what that is , but we spend billions of dollars for it .
and you know what ? when i say that , people will say to me and say , &quot; what do you care ? let people do what they want .
that &apos;s how they feel good . &quot;
and you know what ? they &apos;re wrong .
because it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s the gesundheitsminister , which says , &quot; hmm , i &apos;m not going to take the evidence of my experts in mammography , &quot; or some krebs-quacksalber krebs-quacksalber who wants to treat his patients with kaffe-einläufen .
if you &apos;re going to go on this way , and ersetzen with magic to do that and replace science , you get to a place where you don &apos;t want to be .
they &apos;re going to thabo mbeki in south africa .
he took 400,000 to people , because he insisted that red beete , knoblauch and zitronenöl , much more effective than were able to get drugs that we know that they can break the course of aids .
hundreds of thousands of deaths deaths in a country that will be geplagt worse than any other disease .
don &apos;t tell me that these things don &apos;t have consequences .
they have them . they &apos;ve always got them .
now , the hirnloseste epidemic that we &apos;re in right now is this absurde struggle between the befürwortern , gentechnisch foods and the bio-elite .
that &apos;s a idiotische debate . it has to stop .
it &apos;s a debate about words , about metaphors .
that &apos;s ideology , not science .
all we eat , every single reiskorn , every branch , every branch , every rosenkohl , was changed by the people .
you know , there was no mandarinen in paradise .
there was no cantaloupe-melonen .
there was no weihnachtsbäume . we did all this .
we &apos;ve done it in the last year years .
and some of it has worked and some of it .
we &apos;re losgeworden , which doesn &apos;t work .
now we can do it more , and of course , there are risks . but we can do something like vitamin a in rice , and that stuff can help millions of people to extend their lives .
you don &apos;t want to do that ?
i have to say , i don &apos;t understand that .
we were lehnen to the process .
why do we do that ?
now , what i &apos;m constantly hearing is too many chemicals , pesticides , hormones , monokultur , and we don &apos;t want a huge fields with one thing , that &apos;s wrong .
we don &apos;t want companies to patent life .
we don &apos;t want to have seeds .
and you know what my answer is to all of this ?
yes , they &apos;re right . fix that .
it &apos;s true , we have a huge nahrungsproblem , but that &apos;s not science .
that has nothing to do with science .
it &apos;s right , morality , patentkram .
you know that science is not a company .
she &apos;s not a country .
she &apos;s not even an idea ; it &apos;s a process .
it &apos;s a process , and sometimes it works and sometimes , but it doesn &apos;t work , but the idea that we shouldn &apos;t allow science to do their work because we &apos;re afraid of a real sackgasse , and it &apos;s hält millions of people from the aufblühen .
you know , in the next 50 years , we &apos;ll have 70 percent more food than it is at the moment . 70 percent .
this investment in africa in the last 30 years .
embarrassing . embarrassing .
they need this , and we don &apos;t give it to you .
and why ? well , the gentechnisch of food .
we don &apos;t want to encourage people to eat this verrottete stuff , like maniok .
the maniok is something that eat half a billion people .
it &apos;s about like a potato .
it &apos;s just a bündel of calories . it &apos;s mies .
it doesn &apos;t have nutrients , it doesn &apos;t have a protein , and scientists are building it in it .
and then people could eat that and would not be blind .
they wouldn &apos;t go to starvation , and you know what ?
that would be nice . it would be not chez panisse , but it would be nice .
and all i can say is : why do we fight that ?
i mean , we &apos;re asking ourselves , why do we fight that ?
because we don &apos;t want to have genes to do ?
it &apos;s not about genes , genes . it &apos;s not about chemicals .
it &apos;s not about our ridiculous passion for hormones , our beharren of food , better food , food food .
it &apos;s not about rice krispies , it &apos;s about getting people alive , and it &apos;s going to be a highest time to understand what that means .
because you know what ?
if we don &apos;t do that , if we continue to do so far , we have to be guilty of something that we don &apos;t want to be guilty about , high-tech stuff .
there &apos;s no other description of what &apos;s going on .
it &apos;s a little bit , it &apos;s ugly , it &apos;s not worthy , and we really need to stop that .
so after this incredibly funny conversation , you might like to say , &quot; are you going to go out and go to this ridiculous machine and the future ? &quot;
anyway . i want to go on anyway .
the moment is in the presence , but we have an incredible opportunity .
we can put these machine machine on everything we want .
we can hinbewegen them where we want to hinbewegen them , and we will move them where we want .
we have to go and we have to go and think of these conversations , and we need to think , but when we go into the time , and we &apos;re going to be happy to have that .
i know we can , and as far as it &apos;s been , it &apos;s something that the world needs now .
thank you .
thank you .
for some time , i &apos;m interested in the placebo-effekt , and it may seem strange to be interested in this , it &apos;s been curious , it &apos;s been , because they look at it as me as i , as a deception , which is going to be a little bit of something that if someone just stuck on it . &quot;
in other words , zuckerpillen , in some studies , has shown a measurable effect , and it &apos;s because the person thinks what happens to you , whether a pharmazeutische or a kind of ... in the schmerzmanagement , for example , if the patient is only stuck on that , a significant effect in the body called the placebo-effekt .
it &apos;s a deception that &apos;s going to be a real thing because somebody knows it .
so we &apos;re also trying to understand each other , i want to show you a very basic , very simple trick .
and i &apos;m going to show you how it works . that &apos;s a trick that &apos;s at least since the 1950s is in every zauberbuch for children .
i myself have learned it from the cub scout magic of the pfadfinder in the 1970s .
i &apos;ll take it for you and then explain it .
and then i &apos;ll explain why i &apos;ll explain it .
so , look what happens .
the knife that you can do is to investigate it ; my hand that you can study .
i &apos;m going to just hold the knife in my hands .
i push my ärmel back .
and to make sure nothing in my mouth , or out of it , i &apos;m just going to put my wrist right here .
so , in this way , you can see that there &apos;s no time going to be done , and as long as i &apos;m here , nothing can go into my own , or get out of it .
and the goal is just easy .
i &apos;m going to open my hand , and hopefully , if everything goes well , the knife will be held by my naked physical .
it &apos;s actually so fest to his place that i can shake it without that the knife of a herunterfällt .
nothing moves into my own , or it comes out , not a trickserei . and you can examine everything .
ta-da !
now , this is a trick i often beibringe into a little bit of kids who are interested in magic , because you can learn a lot about deception , if you look carefully , even though it &apos;s a very simple trick .
probably , many of you here know this trick .
it works like this .
i hold the knife in my hand .
i &apos;m saying that i umschließe my wrist to make sure that nothing in my mouth is going to be disappears or the end comes out , and that &apos;s a lie .
the reason i put my wrist festhalte is that there is the actual secret of illusion .
and in the moment , where i &apos;m going to put my hand from you , so you see it from the back , this finger moves here , my zeigefinger , just from there , where he was , in a position where he &apos;s so extended .
great trick ?
there &apos;s somebody who &apos;s like a childhood .
so , he &apos;s here . right .
and when i &apos;m umdrehe , the fingers changes its position .
and now you could talk about why this is a deception , why you don &apos;t realize that there &apos;s only three fingers to see , because the mind , and the way it processed information , not one person counts , one , two , three , but it &apos;s a group .
but that &apos;s not what &apos;s really about , and then i open my hand .
of course it &apos;s festgehalten there , but not by the magnetismus of my body , but through a trick , through my zeigefinger , which is now there .
and when i close my hand , the same thing is going to happen by zurückdrehe by this movement that the fingers is zurückbewegt .
i take that hand . and here &apos;s the knife .
this trick can show you your friends and your neighbors . thank you .
now , what has this done with the placebo-effekt ?
one year or so , i read a study that really got me out right .
i &apos;m not a doctor or a researcher , and that &apos;s why i was an amazing thing .
and it turns out , if you put a placebo pill against a weißen pill , in the form of a aspirintablette , it &apos;s just a round , white pill , which has a particular impact .
but if you give the shape to put it into a smaller pill , and you can paint that blue and shape that blue , and you shape a letter on it , it &apos;s actually measurable more effective .
and that , although none of them are any pharmazeutische -- they &apos;re just zuckerpillen .
but a white pill is not as good as a blue pill .
what ? that was really crazy .
it turns out that it &apos;s not all that .
when you take a little bit , the more effective than the tabletten of any form .
a colored capsule , which is yellow at a end , and the other red is better than a white space .
also the dosierung is a role .
a pill a day is not so good as three pills -- i can &apos;t remember the exact statistics of the exact . i &apos;m sorry .
but the key thing is .
and the dosierungen is also a role .
and the form plays a role .
and if you want to have the ultimate placebo-effekt , you have to reach the needle .
right ? a syringe with a wirkungslosen unit -- a few milliliter of a wirkungslosen substance you get to a patient .
that creates a very strong picture in your mind . that &apos;s a lot stronger than a white pill .
this graph is really -- i &apos;m going to show you another time when we have a projektor .
so the fact is that the white pill doesn &apos;t work as well as the blue pill that doesn &apos;t work as well as a capsule that doesn &apos;t work as well as the needle .
and nothing has a really pharmazeutische property , it &apos;s just our belief that i think in a stronger impact .
i wanted to know if i could use this idea for a magic .
i take something that &apos;s obviously a deception , and it &apos;ll make it look .
we know from the study that we have to reach at the needle when it &apos;s supposed to go to the thing .
this is an 18 inches long hutnadel . it &apos;s very , very spitz . and i &apos;ll start to do it a little bit of a little bit .
this is really my meat . it &apos;s not damians gezüchtetes meat .
this is my skin . this is not a special effect of hollywood .
i &apos;m going to stick this needle into my skin and push through them , until you austritt on the other side .
if you &apos;re evil , if you fall out in the hotel , i showed you a couple of friends in the hotel room for some friends , and some people i didn &apos;t know , and that was a woman almost ohnmächtig .
so i propose that if you get worse , you &apos;ll go away for the next 30 seconds , or , you know , i &apos;m going to be able to do the first step part of the back .
you can see it right , but you can also also wegsehen , if you want .
so , it &apos;s like this , where my flesh is , on the bottom part of my arm , i &apos;ll just make a little einstich .
i &apos;m really sorry . do you do that ?
and just a little bit of a little bit of my skin and on the other side .
now we &apos;re actually in the same situation we had when we had the messertrick .
about it .
but now , you can &apos;t count my fingers , right ?
so , i &apos;ll show you . this is one , two , three , four , five .
well , yes .
i know what people think when you see that .
they say , &quot; okay , it &apos;s not bestimmt to be stupid and durchsticht yourself the skin , just for us to talk for a few minutes . &quot;
well , i &apos;ll show you .
what &apos;s this ? pretty good .
yeah , i know .
and the people in the back say , &quot; okay . i don &apos;t see it right . &quot;
people in the nebenräumen are coming in .
let me show you from the near one .
that &apos;s really my skin . this is not a special effect of hollywood .
that &apos;s my flesh , and i can do that .
sorry . if you &apos;re going to get worse , you &apos;ll look away , don &apos;t look at it .
the people who are at the back , or the ones that you see on video , you &apos;ll see , say , &quot; well , this looks pretty impressive , but if it &apos;s really , it would -- you see , here &apos;s a hole and there , if it really would be really real , it would be bluten . &quot;
okay , let me herausquetschen a little blood for you .
yes , here &apos;s it .
i would normally take the needle now .
i would clean my arm and show you that there are no wounds .
but i think in this frame and with the intention of making a real thing , i &apos;m going to just let the needle just go there and go out of the stage .
we &apos;ll even meet a couple of times in the next days .
i hope you &apos;ll be happy to look at it . thank you .
everyone &apos;s speaking today about happiness .
i &apos;ve been counting some people the number of books that were published in the title of &quot; happiness &quot; in the last five years , and they gave them about 40 , and there was a lot more .
there &apos;s a tremendous wave of interest in happiness .
there &apos;s a lot of glücks-coaching .
everyone would like to make people happier .
but despite all of these flood of work , there are several cognitive ones that are sort of impossible to think about happiness .
and my talk today is mostly going to act about these cognitive cognitive .
this is true of laien , which are thinking about your own happiness , and it &apos;s true for scientists who are thinking about happiness , because it turns out that we are just as mess as everybody else .
the first one of these falls is a widerstreben , complexity .
it turns out that the word happiness is simply not a useful word anymore , because we apply it to many different things .
i think there &apos;s a certain meaning that we could limit it , but in large , and all the time we need to be giving up , and we &apos;ll take the complicated view of what well-being is .
the second event is a verwechslung of experience and memory : basically , it &apos;s been happy to be in his life and happy about his life or happy with his life .
and these are two very different concepts , and they &apos;re both zusammengeworfen in the picture of happiness .
and the third is the konzentrations-illusion , and that &apos;s the unfortunate fact that we can &apos;t think about a fact that affects well-being without having its meaning to the verzerren .
i mean , this is a real cognitive event .
there &apos;s just no way to get it right .
now i &apos;d like to start with one example of someone who had a frage-und-antwort-sitzung after a student that was a story . &#91; unclear &#93; -- he said he &apos;d heard a symphony , and it was absolutely beautiful music , and at the end of the recording , it was a fürchterliches kreischendes sound .
and then he added , really , really emotional , that has been ruined all of the experience .
but that didn &apos;t .
what it was ruined was the memories of the experience .
he had had experience .
he had 20 minutes of music music .
they didn &apos;t count because he was a memory of verblieben ; the memory was ruined , and the memory was all he had kept .
what that really tells us is that we could think about ourselves and other people , in terms of two types of self .
there &apos;s a erlebendes self that lives in the presence and the presence of the presence , can experience the past , but essentially the presence .
it &apos;s the erlebende self , which the doctor anpricht -- you know , when the doctor asks , &quot; do it hurt if i &apos;m going to get it up here ? &quot;
and then there &apos;s a erinnerndes self , and the erinnernde self is that , and it &apos;s the history of our life , and it &apos;s the one that the doctor will address by asking the question , &quot; how did you feel more recently ? &quot;
or , &quot; how did your journey to take place ? &quot; or something like that .
these are two very different units , the erlebende self and the erinnernde self , and verwechseln the two is part of the durcheinanders of happiness .
now , the erinnernde self is a storyteller .
and this really starts with a fundamental reaction to our memories -- it starts to go .
we don &apos;t only tell stories when we do to tell stories about it .
our memory tells us stories , which is called what we &apos;re allowed to keep from our erlebnissen .
and let &apos;s start with an example .
there &apos;s an old study .
these are real patients that are doing a painful procedure .
i won &apos;t go into the details . she &apos;s not painful now , but she was painful when this trial was done in the 1990s .
they were asked to report all the 60 seconds of their pain .
and here are two patients . this is their record .
and they &apos;re asked , &quot; who &apos;s got more suffered in the two ? &quot;
and that &apos;s a very simple question .
patient b has been more suffered . his darmspiegelung has been longer , and every minute of pain , the patient a had a patient , and more .
but now there &apos;s a different question : &quot; how did these patients do that they were suffering ? &quot;
and here &apos;s a surprise .
and the surprise is that patient a much worse erinnrung in the darmspiegelung , as a patient , had a patient .
the stories of the darmspiegelungen were different , and because a very important part of the story is how it ends .
and not one of these stories is very erbaulich or great -- but one of them is clear to you .
but one of them is clearly worse than the other .
and the worse thing is that where the pain was at the end of the end , it &apos;s a very bad story .
where do we know that ?
because we asked these people after their darmspiegelung , and also a lot later , &quot; how bad was the whole thing all about ? &quot;
and she was much worse for a b to a b in the erinnrung .
now , this is a direct conflict between the erlebenden self and the erinnernden itself .
in terms of the erlebenden , b has an awful time .
now what you could do with a patient , and we actually did clinical experiments , and it &apos;s been done , and it &apos;s been done , and it works , you could actually get the patient &apos;s darmspiegelung from a verlängern a way to just rütteln your tube back to it .
this will lead the patient &apos;s suffering , but only a little bit less than before .
and if you do that for a few minutes , you have a bewirkt , which is the erlebende , which is a bad turn , and you have to have a lot of the erinnernde that you have a lot better than a lot better than that , because you &apos;ve got a patient a better story about your experience .
what does it draw to do ?
and that &apos;s true for the stories that provides us and it also true for the stories that we invent .
and so what &apos;s a story of a story is that , and the meaningful moments and end end .
and end ends up very , very important , and in this case , the end .
now the erlebende self lives his life forever .
it has moments of the erlebens , one after the other .
and you ask : what happens to these moments ?
and the answer is really easy . they &apos;re lost forever .
i mean , most of the moments of our lives -- and i have a point of what &apos;s happening in the psychological present , for about three seconds . what means , you know , there &apos;s about 600 million of them in a month , and in a month , there &apos;s about 600,000 . most of them don &apos;t leave any trace .
most of you are completely ignored by the erinnernden itself .
and yet , you kind of get the impression that you should count that , during the moments of the day , our lives is happening .
it &apos;s the resource resource that we use as we are in the world .
and as we use them , it would seem to be important , but that &apos;s not the story that the erinnernde itself is for us .
so we have the erinnernde self and the erlebende self , and they &apos;re really quite different .
the biggest difference between you is a deal of it .
from the perspective of the erlebenden , if you have a vacation and the second week is just as good as the first week is the zweiwöchige vacation is twice as good as the einwöchige vacation .
so that &apos;s not how it works for the erinnernde itself .
for the erinnernde self , a zweiwöchiger vacation is barely better than the einwöchige vacation , because there &apos;s no new memories .
they haven &apos;t changed the story .
and in this way , time is actually the critical variable , which is a erinnerndes self , which is a very different way of a erlebenden self . time has a very little impact on this story .
now , the erinnernde self makes more than to remember and telling stories .
it &apos;s actually the way that makes decisions , because when you have a patient , who , you know , two darmspiegelungen , two different surgeons , and decide what he should choose , then the one who has memory that is less bad , and that &apos;s the surgeon that &apos;s chosen .
the erlebende self has no voice in that election .
we don &apos;t choose between the erlebnissen . we choose between memories of experiences .
and even when we think about the future , we don &apos;t think of our future as a experience .
we think about our future , as we have a vorausgesehene memories .
and basically , you can look at this , you know , as an tyrannei of the erinnernden itself , and you can think of the erinnernde self as one , which sort of schleppt the erlebende itself , which doesn &apos;t need the erlebende itself .
i have the idea that if we &apos;re doing vacation , that &apos;s very often the case , which means we are doing weitestgehend on the service of the erinnernden itself .
and that &apos;s a little hard to justify , i think .
i mean , how much of our memories of our memories ?
that &apos;s one of the explanations that will be given the dominanz of the erinnernden .
and when i think about it , i think of a vacation we &apos;ve done in antarctica a few years ago , the clearly the best vacation i had ever had , and i think relatively often the relationship with how often i think of others .
and i probably have about my memories of this dreiwöchige journey , i would say about 25 minutes for the last four years .
now , if i had the ordner the ordner , i would have spent the 600 images in it , i would have spent another hour .
now , these are three weeks , and that &apos;s a half a year .
there seems to be a unstimmigkeit .
well , i like a little bit extreme , you know , how little appetite i &apos;m appetit into the zehren of memories , but even if you make more of them , there &apos;s a real question . why do we give memories so much weight in the amount of weight that we have experienced ?
so i want you to think about a thought experiment .
imagine your next vacation , you know , at the end of the end of the board , all of you will be vernichtet your pictures , and you get a amnestisches drug , so you &apos;ll remember nothing .
now , would you choose the same vacation ?
and if you &apos;re going to choose a different vacation , there &apos;s a conflict between your two types of self , and you have to think about how you choose this conflict , and that &apos;s really not obvious , because if you think in the sense of time , you get an answer . and if you think of memories in your sense , you could get a
why we choose the urlaube that we choose is a problem that makes us a choice between the two types of self .
now , the two types of self are two terms of happiness .
there are actually two concepts of happiness that we can apply , one per self .
so you can ask : how happy is the erlebende self ?
and then you would ask : how happy are the moments of life in the life of the erlebenden itself ?
and they &apos;re all -- happiness for moments is a fairly complicated process .
which are the emotions that are going to be measured ?
and by the way , we &apos;re now able to get a fairly good idea of happiness from the erlebenden itself over time .
if you &apos;re lucky to the happiness of the self , it &apos;s a very different thing .
this is not what &apos;s alive about as happy .
it &apos;s about how happy or happy the person is , if this person thinks about their lives .
very different term .
each one of these words is not different from the study of happiness , and i &apos;m one of a bunch of researchers over well-being that have been doing studying happiness in the right now , in the same way .
the distinction between happiness of the erlebenden self and happiness of the erinnernden itself has been recognized in the last few years , and now you &apos;re trying to measure the two separat .
the gallup organization has a worldwide survey where more than half a million people have been asked about what they think about their lives and about their experience , and there were other efforts in that direction .
so in the last few years , we &apos;ve started learning about happiness in the two ways .
and the main lesson that we &apos;ve learned , i think , is that they &apos;re really different .
you can know how happy someone &apos;s with his life is , and that &apos;s not really teaching them how happy he lives and vice versa .
just to give you an impression of the correlation , correlation is about .5 .
what that means is that if you were meeting somebody and you would say , oh , your dad is a zwei-meter-mann , how much would you know about your size ?
now , you &apos;d know something about its size , but there &apos;s a lot of uncertainty .
they have so much uncertainty .
if i tell you that somebody has eight to a scale of 10 , you have a lot of uncertainty about how happy it is with his erlebenden .
so the correlation is low .
we know something about what determines happiness happiness .
we know that money is very important , goals are very important .
we know happiness is basically being happy with people who we like to spend time with people we like .
there are other pleasure , but that &apos;s dominant .
so if you &apos;re very lucky to maximize the two types of self , you will end up doing very different things .
the conclusion from what i said here is that we &apos;re not really going to be able to think of it as an ersatz for well-being .
it &apos;s a completely different term .
now , very short , one of the reasons we can &apos;t really understand about happiness is that we don &apos;t care at the same things when we think about life and when we actually live .
so if you ask the simple question , how happy people are in california , they won &apos;t get the right answer .
if you think of this question , you think people have to be happier in california when they say , we say , in ohio .
and what &apos;s happening is that when you think about life in california , you think about the difference between california and other places , and that difference , we say , in the climate .
well , it turns out that climate is not very important for the erlebende self , and it &apos;s not even very important for the nachdenkliche self that decides how happy people are .
but because , because the nachdenkliche self is responsible , you can end up -- some people could go to california .
and it &apos;s kind of kind of track of what happens to people who are going to be happy to california , and happier .
now , your erlebendes self will not be happier .
we know that .
but one thing will happen . they &apos;re going to think that they &apos;re happier , because if you think about it , you &apos;ll be reminded of how terrible the weather was in ohio , and they &apos;re going to feel that they made the right decision .
it &apos;s very hard to think about well-being , and i hope i &apos;ve given you a sense of how hard it is .
thank you .
thank you . i have a question for you .
thank you .
now , when we were on the phone , a couple of weeks ago , they were told me that there was a pretty interesting outcome that came out of this particular survey .
is that something that you can share with us , because you have a few minutes left ?
daniel kahneman : sure .
i think the most interesting thing we found in the latest survey is a number that we &apos;ve absolutely expected to find absolutely .
we found that in terms of happiness of the erlebenden itself .
if we looked at how feelings vary .
and it turns out that under a income of 60,000 dollars a year , for americans , and it &apos;s a very large sample of americans , about 600,000 , but it &apos;s a great representative sample of a income of $ 600,000 dollars in the year .
60,000 .
dk : 60,000 .
60,000 dollars a year is unhappy , and they become more and more happy , the more they get the poorer .
we &apos;ll get a absolutely flat line .
i mean , i &apos;ve rarely seen as flat lines .
what happens is obvious that money doesn &apos;t buy a erlebnis-glück , but that lack of money is a good misery , and we can measure this misery very , very clearly .
in the sense of the other self , the erinnernden self , you get a different story .
the more money you make the more you are the more you .
that &apos;s not true .
but danny , in the entire american effort , it &apos;s about life , freedom , the pursuit of happiness .
when people take these befund seriously , i mean , it seems to be all on the head , everything we think in terms of steuerpolitik and so on .
is there a chance that politicians generally take a befund befund and basierend the country of politics ?
dk : you know , i think there &apos;s recognition for the role of the glücksforschung in politics .
the recognition will be slowly to the united states , not a question , but in the united kingdom , you &apos;re just going to happen in the united kingdom , and in other countries , it &apos;s happening .
people are in understanding that they should think happiness when they think about politics .
it &apos;s going to take a while , and people will discuss whether they want to study erlebnis-glück or whether they want to explore lebens-bewertung , so we have to go through this discussion pretty soon .
how you &apos;re lucky , you can get very different depending on how you think and whether you think about the erinnernde yourself or you think of the erlebende itself .
this is going to affect politics , i think , in the next few years .
in the united states , you &apos;re looking at the population of the population .
that &apos;s going to be , i think , in the next one or two decades of the national statistic .
now , it seems to me that this issue is , or should at least , at least the most interesting political debate are going to be following over the next few years .
thank you for the invention of behavioral economics .
thank you , danny kahneman .
i &apos;m jane mcgonigal . i design video games .
i &apos;ve been online-spiele now for 10 years , and my goal for the next decade is to make it easy to do the world in reality , how it &apos;s in online-spielen .
i have a plan for it . i want to convince more people , including all of you , to spend more time playing with playing and playing games .
currently , we spend three billion hours a week with online-spielen .
some of you might think , &quot; this is a lot of time for games . &quot;
maybe something too much time when you think about how many problems we have in the real world .
but in fact , my research on the institute of the future is that the opposite is on the opposite .
three billion hours a week are not nearly enough to solve the world &apos;s most important problems .
in fact , i &apos;m convinced that if we want to survive the next century on this planet , we need to dramatically increase those time .
i &apos;ve calculated that the time of 21 billion hours of time is a week per week .
now , this seems to be a little bit more abwegig , so it can make it work : if we can do problems like hunger , poverty , climate change , global conflicts and obesity , i think we need to play games online for at least 21 billion hours a week to the end of the next decade .
no , i &apos;m really serious .
why ? this picture describes quite exactly why i think games are so essential for the survival of human species in the future . seriously .
this is a photographer of the photographer phil toledano .
he wanted to capture the emotions , so he &apos;s built a camera in front of the players .
this is one of the classical expressions in play .
if you &apos;re not a player , you may be able to get some of the nuancen in this picture .
you &apos;re probably looking at this sense of urgency , a little bit of fear , but also also , äußerste concentration , a very vertieft problem , which is a really difficult problem .
if you &apos;re playing , you see some of the nuancen here , which are looking up , and the mouth are a sign of optimism . the augenbrauen show surprise .
this is a player who &apos;s on the edge of a call called sieges .
oh , you know that . ok . so , nice . so we have some players here .
a epischer victory is a result that &apos;s so great positive , that they didn &apos;t know that it was possible at all .
it was almost beyond the imagination .
and if you do it , they &apos;re shocked that they actually do that , and that &apos;s a epischer victory .
this player is a long victory of a epischen victory .
and this is what we have to see on millions of faces from problemlösern around the world , if we take the hürden of the next century , the face of the face of the widrigkeiten on the edge of a epischen sieges .
well , unfortunately , we &apos;re looking at this face in real life when we &apos;re facing hard problems .
i call it a bad thing in life , and i &apos;m bad , and it &apos;s actually my face , see ? yes . ok .
i am , i am in life , i &apos;m bad at life .
this is a graffiti in my former home in berkeley , california , where i was studying in my research why we &apos;re doing better than in real life .
that &apos;s a problem that a lot of players have .
we think we &apos;re not so good at reality .
and i don &apos;t just mean less successful , although that &apos;s what i &apos;m hearing .
we &apos;re reaching in spielwelten anymore . i mean good in the context of motivation , doing something , inspired to collaboration .
when we &apos;re in a spielwelt , i believe that many of us are going to turn into our best version , anytime and immediately , are the problem trying to solve the problem , as long as you need to try it again .
and in reality , if we fail , when we run into obstacles , we often feel differently .
we feel overwhelmed . we feel besiegt . we feel threatened , maybe depressed , frustrated , frustrated .
these feelings we never have , when we play games , they don &apos;t play it .
and that &apos;s what i wanted to study as a graduate student .
why is it in games to think , you could not just get anything .
how can we translate these feelings from playing into reality ?
so i looked at games like world of warcraft , which is the ideal environment for the collective problem .
and i &apos;ve found some things that the epische epische are siege in online-welten .
so , first , when you go into one of these online-spiele , especially in world of warcraft , there are a lot of different characters ready to give them a weltrettende mission , and immediately .
but not only any mission , but a mission that fits perfectly at your current level in the game right ?
so they can do this .
they never get a task that they can &apos;t solve .
but always at the edge of their skills , they have to be hard . but there &apos;s no unemployment in world of warcraft .
you &apos;re not sitting around and you &apos;re dreht . there &apos;s always a little bit of a specific thing to do .
and there &apos;s plenty of staff .
where they go , hundreds of thousands of people who work with them to finish their epische mission .
that &apos;s not so easy to do that in real life , that feeling that there are a lot of staff on a fingerschnipsen .
and also , this is a story of history , and this inspiring story , why we are and what we have to do .
and then we get this whole positive feedback .
they &apos;ve been bestimmt by &quot; level high &quot; and &quot; + 1 strength , &quot; or &quot; + 1 intelligence . &quot;
that constant feedback is not in real life .
when i leave this stage , i don &apos;t have to talk to you , and i &apos;m not going to talk to you , and i &apos;m going to be a crazy idea , you know , i &apos;m going to be a crazy idea .
i don &apos;t get this feedback in real life .
so , the problem of kooperations-online-welten like world of warcraft is that it &apos;s so befriedigend , at any edge of a epischen , is to be on the edge of a epischen , that we &apos;d rather spend our time in these spielwelten .
they &apos;re just better than reality .
until today , all the world of warcraft-spieler have spent millions of years of warcraft-spieler to solve virtual problems of azeroth .
that &apos;s not necessarily something bad .
it may sound bad .
but to see it in context , 5,93 million years ago , our first primatenvorfahren started to go .
so the first one of the aufrechte .
ok , so if we talk about how much time we spend with play , it just makes sense , when you think of the time in terms of human development , the scale of human development , which is extraordinarily .
but also , it &apos;s also appropriate . because it turns out that we &apos;re using this whole time , actually , change what we are as people are capable of .
we &apos;re developing collaborative thinking , herzlichen creatures .
that &apos;s the truth . i think it &apos;s .
now , look at this interesting statistic , which was recently published by a researcher of carnegie mellon university , the average young person in a country with great spielkultur verbringt spend 10,000 hours with online-spielen to the 21st .
so , 10,000 hours is a very interesting number , for two reasons .
first of all , for children in the united states , 10.080 hours of the gesamtzeit they spend in school , from fifth grade to the high school school -- if you never miss .
so here we have a complete parallelbildungsweg , where young people learn , what it means to be a good player , like everything you learn in school .
and maybe some of you have a new book from malcolm malcolm , &quot; überflieger . &quot;
so you know his theory of success , the theory of the success of the 10,000 hours .
it &apos;s based on the great research of the kognitivwissenschaft , that if we spend 10,000 hours with the mühsamen study of a professional age of a matter of a matter of the 21st of life , we will be master in it .
we &apos;re going to be so good at what &apos;s always doing , like the most significant people in the world .
so what we have here is a complete generation of young people who are meister-spieler .
so the big question is , &quot; what are the player &apos;s player good ? &quot;
because if we could figure out that , we would have never had a gewesenes human potential .
so many people are now in the world that spend at least one hour a day with online-spielen .
these are our meister-spieler . 500 million people who are extraordinarily good in &quot; something . &quot;
and the next decade , we have another billion players who are extraordinarily good in whatever .
if you haven &apos;t heard it yet ?
the spieleindustrie developed konsolen , saving energy and work on mobilfunknetzen , instead of the breitband-internet player , so that player around the world , especially in india , china , brazil , online .
you expect a extra billion player in the next decade .
so we &apos;ve got a total billion player .
so i started to think what &apos;s what we &apos;re doing these games for .
here are the four things i found . first of all , dringlichkeits-optimismus .
ok , imagine that like extreme selbstmotivierung .
dringlichkeits-optimismus is the desire , immediately to do something , to master , together with the belief that we have a begründete hope on success .
players always believe that there is a epischer victory can be possible , and it &apos;s always worth trying to try and it &apos;s equal to it .
player &apos;s not sitting around .
player are experts in the spiders of the spinnen nets .
there are a lot of interesting studies that show that we like people , after we played with them , even if they were besiegt us .
the reason for that is that it requires a lot of trust to play with someone playing a game .
we trust that there &apos;s a time with us that there &apos;s a time that the rules will be eingehalten , that we have the same goal and to keep the spielende .
so the zusammenspielen enabled the growing of bindungen , trust and one .
as a result , we &apos;re building more powerful social relationships .
glückselige productivity . fantastic .
you know , there &apos;s a reason why the durchschnitts-word of warcraft-spieler of warcraft-spieler of are playing 22 hours a week , sort of as a teilzeitjob .
the reason is , when we play , we actually are happier to work hard than when we relax or do nothing .
we know that we are going to be optimal as human beings when we do hard work , major work .
and player are always ready to work hard if they get the right job .
and finally , the epische meaning .
player like , part of the ehrfurcht of the missionen of the missionen .
here &apos;s a hintergrundinformation to back that in the right . you know all of the wikipedia , the largest wiki of the world .
the second largest wiki of the world , with nearly 80,000 einträgen , is the world of warcraft .
five million people use it every month .
they &apos;ve been doing more information about world of warcraft on the internet than any other subject in every other world &apos;s world .
they &apos;re creating a story of a story .
they &apos;re creating a epische source of knowledge of the world of warcraft .
so , ok , so these are four superkräfte that lead to a single outcome : player are super-mächtige , hopeful individuals .
it &apos;s people who believe they can change the world as an individual .
and the only problem is they think they can change the virtual worlds , but not the real .
that &apos;s the problem i &apos;m trying to solve .
edward castronova is a volkswissenschaftler .
his work is great . he &apos;s looking at why people spend so much time , energy and money in online-welten .
and he says , &quot; we &apos;re not going to be less than a massenemigration in virtual worlds and online-spielumgebungen . &quot;
and that &apos;s an economist . so he &apos;s logical .
and he says ...
not like me -- i &apos;m making games , i &apos;m a little bit of überschwänglich .
so he says that , in fact , it makes sense , because players can achieve more in online-welten than in real life .
they can actually connect to stronger social ties than in real life , and they get more feedback and rewards in games than in real life .
so , he says it &apos;s completely logical that player are more time in the virtual world than the real one .
i just agree with it , that &apos;s logical .
but it &apos;s definitely not a optimalsituation .
we need to start turning the real world into a game .
my inspiration comes from an event , 2,500 years .
there are these ancient cube , aus . you know ?
there was a fantastic spielecontrollern in front of these amazing spielecontrollern .
and that was kind of the first of people developed to develop .
and if you &apos;re familiar with the werken of the ancient greek herodotus , you may know this story . the story about how and why games were invented .
according to herodotus , games , more precise , more würfelspiele , the kingdom of the kingdom of the kingdom of famine .
it was supposed to be such a great famine that the king of lydien decided to be a crazy idea .
people were suffering . people were fighting .
it was an extreme situation . you needed an extreme solution .
so they invented , loud , laut , the würfelspiel and vereinbarten a national strategy . they would eat a day , and the next day you would play .
and they would be so much like this , and they were so fascinating , because they &apos;re so fascinating and uns with befriedigender , glückseliger productivity , they would forget that there was nothing to eat .
and then , the next day you would play , and the next day you would eat .
and according to herodotus , they survive so 18 years of famine , they ate it in a day and playing the next day .
so , i think we &apos;re going to sit in games today .
we &apos;re going to be able to get games to get out of the world &apos;s suffering .
we &apos;re going to play games to avoid everything that doesn &apos;t work in the real world , everything that &apos;s not really a befriedigend life , and we &apos;re bringing what we need from play .
but that doesn &apos;t have to be the end .
this is exciting .
according to 18 years , the famine was not better , so the king decided to be a last würfelspiel .
they shared the kingdom in two .
they were playing a würfelspiel and the best allowed to be able to get a epischen adventure .
they were leaving lydien and they were looking for a new home , and they had so many people , and they were looking back to the way that food was going to survive , and then looking for the rest of the area that they could thrive .
this sounds crazy , right ?
but latest dna-beweise show that the etrusker , which later , the roman empire , is to make the same dna as the old lydier .
so scientists came to the notion that herodotus geschichte actually agrees .
and geologists found evidence of a global abkühlung abkühlung , which was almost 20 years , which was the famine .
so this crazy story could vote .
you may actually have saved your people through games by 18 years and then they had these eingebung and then they had these eingebung and they learned so much about the one that they have to have saved all of the civilization .
so , we can .
we &apos;re playing with warcraft .
this was the first strategiespiel in real time of the world of warcraft-serie . it was 16 years ago .
they were playing for 18 years , and we were doing it for 16 years .
i &apos;m saying we &apos;re ready for our own episches game .
so , they sent half of their civilization to the search for a new world , so i take my 21 billion spielstunden per week .
we should be übereinkommen by giving half an hour a day with play , until we &apos;ve solved the problems of the real world .
i know you &apos;re going to ask , &quot; how do we solve the real world of real world ? &quot; and i have this question for the last few years to do the institute of the future .
we have this banner in our office in a very palo way , to push it out how we should understand the future .
we don &apos;t want to try to tell the future .
what we want is to create the future .
we want to take the best outcome , and then make people to make this idea of what &apos;s going to do in reality .
we &apos;re going to put in epische and we give people the opportunity to reach them .
i &apos;m going to show you a very short of three games that i designed to try to try to get people to get out of the world &apos;s epische in their own future .
this is &quot; the world without oil . &quot;
the game is in 2007 .
it &apos;s a online-spiel where you have to overcome a ölknappheit .
the ölknappheit is invented , but we have enough online-inhalte to live it , and you can actually live your real life without oil . so , you &apos;ll tell you where you live , and then you get nachrichten-filme in real time , which show you how food is affected , whether to be transport , whether there &apos;s been there &apos;s been there , and you have to
we &apos;ve been tested this game with 1.700 players in 2007 , and we &apos;ve been accompanied since the last three years .
and i can tell you it was a change experience .
nobody wants to change their lives because it &apos;s good for the environment , or because we should .
but if you &apos;re in an epischen adventure and say , &quot; we &apos;re going to go out of the oil . &quot;
this is an amazing adventure that you go on .
find out how they would survive , most of our players have beibehalten habits in the game .
so we &apos;ve got a bigger , higher goal , for the next game of the game .
we &apos;ve developed the game called &quot; superstruct &quot; at the institute of the future .
what we started is doing is a calculation of a supercomputers that people only have 23 years on the planet .
this is a supercomputer called &quot; global aussterbungs- sensibilisierungs-system . &quot;
the call to player , anzumelden , we almost have made a jerry-bruckheimer -film .
you know jerry bruckheimer-filme , where it &apos;s &quot; dream-team , &quot; you have the astronauts , the scientists , the ex-sträfling , and only together , they can save the world .
but in our game , instead of just five people , we say everyone &apos;s in the dream-team , and it &apos;s our job , the future of energy , food , health , security and the future of social justice .
8,000 player played the game for eight weeks .
they found 500 of the creative solutions they can read when they &apos;re &quot; superstruct &quot; google .
and the last game we put on the third of march . it &apos;s a game in collaboration with the world bank .
if you finish the game , you get the award from the world bank , the award for social engineering , and finally , in 2010 .
we &apos;re working in universities in all the way to the world and store them a social tool .
we have a comic about it . we have a level high up to regionales , wissensvernetzung , sustainability , vision and ingenuity .
i &apos;d like to invite you to share this game with young people , all around the world , especially in entwicklungsgebieten , which benefit from , and they are doing their own social enterprise to save the world .
i &apos;m going to end up .
i want to ask you something .
what do you think next ?
we have all these fantastic players , we have games that show us what we can do , but we haven &apos;t yet saved the world .
well , i hope you agree that player are human resources that we can actually spend in real life , and that games have a big meaning for change .
we have these all the superkräfte , glückselige productivity , the ability to engage tight social networks , dringlichkeits-optimismus and the desire for epischer .
i really hope we &apos;re doing great games to survive this planet another century .
and i hope you &apos;ll play and play with me and play .
if i took into the next decade , i &apos;m sure about two things : that we can create every single future , and we can play all kinds of games .
so i say , let &apos;s start the weltverändernden games .
thank you .
i &apos;d like to tell you something which i had noticed a artikels paar in my computer .
i always got my synonym-wörterbuch on writing , but i was finished with the process of the text , and i noticed that i never had a life nachgeschlagen , which is what the word &quot; disabled &quot; really means .
i read the post .
&quot; disabled , &quot; verkrüppelt , helpless , nutzlos , zerstört , verstümmelt , verwundet , lahm , lahm , abgetrennt verwahrlost , geschwächt , impotent , kastriert , gehandicapt , gehandicapt , altersschwach , erledigt , kaputt , kaputt , kaputt , kaputt , siehe , nutzlos and weak .
antonyme : healthy , strong , powerful . &quot;
i read this list of a friend loud , and i had to laugh , it was so ridiculous , but i only came up to &quot; zugerichtet &quot; and couldn &apos;t get back up , and i could stop reading and then i had to get in the überfallartigen of the überfallartigen , and that was verbundenden shock .
of course , this was an ausgefranstes old synonym-wörterbuch synonym-wörterbuch , and i just thought that the copy has to be pretty old .
but in fact , it was a copy of the early &apos; 80s when i was starting to build my school in elementary school , and started building my mind outside my own family and form , even in terms of other children and the rest of the world around me .
and thank god , i didn &apos;t use a synonym-wörterbuch .
i would take this kind of a place that i would be born to a world that someone like me would be able to be able to be positive in a sense of a person , and i &apos;m going to be celebrated for the opportunities and adventure i &apos;ve experienced .
so i immediately asked to the online-ausgabe of 2009 , and i expected that i &apos;m going to find a ansprechenderen piece here .
here &apos;s the aktualisierte version of this eintrags .
and the world &apos;s not a lot of the world .
and in particular , i &apos;m going to have the last two words under &quot; near antonyms &quot; &quot; and &quot; healthy &quot; . &quot;
but it &apos;s not just about words .
it &apos;s about what we think about people who are describing to these words .
it &apos;s about values that are in those words , and how we engineer these values .
our language is affected our thinking and how we see the world and the people around us .
many more sophisticated societies , including the greeks and the römer , have really believed that the aussprache of a fluchs has a great force because what you can do loud is also manifestieren .
so , what do we really want to do -- a disabled people or a powerful person ?
alone , people have been achtlos to call a child child as a child , could be enough , and überzustülpen them and überzustülpen them .
wouldn &apos;t it be nice to open them doors ?
a person who opened for me was my pediatrician at the a.i. institute of institute in wilmington .
he &apos;s called dr. pizzutillo . a italo-amerikaner whose name , as you can think , most americans couldn &apos;t put correctly correctly , so he was called dr. p. .
and dr. p. had always carried a very bright flies and was just a work with children .
i found the time i spent in this hospital just great -- till my physiotherapie .
i had to do an individual übungen of an übungen of infinite times with these thick , elastischen bändern -- in different colors -- that &apos;s what you know about my bein-muskeln , and i &apos;ve grown these bänder more than anything . i hated it . i &apos;ve got them . i hated it .
and imagine , i even had a fünfjähriges child who was going to negotiate with dr. p. and tried to stop this practice , natürllich without success .
and one day he looked at me at one of my practices -- these things were just ermüdend and gnadenlos -- and he said to me , &quot; wow , aimee , you &apos;re such a strong , powerful and young girl , you &apos;ll cut one of these bänder .
and if you make it , i &apos;ll give you a hundred dollars . &quot;
and that was , of course , just a simple trick by dr. p. , so i wanted to make the practice that i didn &apos;t want to do with the chance that the richest year-old girl in the hospital could be in the second floor , but he actually did me see my daily übungs-horror with new eyes , and that &apos;s been a new and vielversprechendes experience .
and i &apos;m asking myself , how much his vision of me was shaped as a strong and a young young girl , and i could imagine , as one of nature , from strong , powerful and atlethischen man .
this is just one example of many , as adults in machtpositionen , can encourage the imagination of a child .
but as you see , as you see , the zitierten examples of the synonym-wörterbüchern , our language cannot imagine a room to imagine what we would all wish : to make it possible for each one to see themselves as a human .
our language is hinkt to the social changes , which has been caused in many cases of a technological change .
of course , you can say , the laser-chirurgie , of course , the laser-chirurgie for sehbehinderungen , kniegelenke hüftgelenke , kniegelenke hüftgelenke , which allow people to use all of their options and to go beyond the borders , and not to speak of social networking destiny , people will be able to make their identity define , and orientieren themselves in their way and to be able to
so , perhaps , this technology change , as well , is that it &apos;s going to be clear , because the fact that there &apos;s always a different truth , that every person in society can give something very besonderess and very powerful , and that the human capacity to adapt , our biggest plus .
the human ability to adapt -- it &apos;s an interesting story because people are always asking me to tell me about how i umgehe with widrigkeiten , and i &apos;m going to tell you something , that sentence never gepasst for me , and i always felt very uncomfortable to answer the questions of people and i think i understand why .
this phrase of the idea of widrigkeiten lives on the idea that success or happiness depends on a challenge , without being able to be shaped by the ability to be associated with it , because my life would be so successful , because i could also get the possible fallen of a prosthetic , or as well as people perceive me with my disability .
but the truth is that we change , and of course , we are shaped by the challenge , whether they physically , emotionally or even both of them .
and i &apos;m saying that that &apos;s good .
widrigkeiten are no obstacle that we need to have to go to get better with our lives .
widrigkeiten are just among our lives .
and i &apos;m running out of seeing widrigkeiten as my shadow .
sometimes i realize that he &apos;s very present , sometimes he &apos;s barely barely to see , but he &apos;s all the time .
and i want to have no effect on the effect of the impact of a human kampfs .
there are more widrigkeiten and challenges , and they &apos;re just alllzu , and every person is different to do it , but the question is not whether we &apos;re going to get right with widrigkeiten , or not , but how we &apos;re going to get it .
so we &apos;re not just responsible for the people we love to preserve schicksalsschlägen , but they &apos;re ready to get good to get it right now .
and we don &apos;t really do our kids if we give them the feeling that they can &apos;t adapt .
you have to separate two things : for one to the medical fact , an amputiert , and the social opinion of the social opinion of whether i &apos;m disabled or not .
and to be honest , the only real and bleibende disability that i had to make me apart is that the world is constantly , she can describe me with this definitions .
in our wish to protect people who are at heart , and to give them the cold hard truth about their medical forecast , or even a forecast of the quality of life that they expect , we need to pay attention that we don &apos;t have the idea for somebody to disabled .
perhaps the concept is the concept that only is what &apos;s broken in a broken , and how we fix it , for each individual disability , as a brain of the brain .
if we don &apos;t treat a human person , and not perceive all its forces and possibilities and recognize it , we create the natural struggle that you might have to lead to another disease .
we degradieren a human society that has value for our society .
so we have to look beyond the patologie and focus on all the parts of human possibilities .
but most important , it &apos;s between perception of our unzulänglichkeiten and our great erfindergeist , a connection .
we shouldn &apos;t be abwerten or verleugnen , or not , we should not try and avoid them , nor we want to go under the rug , but it &apos;s about recognizing the opportunities in the most widrigkeiten opportunities .
it &apos;s more about to make sure that we don &apos;t have to get widrigkeiten in the necessarily , but we &apos;re open to umarmen them to a hug , to put them on the schopf , to use a kampf-ausdruck , and maybe even dance with it .
and perhaps we can create it , as a natural , stimmiges , stimmiges and useful , and feel like that , as much as their presence , they don &apos;t get so much .
in this year we celebrate the 200 , anniversary of charles darwin , and when he wrote about evolution 150 years ago , darwin , in my eyes , in my eyes , in my eyes , in a very true human character .
i would call it like this : not the most powerful of its species , and not the intelligenteste of its species , but the one that can be anpassen to the best .
conflict comes from conflict .
not only from darwin &apos;s work , we know that the capacity of humans , and aufzublühen , and aufzublühen , from the struggle of human mind is determined to move through conflict .
so again , again , change and adaptation are the greatest skills of the human .
and we may only know what we wood we are , if we &apos;re actually going to be tested .
perhaps the sense of widrigkeiten , a sense of the ichs , a sense of our own force .
we can give ourselves something like this .
we can give widrigkeiten a new meaning that &apos;s beyond severe times .
maybe we can see a change as change .
widrigkeiten are for a change that we haven &apos;t yet adapted to .
i think the biggest damage we &apos;ve been doing ourselves is to believe that we should be normal .
let &apos;s face it -- who &apos;s normal ?
there &apos;s no normal .
there &apos;s the usual . the typical is , but not the normal , and you would really know that poor , gray person , if they really existed ?
i think , rather than .
it would be great if we could austauschen this paradigm of normalität , or the strength , to make it even more dangerous to austauschen , and so we can release the forces of very many of the children , and they invite them to engage their very special and their value in society .
and what &apos;s found is that we have people from the members of our society to have a team of a gefordert : useful and to do a piece .
there &apos;s evidence that the neanderthals 60,000 years ago and people have carried with heavy physical injuries and that might happen because the lebenserfahrung of the überlebenskampf in the überlebenskampf of these people were valuable .
they didn &apos;t have a broken and useless thing ; they were considered to be a special and value .
a few years ago , i was going to go in the city where i grew up in a lebensmittelmarkt in the northeast of pennsylvania , and i was standing in front of a scheffel .
it was summer , and i had shorts .
and i hear a guy behind me , &quot; you know , if that &apos;s not aimee . &quot;
and i turn around and see the older man . i had no idea who he is .
and i said , &quot; sorry , sir , do we know ? i can &apos;t remember them . &quot;
and he said , &quot; well , you don &apos;t remember remember me .
when i first saw her for the first time , i pulled her out of her mother . &quot;
oh , so .
and of course , it &apos;s actually made a click .
this was dr. kean , a man who i had just heard of stories of my mother &apos;s stories of this day because i was , of course , typical , my birthday was two weeks late .
the doctor for pränatale medical imaging for my mother was on vacation , and so my parents knew the man who brought me to the world at all .
and because i was born without wadenbeine , and my feet had been looking at them , and i had just a few toes on this one and a few toes on the other foot , and he was the überbringer , that strangers had to get the bad news .
he said to me , &quot; i had to tell your parents that you would never walk , and never as beweglich as other children , or you never have an independent life , and have just lie to me in a lie . &quot;
and i really found that he had collected all the childhood , if i had won a buchstabier-wettbewerb in the second grade , whether i was going to siege the pfadfindern with the parade parade , whether i had a scholarship or my sportlichen siege , and he used these little ausschnitte to teach his students , medizin-studenten medical school and medical medical school .
and he called this part of his kurses the x factor , the potential of the human will .
you can &apos;t just emphasize enough how critical of the quality of life of life is a human quality of life .
and dr. kean said , he said , &quot; i learned children , if you don &apos;t get something else constantly , and even if you get a little support , if you get kids yourself , children can reach very much . &quot;
and you see , dr. kean , changed his thinking .
he had understood that medical diagnosis and how someone deals with it , two different things are .
and i had changed my thinking over the course of the time , if she had asked me at age 15 , if i had my prothesen prothesen and bones , i would have no second .
i was very normal at that time .
if you ask me this , i &apos;m not sure .
and that &apos;s what happens because i &apos;ve experienced something with my legs and not despite that experience .
and perhaps that change could happen , because i &apos;ve met so many people who opened me doors rather than to meet people who would sit down me or want to give an idea of an idea .
you see , it really takes a human to show you how they can manifestieren their forces , and they &apos;re through .
if you allow someone to activate your own internal forces -- the human mind is so empfangsbereit -- if you do that , and you open up for somebody in a single moment , you &apos;re a very good teacher for those people .
they &apos;re giving them open doors .
the real meaning of the worts &quot; educate &quot; in the word &quot; educe . &quot;
it means something that &apos;s producing in one that is going to be herauszukitzeln .
again , what is the potential for which we want to get up ?
in the &apos; 60s , in britain , the world was done in the u.k. , and then gymnasien were turned into gesamtschulen .
they call this &quot; streaming trials &quot; in the united states , &quot; we call this &quot; tracking . &quot;
students are cut to notes .
and a student will be geprüft , and the better teachers are getting , and so on .
they then gave students a dreimonatigen period of students with a &quot; good &quot; the grade , &quot; very well , &quot; they were told they were asse , they were very clever , and after those three months , they really wrote a einser .
and of course , it &apos;s going to hear a heart that the other way around the einser-schülern was said , you &apos;re only sufficient .
and then , it was the same way after the three months .
but only those who are still in school -- except for the students who had been going to have the school .
and so , very crucial in this study , the teachers were not eingeweiht .
the teachers didn &apos;t know that something changed .
they were simply told that they were the einser-schüler , and that the students are sufficient with the grade , and they &apos;re taught them to do something and they treat them .
the only real disability is a gebrochener mind a mind that has broken , has no hope . he finds no more schön. of the world &apos;s natural kindliche , kindliche neugier. and our angeborene capacity of imagination .
but if we can do it , to support the human mind to hope , even and other people around you to find yourself , curious and phantasievoll , we &apos;re going to be able to make our forces really positive .
if a mind has these qualities , we can create a new reality and new daseinsformen .
i want to end with a poem , and the poem is written by a poet poet , in the 14th century , and the poem is called &quot; god who knows only four words . &quot; &quot; every child knows god , not the god of the name , not the god of the verbote , but the god that &apos;s just kennt four words and repeat these constantly
come with me . thank you .
how would you want to be better than you &apos;re currently ?
suppose i said , by a few changes of your genes , a better memory of your genes -- more precise , more precise and faster .
or like , you want to be more fitter , stronger , more force .
would you like to be more attractive and more confident ?
how would it be to live in good health ?
or maybe you &apos;re one of those who are always going to be more creativity .
which would like you like to do most ?
what would you like to have , if you could only have one ?
creativity .
how many people would choose creativity ?
raise your hands . let me see .
some of them . probably about as many as many people here are .
that &apos;s very good .
how many would choose to make a good memory ?
some more .
what about fitness ?
a few less .
what about longevity ?
ah , the majority . i like to do that as a doctor .
if you could only have one of them , it would be a very different world .
is this all a einbildung ?
or is it possible ?
evolution has been a andauerndes theme here at ted conference , but i want to give you a doctor on the subject .
the great genetiker in the 20th century , t.g. dobzhansky , who was also a kommunikant in the russian &apos;s orthodoxen church , wrote an article called &quot; nothing in biology doesn &apos;t make sense except in the lichte of evolution . &quot;
now , if you &apos;re not going to take the evidence of biological evolution , this would be a very good at a time , take your personal kommunikationsgerät -- i give you permission -- and maybe you can take a look at kathryn schultz &apos;s book , which is about being wrong , because nothing in the other process of this talk will make any sense of what you
but if you accept biological evolution , remember this : is it only about the past , or is it about the future ?
is it for other people &apos;s geltend , or is it also ?
this is another looking at the tree of life .
in this picture , i &apos;ve put a bush as a center of verzweigungen in all directions , because if you look at the edges of the tree of life , all the existing existierenden on the top of these branches in evolutionary terms of evolutionary terms : they survive ; it shows its environment .
the human part of this busches , far at the end , of course , is what we &apos;re most interested in .
we are zweigen from a shared ancestor to modern chimpanzees about six or eight million years ago .
in that period , there might be 20 or 25 different spezien of the world .
some of them come and went .
we &apos;ve been here for about 130.000 years .
it seems like we &apos;re quite remote from the other parts of the tree of life , but actually , the most fundamental part of our cells are quite equal .
is it clear that we can take advantage and use the mechanisms of a common bacterium to produce the protein of the human body , which is used to treat diabetiker of carbon ?
this is not like humaninsulin ; this is the same protein that &apos;s chemisch ununterscheidbar from what &apos;s coming out of your brain .
and while we &apos;re talking about bacteria , you know that every one of us in our gut is going to be more bacteria than cells , in the rest of our bodies ?
maybe 10 times .
i mean , think , if you think , if you think , antonio , after your self , you think about the bacteria ?
our gut is a wonderful gastfreundlichen environment for these bacteria .
it &apos;s warm , it &apos;s dark , it &apos;s feucht , it &apos;s very comfortable .
and you &apos;ll give you all the nutrients that you only could want to be in a single effort .
it &apos;s really a easier way for bacteria , with gelegentlichen unterbrechungen of the unbeabsichtigten , jeodch forced to get an end .
but , they &apos;re a wonderful environment for these bacteria , as they are important for their lives .
they help verdauung from the essentiellen , and they protect them against certain diseases .
but what &apos;s going to come in the future ?
are we in a kind of a evolutionäres balance in a form of a species ?
or are we determined to be something else -- something that might even be adapted to the environment ?
now , let &apos;s take a step back to the big trillion trillion years ago -- the earth , the ersten solar system , the first signs of living , maybe three to four billion years ago -- the first mehr-zelligen organisms , perhaps as much as 800 or a billion years -- and then the human species , which is what &apos;s going to be shaped in the last
in this vast unvollendeten symphony of the universe , life is just a little bit of a second , the animal kingdom , like a single takt and human life , a small notenverzierung .
that &apos;s what we were .
this is also the unterhaltungswert of the speech , so i hope i &apos;d like to have d d .
now , when i was a college college in college i had my first biologiekurse .
i was fascinated by the elegance and beauty of biology .
i fell in love with the power of evolution , and i found something very fundamental : most of the existence of life in einzelligen organisms , each cell is divided to each other , and all the genetic information on the cell is going on to move on either more .
but at the time when the mehrzelligen organisms showed up , things began to change .
sexual reproduction is coming into the picture .
and very important : the introduction of sexual reproduction to the genome , the rest of the body will be entbehrlich .
in fact , you could say that the unausweichlichkeit of the death of our body is going to happen in evolution in the same moment as sexual reproduction .
now i have to say , when i was a college-student , i thought , okay , sex / death , sex / death , death for sex -- it seemed pretty reasonable at the time , but with every year , it has come to my increased mind .
i &apos;ve come to understand the feelings of george burns , who in las vegas , in las years , in the &apos; 90s .
and one night , there &apos;s an klopfen on his hotelzimmertür .
it opens the door .
he says a beautiful spärlich showgirl .
she looks at him and says , &quot; i &apos;m here for super-sex . &quot;
&quot; that &apos;s wonderful , &quot; says george , &quot; i &apos;m going to take the soup . &quot;
i came to the realization as a doctor that i was a goal to be a goal that was different as the goal of evolution -- not necessarily , a different .
i &apos;ve tried to preserve the body .
i wanted to keep ourselves healthy .
i wanted to try to get the health to a disease .
i wanted to lead a long and healthy life .
evolution is all about the weitergabe of the genome to the next generation , anpassung and survival generation .
from a evolutionary perspective , you and i developed a booster rockets to send the genetic fracht into the next level of orbit , to let yourself fall into the ocean .
i think we would all have the mood , the woody of all the way , when he said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to get immortality through my work .
i want to do it by dying . &quot;
evolution doesn &apos;t necessarily mean the longest life .
it doesn &apos;t necessarily the biggest , the most powerful or the fastest , and not even the smartest .
evolution priviligiert the creatures that adapt to their environment .
it &apos;s only the test of survival and success .
and on the bottom of the ocean , bacteria are available that they &apos;re in the world , and that &apos;s what the hot gas would have to survive , if fish were there , they would have a vacuum , and they have a vacuum , and they have a vakuum fish , they have managed to make an bewohnbare environment .
so , what does that mean , when we look at what &apos;s happening in evolution , and how we think about the space in evolution , and especially as we vorausschauen in the next phase , i would say there &apos;s a number of possibilities .
the first is that we &apos;re not going to move forward .
we &apos;ve reached a kind of balance .
and the reason that we were for the reason is that , first of medicine , we &apos;ve done in medicine , in fact , in fact , a lot of genes that have been rausgewählt otherwise , and was taken out of the population .
and second , we as a species , we have so konfiguriert our environment that we did it , and we adapt to them in the same way as we adapt to them .
and by the way , we travel and we go around and we mix so much that they can &apos;t say no longer , that isolation is necessary for evolution , to stattzufinden .
a second possibility is that it &apos;s going to be an evolution of traditional art , of course , by the forces of nature .
and the argument , here is the wheels of evolution slowly , but they &apos;re unerbittlich .
and so far the isolation goes , if we &apos;re besiedeln planets as a species , it will be isolierung and the changes of the environment that could produce evolution in natural ways .
but there &apos;s a third possibility , a verlockende , fascinating and scary possibility of a fascinating possibility .
i call it neo-evolution -- the new development that isn &apos;t just natural , but led , and decided to be a individuen. of the decisions we make .
now , how could this happen ?
how could it be possible that we do this ?
let &apos;s first look at reality that people are now making decisions about their offspring .
they are , in some cultures , the choice to have more men than women .
it &apos;s not necessarily good for society , but it &apos;s the one who is going to choose the one and the family .
so think , if it &apos;s not only possible to choose the gender of your child but also to make genetic anpassungen that heal and prevent disease .
what if you could do the genetic changes to eliminate diabetes or alzheimer &apos;s disease or reduce the reduce cancer of cancer or disease ?
wouldn &apos;t you want to do these changes in their genes ?
when we &apos;re vorausblicken , these kinds of changes are increasingly possible .
the human genome project started project in 1990 , and it took 13 years .
it cost 2,7 billion dollars .
the following year , when it was finished , they could do the same thing for 20 million dollars in drein to four months .
today , you can put a sequence of the three billion base of the human genome at a price of about $ 20,000 and in the room of about a week .
it &apos;s not going to take long until the reality will be , that it will be the 1,000 thousand human genomes , and it will be increasingly available to everyone .
a week ago , the national academy institute of engineering the draper prize prize for francis arnold and willem stemmer , two scientists , who had been developed the natural process of evolution , to work faster and lead to wünschenswerte proteins in a more a more than a effizienteren , which is called &quot; direct evolution . &quot;
a few years ago , the lasker-preis yamanaka verliehen verliehen for his research in which he took a adult hautzelle , a fibroblasten fibroblasten , and using the manipulation of only four genes , the cell to turn it to a pluripotenten cell stem cell -- a cell potentially is able to become any cell in your body .
these changes are in the coming .
the same technology that produces the human insulin in bacteria that make viruses that are not only protecting themselves , but also to be able to serve the immune for other viruses .
believe it or not , it &apos;s an experimental study in a gang with vaccine that &apos;s been grown into the cells of a tabakpflanze cell .
can you imagine something good that &apos;s coming from ?
this is all reality , and in the future , there will be much more possible .
so , just imagine two other little changes .
you can change the cells in your body , but what if you could change the cells of your own ?
what if you could change the spermien and the eizellen , and the fresh befruchtete of the frisch , to give their kids a better chance to give a gesünderes life -- is the diabetes , eliminating the disease , reduce the risk of cancer ?
who doesn &apos;t want to healthier children ?
and then the analytical technology , the same engine of science that can allow the changes to prevent disease , could also allow us to be able to adopt super-attribute super-attribute , hyper-kapazitäten , the better memory .
why don &apos;t have the schlagfertigkeit of a ken jennings hben , especially if you can expand it with the next generation of watson-maschine ?
why not have the fast muskelfasern that you will allow you to walk faster and longer ?
why no longer live ?
these are going to be unwiderstehlich .
and when we &apos;re at a place where we can pass it on the next generation , and we can adopt the characteristics that we want , we become transformed by alt-stil evolution to neo-evolution .
we &apos;re going to have a process that requires a thousand years , and we can make it a thousand years , and maybe even the next 100 years .
these are decisions with those grandchildren , or their grandchildren , are going to be able to deal with their grandchildren .
do we use these decisions to form a society that is better more successful than more than more more than more than that ?
or are we going to be able to choose different ways that we want to have for some of us , and not for others ?
will we form a society to be dielangweiliger and uniformierter , or more robust and vielseitiger ?
these are the kinds of questions we need to face .
and the deepest of all , will we ever be able to evolve the wisdom and the wisdom that we need to make these decisions ?
in good ones like evil , and early , as you might think , these decisions are going to be on us .
thank you .
i want you to imagine now , a portable robot that gives you your übermenschliche skills , or another , the rollstuhlfahrern , which helps you get up and go back and go back and go back and go back and go back and go back and go back and go back and go back and go back and go back and go back and go back and go back
so we call these robots in berkeley bionics .
they &apos;re not different than something they &apos;re doing in the morning and gives them extra strength , and that will increase their velocity , and that will help you keep your balance .
that &apos;s actually the real verschmelzung of human and machine .
but not only that -- it &apos;s not to join with it , and connect with the universe and other devices out there .
it &apos;s not just a crazy idea .
so to show you now what we &apos;re working on , we start talking about the american soldiers that carries about 100 pounds on its back , and it &apos;s the request for them to carry more equipment .
and of course , this is some major complications -- rückenverletzungen , 30 percent of them -- chronic rückenverletzungen .
so we thought we would embrace that challenge and create a exoskelett that would help with this problem .
so let me now introduce you to now , you know , or the human universal load carrier .
soldier : with the hulc-exoskelett , i can carry 200 pounds over verschiedenartiges terrain , many hours long .
and his flexible design allows you to go down to kriechen and go to kriechen and höchst .
it feels what i want to do where i want to go and get it up and then increasing my strength and resilience .
we &apos;re so far to imagine our industriepartner of this device , this new exoskelett in this year .
so it &apos;s true .
let &apos;s take our view on the rollstuhlfahrer , something that i &apos;m particularly passionate about .
there are 68 million people sitting in the world in the world .
that &apos;s about one percent of the population .
and that &apos;s a conservative estimate in fact .
we &apos;re often talking about very young people with spinal cord rückenmarksverletzungen who are in the blütezeit of your life -- &apos; &apos; 30s , &apos; 30s , &apos; 60s -- the destiny is hit and the wheelchair is the only option .
but it &apos;s also about the population of the population that &apos;s been vervielfacht .
and so quite the option -- if it &apos;s about a hirnschlag , or the other complications -- the wheelchair is .
and so , it &apos;s been the way , by the way , for 500 years since i &apos;ve been to say , very successful introduction .
so we thought we could start to write a completely new chapter in mobility .
let me now imagine you , which is getragen by amanda boxtel who suffered a rückenmarksverletzung rate 19 years ago , which has a result that they couldn &apos;t walk anymore for 19 years and until now .
thank you .
as i said , amanda has amanda .
it has sensors .
his fully non-invasiven sensors in the krücken , the signals zurücksenden on our onboard-computer , which is attached to your back .
here &apos;s batteriepackungen , the motorantrieb is on their own , as well as the kniegelenken they move forward in this fairly geschmeidigen and very natural .
i was 24 years old and bestform , as a monströser purzelbaum while a skiabfahrt paralysierte .
in a fraction of a second , i lost every feeling and my movement underneath my beckens .
not long after a doctor , a doctor &apos;s been taking a doctor and he said , &quot; amanda , you &apos;ll never go again . &quot;
and that was 19 years ago .
and he steel every single day of consciousness .
anpassungsfähige technologies have been ermöglich to me , to learn to ski , to climb , to go to the hands of bike .
but nothing was invented , which would leave me again , until now .
thank you .
as you can see , we have the technology , we have the platforms to meet and discuss with them .
it &apos;s in our hands , and we have all the potential to change life from future generations -- not just for the soldiers , or for amanda here and all the rollstuhlfahrer , but for all .
thank you .
at home in new york , i &apos;m a boss at the entwicklungsabteilung of a non-profit organization called robin .
if i don &apos;t bekämpfe poverty , i bekämpfe as a gehilfe of a feuerwehr-hauptmanns , a volunteer , löschzug fire .
now , in our city , in the volunteer , a hochqualifizierte berufsfeuerwehr , you have to be pretty early on the brandstelle to be able to mitmischen .
i remember my first fire .
i was the second volunteer volunteer , so i had a pretty good opportunity to go inside .
but it was still a race against the other volunteers to reach the verantwortlichen hauptmann and find out what our tasks would be .
when i found the hauptmann , he had just a serious conversation with the hausbesitzerin , which would certainly have one of the worst days of their life .
it was in the middle of the night and she stood in the schlafanzug and barefoot under a screen outside in the strömenden rain while her house was in fire .
the other volunteers that had just arrived in front of me -- let &apos;s call it lex luther -- the first thing that the first was the first , and was asked to go to the house and save the dog of the hausbesitzerin .
the dog ! i was sprachlos .
there was some lawyer or vermögensverwalter , who now could tell people for the rest of his life that people could tell a living house to save a living creature , only because he was five seconds faster than i was .
well , i was the next one .
the hauptmann winkte me to be .
he said , &quot; well , you know , &quot; you know , &quot; you know , you need to go to the house .
you have to go to the top , and the fire will go over and have to get some shoes . &quot;
i swear it .
now , not exactly what i &apos;d hope to me , but i went to -- the stairs up , the flur , the real feuerwehrmännern over that moment , which was done in that moment , and they were quite finished in the bedroom , to get a few shoes .
i know what you &apos;re thinking now , but i &apos;m not a hero .
i carried my prey back down , where i met my erzfeind and the loved dog .
we put our assumptions out to the hausbesitzerin , where , not surprisingly , his significantly more attention than mine .
a few weeks later , the feuerwache got a letter to the hausbesitzerin , which they &apos;re doing for the tapferen effort in saving their house .
one of the things that &apos;s about a maßen is a geschätzte kindness : somebody who had actually put her shoes .
both in my career at robin hood as a volunteer fireman , i &apos;m witness generosity and kindness at the great scale , but i also see the way of the charity and the muts of individuals .
and you know what i learned ?
they &apos;re all important .
so if i &apos;m going to umsehe and see people that either have achieved a beachtenswerten success or there is , i want to offer this memory : don &apos;t wait .
wait not to make a difference in the life of the life until you &apos;ve achieved your first million .
if you have something , you &apos;ll give it .
and then you put it in a suppenküche , put it into a park in the neighborhood .
be a mentor .
not every day will give us a chance to save the lives of a human life , but every day , the opportunity to change one .
so they &apos;re going on . save the shoes .
thank you .
bruno guissani : mark , mark , come back .
thank you .
i &apos;m going to come back from a community that knows the secret of the fortbestands of humankind .
a place where women lead to the zepter , with sex &apos; &quot; hello , &quot; and the game determines the day -- where is a serious issue .
and no , it &apos;s not burning or san francisco .
ladies and gentlemen , their verwandtschaft .
this is the world of wild bonobos in the urwald of congo .
bonobos are together with chimpanzees , who are our closest living related .
that means we have an common ancestor , an evolutionary grandmother , who lived around about six million years ago .
now , chimpanzees are known for their aggressivität .
but unfortunately , we have this aspect of überbetont in the narrative of human evolution .
but bonobos show us the other side of the coin side .
as chimpanzees , from large , fear , einflößenden , they are led by the bonobo-gesellschaft females .
they really came up with this , because that leads to a ausgesprochen society , in the lethal violence , in the lethal violence .
but unfortunately , bonobos are the most known in the primate .
they live in the deep depths of the kongolesischen , and the observation is only hard to get .
congo is a paradox -- a country of an extraordinary biodiversity and beauty , but also the heart of darkness itself -- the schauplatz of a violent struggle that has been wütet for decades and almost , as many lives have been taken as the world war ii .
it doesn &apos;t surprise that these destruction are the survival of the bonobos .
fleischhandel and the decline of the baumbestandes , you can &apos;t even fill a stadion to the verbliebenen bonobos -- and even there are not safe to be honest .
and yet , in this country of violence and chaos , you can hear a verborgenes laugh that the trees are erschüttert .
who &apos;s this related ?
we know it as &quot; love rather than the war , because they have häufigen , including sex with wechselnden partners , and rules such conflict and social angelenheiten .
i don &apos;t say that , that would be the answer to all the humanitarian problems -- because life &apos;s life is made up more than the kama .
bonobos -- like humans -- love to play their lives .
game is not just kinderspiele .
for us , and it &apos;s fundamental to the attachment of relationships and the care of the tolerance .
and we learn trust and the rules of the game .
game is much more and resilience and resilience , and it &apos;s all about creation of diversity -- diversity of interactions , diversity of behaviors , diversity .
and when you look at bonobos at game , you see the evolutionary origins of human lachens , dance and rituals .
play is the kitt that we &apos;re beieinanderhält .
now , i don &apos;t know how to play , but i want to show you some unique footage from the wild .
first a ballspiel on bonobo-art -- and i don &apos;t think of it in a fussball .
so here we see a young female and males in a verfolgungsspiel .
look at what she does .
and that &apos;s the evolutionary origin of this : &quot; she &apos;s always packt him . &quot;
just that i think it &apos;s like it , rather , right .
yeah .
so sexspiele are common , both in bonobos and for people .
and this video is really interesting , because it shows -- and this video is really interesting , because it shows the ideenreichtum that you get into the game -- like the hoden -- and also , as the game can also challenge both trust and fördert -- while it &apos;s been doing a great fun .
but the game is a formwandler game .
game is a formwandler , and it can take many forms of which some of the things are quiet , phantasievoll , curious -- maybe to explore the erstaunen again .
and i want to show you , this is fuku , a young female , and she &apos;s playing with water .
i think just as you play , sometimes , we &apos;re doing it , and we loten boundaries of our inner worlds and outer worlds .
and it &apos;s these kind of playful curiosity that makes us explore , and interact , and the unexpected of the verknüpfungen that we form are the real nährboden of creativity .
this is just a little vorgeschmack of the insights that bonobos would give us into our past and present .
but it also true a secret to our future , a future where we have to adapt to more intense challenges , through greater creativity and cooperation .
the secret is that the game is the key to these skills .
in other words , play is our anpassungsjoker .
to adapt to a unbeständige world , we need to play .
but are we going to be able to make the best out of our spieltrieb system ?
game is not silly .
it &apos;s essential .
for bonobos and people , life is not a teeth and claws alone .
just if it &apos;s barely appropriate , maybe play is perhaps the nötigsten .
and so , my primatenkameraden , let &apos;s give you a gift of evolution , and play together , while we kameradschaft creativity and wonder .
thank you .
i want you to think of two pairs , in the middle of 1979 , at the same day , at the same moment , every single one of the baby &apos;s baby .
so two pairs , each one of the baby &apos;s zeugt .
now i don &apos;t want you to be able to imagine the zeugung , because , if you think of the whole time the zeugung , you don &apos;t listen to me .
just imagine that for a moment .
and in this scenario , you imagine that in a case , the sperma is wearing a y chomosom , which is hitting the x chromosome of the eizelle .
and in the other case , that &apos;s the sperma that &apos;s actually hitting x chromosome that &apos;s hitting the x chromosome of the eizelle .
both of these are überlebensfähig , both of them .
we &apos;re going to go back to these people later .
most of my activities i have two different points .
under a hat i &apos;m just a way to do the story of the anatomy .
i &apos;m a study student , and in this case , how people umgingen with anatomy -- meaning human body , animal bodies -- how they umgingen with körperflüssigkeiten , with körperkonzepten , as they thought about bodies .
the other hat i carried in my work is the activist , as a patientinnenanwältin -- or , as i say sometimes , as a ungeduldige lawyer -- from people who are patients from doctors .
in this case , i &apos;ve been working with people who have the körpertypen , the social norms in question .
so , for example , i &apos;ve been working with people who are identical twins , two people in a body .
i worked with people with zwergenwuchs -- so people who were smaller than common .
and very often , i &apos;ve been working with a lot of people who are gender and gender , and people who don &apos;t have the average male or female species .
and as a general word , we can use the word &quot; intersexualität . &quot;
intersexualität comes in many different forms .
i just give you a couple examples of the kinds of geschlechtsvarianten , who are not like male or female standard .
in one case , you might have somebody with a xy chromosomenbasis , and the sry gene of the y chomosoms is the protogonaden that we &apos;ve all had , to be hoden .
and so the hoden in the fötalen of the fötalen is testosterone .
but because the individual is missing the receptor to see the testosterone , the body doesn &apos;t respond to the testosterone .
and that &apos;s called androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so a lot of testosterone , but not a reaction .
as a result , the body evolved more and more of the typical female trend .
when the child is born , she looks like a girl .
she &apos;s a girl . she &apos;s been raised as a girl .
but it &apos;s usually until you reach puberty and grow your breasts and you evolve , but not get your period until someone comes to it that &apos;s a different one .
and they make some tests and find that instead of eierstöcken and gebärmutter , in fact , hoden in it and it has a y chromosome .
and what &apos;s important is to understand that you could actually hold this person for a male , but they &apos;re not really .
women , like men , have something called the body that you call it .
they are in the back part of our body .
and the nebennieren stellen androgene , which are virilisierende hormones .
most women , like me -- i think i think a typical woman -- i don &apos;t know my actual chromosomenaufbau , but i think i probably have the typical -- most women like me are actually speaking to the androgene .
we produce androgen , and we talk to androgene .
the consequence is that somebody like me actually has a brain that has been exposed to more androgenen than a woman who was born with her hoden and a androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so gender is really hard ; intersexuelle are not only in the middle of the spectrum of gender -- in a sense , you can all spread across the whole range .
one example : a couple of years ago , i got the call from a 19 year-old man who was born as young , he had a friend , he had a girlfriend , had sex with his girlfriend , lived as man , and he had just figured out that he had eierstöcke and a gebärmutter .
he had an extreme form of an angeborenen nebennierenrindenhyperblasie .
he has xx chromosome , and in the womb , his nebennieren were so strong active that they basically have a male hormonumgebung .
and as a result , his genitalien male male , his brain was exposed to the typischeren &apos;s male male .
and when he was born , he saw as a boy , no one could see .
and only when he was 19 years old , he got enough medical problems , actually , because he was innerlich , that the doctors found it was within the inner female .
okay , just a quick example of a version of intersexualität .
some people with xx chromosomes , they &apos;re developing something called ovotestis , which is eierstockgewebe of hodengewebe umhüllt .
we don &apos;t know exactly why that &apos;s happening .
so gender can occur in many different varieties .
the reason kids with this kind of body -- whether it &apos;s zwergenwuchs or siamesische twins , it &apos;s intersexuell -- from surgeons often , are adapted to the norm , it &apos;s not because it would be the physical health of advantage .
in many cases , these people are perfectly healthy .
the reason they often do various kinds of surgeries surgeries is because they threaten our social categories .
typically our system is based on the idea that a certain of these are anatomische form with a specific identity .
so we have the concept that a woman means to have a female identity , a black person , meant to have an african anatomy in terms of your own story .
so we have this awful vereinfachende idea .
and when we &apos;re confronted with a body , which actually is something very different , we get to think about this kategorisierungen .
so we have a lot of romantic ideas in our culture .
and our nation really is really based on a very romantic concept of individualismus .
now , you can imagine how amazing it is , when children are born , the two people in a body are born .
now , i had been most excited in the last time that the südafrikanische läuferin semenya was semenya last year whose gender was asked in berlin , in berlin .
a lot of journalists , who said to me , &quot; what test are you going to do , is that caster female or male male ? &quot;
and i had to explain to the journalist that there &apos;s no test .
we now know that gender is hard enough to admit that nature is not going to move between male and female , or male and intersexuell and female and intersexuell , tastächlich , that &apos;s the way that these are trennlinie than to do .
so we have a situation where we &apos;ve been able to go forward and so on , we have to recognize that these categories that we have held categories for stable , which is very simple zuordnungen to create permanent identitätskategorien , much more unschärfer than we &apos;ve accepted .
and this is not just in terms of gender .
it also applies in terms of race , which is a lot more complicated than our terminologie has allowed .
in our betrachtungen , we &apos;re going to get into all kinds of different areas .
for example , we &apos;re going to take an example of the fact that we have at least 95 percent of our dna with chimpanzees .
what are we going to do with the fact that we &apos;re just going to tell ourselves from a few nukleotide ?
as we continue to push our science , we are increasingly moving into a zone of the unbehagens where we need to recognize that the simplistischen categories that we &apos;ve probably had too simple .
we &apos;re seeing that in all sorts of different parts of the human life .
one of the areas we see in the beipiel , in our culture today , in the united states today , is the struggle of the beginning and the end of life .
we have hard conversations about what point a body is going to be , so it &apos;s a different law than the most important life .
we have very difficult auseinandersetzungen , these days , not as public as in medicine -- about the question of when someone is dead .
our ancestors had never been hard to fight with the question when someone was dead .
they only have a feder a feder in the nose , and when they moved , they haven &apos;t buried them .
if she didn &apos;t moved anymore , you buried it .
but today , we are in a situation where we take people to take away from lebenswichtige organs and want to get people to do other people .
and as a result , we verfangen ourselves with the really difficult question when someone is dead , and that brings us into a really difficult situation where we don &apos;t have as simple categories as used .
now you might expect that the whole collapse of categories would be a person like me really happy .
i &apos;m political progressiv , i &apos;m verteidige people with unusual bodies , but i have to admit , it &apos;s getting a nervous .
understanding that those categories really are much more comfortable than we thought , is angespannt .
and it makes me feel angespannt in terms of the democracy .
so to tell you about this anspannung , i have to take a big fan of the gründungsväter .
i know they were rassisiten , i know they were sexisten , but they were great .
i find that they were so tapfer and strong , and so radical , what they did for me , and i &apos;ve been looking at the schmalzige musical 1776 , and it &apos;s not because of the music that &apos;s absolutely forgotten .
it &apos;s because of what &apos;s going on with the gründungsvätern .
the gründungsväter were the original anatomischen activists , and that &apos;s why .
what they were zurückwiesen was a anatomisches concept , and they were replaced it by another , which was radical and beautiful and 200 years of maßgeblich .
as you all remember , our gründungsväter refused to go out the concept of monarchy , and the monarchy was based on a very vereinfachten concept of anatomy .
the herrscher of the old world had no concept based on dna , but they had a concept of the geburtsrechts .
they had a concept of blue blood .
they were the notion that people had political power , the political power , because of the vererbten blutlinie from the grandfather to the father to son and so forth .
the gründungsväter wiesen this idea and they were ersetzten by a new anatomisches concept , and this concept said that all people were gleichwertig .
they nivellierten the field and decided that , anatomisch , the common one , not the differences , and that was very radical .
now they did it , because they were part of a aufklärerischen system in which two things together .
democracy grew up , but at the same time , the science grew .
if you look at the history of the world , you know , many of you are very interested in science , and they were interested in a concept of a naturalistischen world .
they went from the explanations of übernatürlicher , and wiesen things like a übernatürliches concept of power , back to where the transmission is based on a very vagen concept of geburtsrecht .
they moved to a naturalistischen concept .
and if you look at the unabhängigkeitserklärung of the independence , you talk about nature and god &apos;s god .
it doesn &apos;t talk about god and nature &apos;s nature .
they &apos;re talking about the power of nature to tell us who we are .
and as part of it , they came together with a concept that was a anatomischen common .
and so they &apos;ve got the future civil rights movement .
they didn &apos;t think about this , but what they &apos;ve done for us was great .
so what happened ?
for example , women , the wahlrecht anstrebten , the concept of the gründungsväter , which says that both more common difference than the anatomische difference , and said , &quot; we have a gebärmutter and eierstöcke , as a difference , that we should not have the wahlrecht , which is right to have a full of staatsbürgerschaft , which is right , etc . , etc . &quot;
and women are doing that .
next , the successful civil rights movement , where we saw people like sojourner truth who spach on this , &quot; am i not a woman ? &quot;
we find men in the marschierenden row of the bürgerechtsbewegung who say , &quot; i &apos;m a man . &quot;
again , people who are berufen different hautfarbe , berufen differences in anatomischen differences .
we see the same thing in the behindertenrechtsbewegung .
and of course , the problem is that , as well as we start looking at the common , we have to start to ask why we maintain certain trennungen .
now , mind , i want to be able to sustain a certain trennungen , anatomisch , in our culture .
i want to give you a fish that you can &apos;t give the same rights to a human .
i don &apos;t want to say that we should be taking away from the anatomy .
i don &apos;t want to say that 5-jährige should be right to give her informed informed consent to sex or to get married .
so there are some of these anatomische trennungen that make sense for me , and i think i think .
but the challenge is to try and figure out what it is and why we keep them , and whether they make sense .
so let &apos;s go back to these two creatures that we &apos;ve been in the beginning of the speech of speech .
we have two creatures , both in the middle of the 1979 , the same day .
let &apos;s imagine that one of them , maria , three months of verfrüht , she was born at one june 1980 .
heinrich , on the other side , is born to the geburtstermin , so he was born on one march of 1980 .
only because of the fact that maria was born three months of verfrüht , she had all possible rights three months ago -- the right of sex sex , which is right to choose to drink the right .
heinrich has to wait for all these , not because he &apos;s actually got a different biological age , just because of the zeitpunktes of his birth .
we &apos;re finding other merkwürdigkeiten about what their rights are .
heinrich , because you think he &apos;s male -- although i didn &apos;t tell you that he &apos;s the xy -- because you think he &apos;s male , he can now be able to get to be able to make the maria worry .
but maria , in all states , can &apos;t perceive the same right in all states , the heinrich of all states , and that &apos;s the right to get married .
heinrich can get married in every state , but maria can only get married in a few states in a few states .
so we have these dauerhaften categories that are in many ways problematic and fragwürdig .
and for me , the question is , what are we going to do , because our science is going to do so much more advances in the field of anatomy that we have to reach a point where we have to admit that a democracy based on anatomy , could be auseinanderfallen ?
i don &apos;t want to give science , but at the same time it feels sometimes as if the science is doing its own .
so where do we go ?
it seems like our culture would take a kind of a different posture : &quot; well , we need to move somewhere somewhere , so we move it somewhere . &quot;
but a lot of people caught up in a very strange position .
so for example , texas decided that texas means a man to marry a man , you have no y chromosome , and you get a woman to get married , you have a y chromosome .
now , in practice , people are not tested for their chromosome .
but it &apos;s also very bizarre , because of the story i &apos;ve been told you about the androgenrezeptor-defekt .
if we look at one of the gründungsväter of modern democracy , dr. martin luther king , he offers us in his &quot; i have a dream of a solution . &quot;
he says we shouldn &apos;t be able to judge people to their skin , but to judge the property of their character , and go beyond anatomy .
and i want to say , &quot; yeah , that sounds like a good idea . &quot;
but how do you do that in practice ?
how do you look at people based on their charaktereigenschaften ?
i &apos;m also saying that i &apos;m not sure that we should be able to spread right in terms of people &apos;s such as well because i have to admit that i know a number of golden retriever , who probably probably make a lot more than some people i know .
i want to dazusagen , i &apos;m probably going to know some bright labradorhunde , the fähiger fähiger , more intelligent and more important decisions about their sexual relationships as some 40-jährige that i know .
so how should we put the question of the character ?
it turns out it &apos;s hard .
and part of me asks , what if the content was something that would be in the future of maschinenlesbar -- using an mri , could be made visible ?
really do we want to go in this direction ?
i &apos;m not sure where we go .
what i know is that it really seems important to think about the idea that the united states is a leader in which is to think about questions of democracy .
in our effort to democracy , we &apos;ve done our things right , and i think we would do the thing in the future .
we don &apos;t have the situation , like , in iran , in iran , where a man who &apos;s been sexuell to other men , who &apos;s been punished by death , it &apos;s because he &apos;s ready to go to a geschlechtsumwandlung , which he may be alive .
the way that kind of don &apos;t exist in us .
i &apos;m glad to say that we don &apos;t have these states -- a surgeon who i spoke with a few years ago who had a few siamesische twins with themselves to separate them , in part to make a name .
but when i was telefonierte him and asked him why he did these surgeries -- it was highly riskante surgeries -- his answer was that in his country , these children would be very bad , and therefore he had to do it .
i said , &quot; well , have you moved political policy in a erwägung rather than trennen ? &quot;
the united states have tremendous opportunities to allow people to be the ones they are , without the state of the state of the state .
so i think we need to be leaders .
well , just to finish , i want to notice that i &apos;ve talked a lot about the fathers .
and i want to think about the possibility of how democracy could look , or looked like that , if we had the moms .
and i want to say something radical about a feminist , and i think there might be different ways that could be herrühren by different ways of anatomy , insbesonders when people apply a gruppendenken .
for years , since i was interested in intersexualität , i &apos;ve been interested in the field of research .
and one of the things that i really found interesting is the difference between men and women are in ways to think about how they think and act in the world .
what we &apos;ve learned from kulturübergreifenden studies is that women , average , average -- not every , but average -- more tend to be more tend to be complex social relationships and the care of the people who are vulnerable to people in the group of vulnerable .
and so , when we think about it , we have an interesting situation to do .
so years ago , when i made a graduate student , my favorite mine who knew my interest in feminism -- i considered a feminist , so i &apos;m doing it -- a really curious question .
he said , &quot; tell me what &apos;s going on to be about . &quot;
and i thought , &quot; well , that &apos;s the most exciting question i &apos;ve ever heard .
in feminism , it &apos;s about gender about gender , so that &apos;s not a female for feminism .
but the more i thought about his question , so i thought there could be something weibliches in the feminism .
that &apos;s called to say , there could be something , on average , which is different brains of male brains of male , which makes us aufmerksamer for hochkomplexe social relationships , and sorgen the schutzbedürftige for the world .
so where the gründungsväter were extremely bedacht , as they could be protected from the state , and it &apos;s possible that if we einbrächten more mothers in this concept , we can &apos;t just bekämmen a concept of how to do not just how to protect , but how we can care for each other .
and perhaps it &apos;s where we have to go into the future , when we have democracy about anatomy -- less about the individual bodies , to think about , and think about relationships .
so , if we try to make a perfektere connection , we think what we can do for each other .
thank you .
i &apos;m a jessi , and this is my suitcase .
but before i show you what i &apos;ve got in it , i &apos;m going to make a very public geständnis , and that &apos;s : i &apos;m obsessed with outfits .
i love to find a different farbenfrohes , verrücktes , verrücktes , to wear and to photograph and to be photography and to be too .
but i don &apos;t buy anything new .
i &apos;m getting all my clothes out of the second hand on flohmärkten and in second-hand-shops .
ooh , thank you .
second-hand-shopping allows me to reduce the impact of my garderobe on the environment and also on my wallet .
i &apos;m meeting all kinds of great people ; my dollars used for a good purpose ; i look pretty unique ; and it makes a shopping thing to my own personal schatzsuche .
i mean , what am i going to find ?
will it be my size ?
am i like the color ?
is it going to cost less than 20 dollars ?
if you all say to me , i feel like i won .
i &apos;m coming back to my suitcase , and i &apos;ll tell you what i &apos;ve been working on for this exciting week here at ted .
i mean , what does someone bring with so many ?
so i &apos;m going to show you very precisely what i &apos;ve brought .
i brought seven few of the unterhosen , and that &apos;s all .
the genau of the exact week are all i &apos;ve done in my suitcase .
i &apos;ve made sure i could find everything i wanted to wear , would find if i had to get to palm springs .
and since you don &apos;t hear me from my wife , who &apos;s herumläuft here at ted , and i &apos;ve found a couple of things .
and i want to show you my outfits for this week .
sounds good ?
while i do that , i &apos;m going to leave you some of the lessons i think you or not have learned from this abenteuern , not to wear anything new .
let &apos;s start on sunday .
i call this the &quot; strahlenden tiger . &quot;
you don &apos;t have to spend a lot of money to look good .
you can almost always look great for less than 50 dollars .
this whole thing , including the coat , i took 55 , and it was the most expensive piece that i carried in this entire week .
monday : color is a little bit .
it &apos;s almost impossible impossible to be bad , if you &apos;re wearing hellrote pants .
if you &apos;re happy , you &apos;re pulling people on other happy people .
tuesday : all the time is anpassung .
i have spent a lot of time my life trying to try and be myself and to adapt to myself .
be easy who you are .
if you surround yourself with the right people , they &apos;re not just going to understand it , they &apos;ll appreciate it .
wednesday : give your inner child .
sometimes people tell me , i saw as if i &apos;m doing &quot; dress &quot; or &quot; i remember her to get her .
i like to smile , and i say , &quot; thank you . &quot;
donnerstag : confidence is the key .
if you think you &apos;re looking at something well , it &apos;s almost safe .
and if you think you don &apos;t look good in something , you probably have right .
i grew up with a mother that taught me the day for day .
but only when i was 30 , i really got what that means .
and i &apos;m going to summarize it for a second .
if you believe that you &apos;re inside and outside a wonderful person , there &apos;s nothing you can &apos;t wear .
so there &apos;s no excuse for anyone here in this audience .
we should be able to rocken everything we want .
thank you .
friday : a universal truth -- five words : golden pailleten fit with everything .
and finally , saturday saturday : a unique personal style , is a great way to tell the world about a one , without saying a word .
it was always shown to me , and again , when people came to me , in this week of people , just because of what i carried . and i had great conversations .
obviously , it &apos;s not going to fit in my tiny suitcase .
so before i go home to brooklyn , i &apos;ll give it all back .
because the lesson i &apos;m trying to learn from this week is that it &apos;s okay to let go .
i don &apos;t have to get these things down to this stuff , because the road is always going to be a different verrücktes , farbenfrohes , strahlendes outfit , which just wait for me when i love a little bit of love and search it .
thank you very much .
thank you .
good afternoon , all together .
i have something that i &apos;d like to show you .
think of this as a bildpunkt , as flying fliegenden .
that &apos;s what we call in our lab , wahrnehmbares design .
let me tell you a little bit about it .
now , if you take this picture -- i &apos;m a very italian italian , and every boy in italy is growing up in his room with this picture , but the reason i show you this is what happened in the formula for a decade in the past decade .
a few time ago , if you wanted to win a formula for a race , they took their budget and put their money on a good driver and a good car .
and if the car and the driver were good enough , then they won the race .
now nowadays , you need something like this -- something that &apos;s been überwacht a car in real time , a little thousand sensors that pass information from the car , that information on the system and then process it and then use it to send decisions and make things in real time , and that &apos;s collected things in real time .
this would call them , in ingenieurteams , a echtzeit-kontrollsystem .
and basically , it &apos;s a system that &apos;s made of two parts -- a spürenden part and a reagierendenteil .
what &apos;s interesting now is the echtzeit-kontrollsysteme , starting in our lives .
our cities were just equipped in the last few years , just equipped with networks .
they become a computer in the open .
and as a computer in the free , they start to respond to other ways , and they &apos;re being wahrgenommen .
when we &apos;re herrichten cities , it &apos;s actually a big deal .
only by the way , i want to mention that cities are only two percent of the world &apos;s surface , but 50 percent of the world &apos;s population .
they &apos;re 75 percent of the energiekonsums -- cause to 80 percent of co2 emissions .
so if we do something with the cities , it &apos;s a big thing .
beyond the cities , pulling all of this sense and push it into objects of everyday life .
this is from an exhibition show , the paola of moma , at moma , in the summer , in the summer .
it &apos;s called &quot; talk to me . &quot;
now , all of our objects , our environment , are starting to talk to us .
in a certain sense , it &apos;s almost like any atom that &apos;s going to be both on the two , a sensor and a antreiber .
and this is changing the interaction that we have people out with our environment .
in a way , it &apos;s almost like the old dream of a michelangelo .
you know , when a michelangelo shaped the moses , it &apos;s like he took the hammer and he threw him on moses -- actually , you can still see a little spot untendrunter -- and said , &quot; perché non parli ? why don &apos;t you do ? &quot;
now , today , our environment , for the first time , is to respond to us .
i &apos;m going to show you just a few examples -- again , to perceive our environment and power our environment .
let &apos;s start to perceive .
now the first project i want to introduce you is actually one of the first of our labs .
it was about four and a half years ago .
and what we did was actually , actually , to use one of the network that was used in the world -- this is a mobiltelefonnetz -- and anonyme and aggregierte information from this network that &apos;s collected from the betreiber to understand how the city works .
the summer was a happy summer -- 2006 .
it was a italy , the fußball-weltmeisterschaft .
some of you will remember it was in italy , in the frankreich , and then at the end of zidane , the kopfstoß .
and no matter , italy has won the end up the end .
now you see what happened on this day , only in the monitor of the activity that &apos;s going on inside the network .
here you see the city .
you see the kolosseum , the fluß tiber .
the morning , in front of the game .
you see the time .
earlier afternoon , people here and there , the calls are making and move .
the game starts -- silence .
france is a gate . italy makes a gate .
halbzeit , people make a short call , go to the toilet .
second halbzeit . end of the normal one .
first , verlängerung , second .
zidane , in a moment of kopfstoß .
italy wins . yeah .
now , in this night , all the center to celebrate .
they saw the big deal .
the next day , all the center to go to the siegerteam and the prime minister at the same time .
and then all the way down .
you see the picture of the space of the space , where , since the time , the people have been to celebrate -- to have a big party , and you see the key part of the day .
now , this is just an example of how we can feel the city , in a way , and how we couldn &apos;t do it a few years ago .
even quickly , another example of feeling : this is not about people , but the things we use and consume .
well , now , we know everything that &apos;s where our things come from .
this is a map that shows you all the chips , which is a mac computer , as they came together .
but we just know little about where the things go .
so , in this project , we actually designed some little markers to track the trash while it &apos;s going through the system .
so we started with some volunteers that we have , in seattle , to be helped us , in seattle , to highlight the things that they were wegwarfen -- different types of things , as you can see -- things that they would throw away anyway .
then we have the little chips , the little brands , the little brands , and we put it on the trash and we started track it .
here are the results that we &apos;ve just got .
from seattle ...
after a week .
and that information is what we realized that there &apos;s a lot of ineffizienzen in the system .
we can do the same things in the act of less energy .
the data was not available before .
but that &apos;s what happens a lot of unnützer , komplizierter things .
but the other thing is we believe that if we see every day , the cup that we throw away , not just disappears , that it &apos;s still anywhere on the planet .
and the plastic bottle that we &apos;re still throwing away every day .
and if we were to show people that people , we can push change change .
so this is the reason for this project .
my colleague at mit , assaf biderman , could you see a lot more about that , and the many other wonderful things that you can perceive with , and i &apos;d like to talk to the second part that we &apos;ve been in the beginning , and that &apos;s the betätigung of our environment .
and the first project is something we did in zaragoza , a few years ago , spain .
it started with a question of the bürgermeisters that came to us and said that spain and südeuropa have a beautiful tradition , in public places as part of architecture .
and the question was , how could you connect technology and new technology ?
and one of the ideas that were ermittelt on with a arbeitskreis was imagine the schläuche and valves , magnetventile , valves , and you open it .
they &apos;re going to cause them like a wasservorhang with water bildpunkten .
if those bildpunkte fall down , they can write it , can you show patterns , images , text .
and they can get to it , and he &apos;s open up to let them durchspringen , as you can see in this picture .
now , we &apos;ve imagined the mayor of belloch .
it fell very much .
and we got to design the assignment to the expo of the expo .
we called it the digital water .
the whole building was water .
there are no doors or windows , but when you &apos;re approaching it , it will open and let them go inside .
the roof was also covered with water .
and if it &apos;s a windig , if you &apos;re cutting the reduction , you can actually put the roof .
or you could close the building and the whole architecture , like in this case , you know , this days when you put the roof , you get pictures of people who were there and say , &quot; you &apos;ve destroyed the building . &quot;
no , they don &apos;t destroyed the building , it &apos;s just that architecture has almost been disappears .
here you see how the building works .
you see the person who &apos;s asking what &apos;s going on inside .
and here you see me when i tried to test the sensors that opened the water , not getting wet .
now , i should tell you what one night happened when all the sensors stopped .
but actually , it was a more fun one of those night .
all the kids from zaragoza came to the building because the way they were playing with the building was very different .
no longer a building that would open up to make them a , but a building that had still breaks and holes in the water , you had to jump up without getting wet .
and that was , for us , very exciting , because as architects , engineers , as designers , we always think about how people are using things that we design .
but reality is always unpredictable .
and that &apos;s the beauty of creating things that are being used and interact with people .
so here &apos;s a picture of the building with the physical bildpunkten , the bildpunkten of water and the projections .
and this is what we &apos;ve led to us about the following project that i &apos;m going to show you now .
so , imagine that bildpunkte could really start to fly .
imagine you could have little helicopter flying through the air , and each of you with a little bildpunkt of light with a little bildpunkt light -- almost like a cloud that can move through the space .
here &apos;s the video .
imagine a helicopter , like the one you saw earlier , which moves with others , completely in perfect .
you can have these cloud .
you can have some kind of flexiblen screen or display like this -- a smooth formation in two dimensions .
or , but , in three dimensions , what that changes , the light is , not the position of the bildpunkte .
they can play with different types .
imagine that screen could just appear in different scales or sizes , in different ways .
but then , all of this could be a 3d cloud of bildpunkten , which you can walk up and move through that you can move from many , many directions .
here you see a real flyfire-steuerung , the herabsinkt , just like a gleichmäßiges v .
when you turn on the lights , it looks like this . so , as we saw it before .
imagine that every single person of people are controlled .
it could have a impulse that &apos;s a impulse that comes from people , from people , from the motions of people or so forth .
i want to show you something here .
we &apos;ve been working with roberto bolle , one of the best balletttänzer of our time -- the étoile at the national theater in new york and the scala in milan -- we took his movements in 3d to use them as a impulse for the brain .
here they &apos;re going to see roberto dancing .
on the left side , they see the bildpunkte , the different eingefangenen sensations .
it &apos;s also a echtzeit-3d-scan and a bewegungsaufnahme .
so they can feel the whole movement .
they can do that all the time .
but then , if we all have the bildpunkte , you can play with it and play with color of gravity and drehbewegung .
so we want to use this as a possible impulse for the computer .
i want to show you the latest project that we &apos;re working on .
it &apos;s something we work for the olympics in london .
it &apos;s called the cloud -- the cloud .
so the idea is , imagine that we &apos;re going to engage people with something and change the environment -- almost something like we call it , wolkenbewegung , like a scheunentor , but with a cloud .
imagine that anybody can give a small donation for a bildpunkt .
i think the remarkable thing that happened last years , the last decade is that we &apos;ve changed from a physical world to a digital world .
it all digitized , and it &apos;s available through the internet .
nowadays , we can first -- and the campaign obama has shown this -- we can change from the digital world , from the selbstorganisierenden forces of the network to the physical world .
and that can be in our case that we use it to design and create a symbol .
that means something that &apos;s built in the city .
but tomorrow , it can be the next challenges -- think about climate change or co2 emissions -- how can we change from the digital world to physical .
so the idea is that we actually engage the people with the people that they &apos;re doing together .
the cloud is again a cloud in bildpunkten , in the same way that a cloud of particles is made .
and these particles are water , while our cloud is a cloud in bildpunkten .
it &apos;s a physical piece in london , but covered in bildpunkten .
they can move inside and make different kinds of experiences .
you can actually look at it from the bottom , the most important moments for olympia 2012 and the other , and use it as a way of connection to the community .
so both , the physical cloud in the sky , and something at the top of that , you can go to the top of the new berggipfel .
you can get inside .
and a kind of digital leuchtturm in the night -- but as a allerwichtigstes , a new kind of experience for all of the experience of all the way they want to go to the top .
thank you .
as an artist , the context is very important .
through my work , i try to express that humans are not separate from nature , and that everything is connected .
the first time i was almost 10 years ago in antarctica where i saw my first eisberge .
i &apos;m at ergriff awe .
my heart was raste , i was schwindelig , while i was trying to summarize what was standing in front of me .
the eisberge eisberge around me , almost 60 feet of the water , and i was just a wonder that this was a schneeflocke on a different schneeflocke year .
eisberge are born as a kalb of a glacier or by brechen out of eisschollen .
each iceberg has his own individual personality .
they &apos;re interacting with a different way with their environment and their experience .
some people are weigern and klammern to the bitteren end , while others can &apos;t stand and zusammenstürzen a anfall of a dramatischer passion .
if you look at a iceberg , you &apos;re easily thinking that they are isolated , apart and alone , just as we often see people .
but the truth is far away .
while a iceberg is melting , i atme his vorzeitliche atmosphere .
as the iceberg melting , it setzt mineralstoffreiches drinking water that feeds a lot of life .
i &apos;m going to go to my photographs of this eisberge , as if i make portraits of my ancestors , in the consciousness , that they are in these individual moments of that wise , and never be so existing .
it &apos;s not a death when you melt ; it &apos;s not an end , but a fortführung of your life cycle .
part of the ice in the eisbergen i &apos;m very young is very young -- a few thousand years old .
and part of the ice is more than 100,000 years old .
the last pictures i &apos;d like to show you is a iceberg that i &apos;ve been photographiert in kekertsuatsiak .
very rarely , in fact , you will actually witness a rollenden iceberg .
here you can see it .
on the left side , you see a little boat .
this is about five feet long .
and please look at the form of the iceberg and where it &apos;s on the wasserlinie .
you can see here , it starts to roll , and the boat is moving on the other side , the guy is there .
that &apos;s the average size of a grönland-eisbergs .
it &apos;s ragt about 120 feet , or 40 meters .
and this video is in real time .
and just like this , you &apos;ll show you the iceberg one of the iceberg .
thank you .
my life is really extraordinary to work through the work of some amazing projects .
but the one i &apos;ve ever worked on , the one i &apos;ve ever worked on .
his name is tempt .
tempt was one of the leading graffitikünstler &apos; 80s .
then , one day he came back and said , &quot; paps , my legs . &quot;
and that was the outbreak of the &quot; as it . &quot;
tempt is completely paralyzed .
he can only use his eyes .
i stood towards him .
i have a company that makes design and animations , so i &apos;m inevitably a complex part of what we admire in the world and look at .
so we &apos;ve decided to get tony -- tempt -- and to support his cause .
i met with his father and his brother and said , &quot; we &apos;ll give you this money .
what are you going to do with this ? &quot;
and his brother said , &quot; i &apos;m just going to talk to tony again .
i just want to go back to him and i said , &quot; wait a minute , i don &apos;t -- i &apos;ve seen stephen hawking -- can &apos;t communicate all the people through these devices ? &quot;
and he said , &quot; no , only if you &apos;ve heard about the higher gesellschaftsschicht and a remarkable insurance , you can really do that .
normal people are not available . &quot;
and i said , &quot; how does it communicate ? &quot;
did anybody see the movie &quot; and &quot; schmetterling &quot; ?
so they communicate -- so they walk along .
i &apos;m like , &quot; very archaisch , how can that be ? &quot;
so i came with the need , just just a check , and instead i put a check out of which i had not the leiseste idea of how i should be einlösen it .
i &apos;m going to take place to the place and i &apos;m going to take a place to his brother and his dad , &quot; well , my suggestion is : tony &apos;s going to talk , we &apos;ll get a machine , and we &apos;ll find a way to make his art again .
because it &apos;s a farce that someone who &apos;s still wearing it &apos;s not communicate . &quot;
so i spoke a few months later .
i met these guys from grl , and i had a graffiti research lab , and they have a technology that allows them to project a light on any surface and then draw a laserpointer on it that &apos;s just registriert the negative surface .
so they &apos;re moving to the way , and they &apos;re doing kunstinstallationen like this .
they say that all things that are going up there is a life cycle .
it starts with the geschlechtsteilen , then the schimpfwörter , then the bush-verleumdungen and the final , people actually do art .
but there was always a life cycle in your presentation .
so i went home and i had dinner with my wife and i was told her , and we thought , &quot; well , second , for example , if there &apos;s this technology that you can use your eyes to control things , then we should find a way that tempt can control a laser , so he can do a graffiti , that it would be awesome .
that was the beginning of the journey .
and about two years later , about a year later , a lot of organization and a lot of things , and things , we &apos;ve done some things .
one , we have the doors the doors for the doors , and actually , for a tempt machine , we could get a device that he can communicate with -- a stephen hawking-maschine .
it was incredible .
and he &apos;s really extremely funny -- i call it yoda , because you talk to him , or you get an email , and you think , &quot; i &apos;m so unwürdig , this guy is incredible . &quot;
also , we have seven programmers from the world -- literally , all of the corners of the world -- to us home .
my wife , my children and i pulled into the garage , and this hacker and programmers and verschwörungstheoretiker and anarchisten have taken our house .
many of our friends thought we were beautiful stupid to do that and that we zurückkämen and all the images on the walls were graffitis gewichen .
but for about two weeks , we have programmed , we went to the strandpromenade in venice , my children were involved , my dog also , and we created this .
it &apos;s called eyewriter , and you can see the description .
this is a cheap sonnenbrille that we bought in the strandpromenade of the venice , something kupferdraht , and some things from the baumarkt and the elektronikhandel .
we took a ps3-kamera , and we put them on a led-licht , and now we have a device that &apos;s available for -- you can build it yourself , we can make the code for free , the software can be free .
so we &apos;ve created a device that &apos;s completely freely from constraints .
no insurance can querstellen .
no hospital .
now , everybody &apos;s gelähmte can actually communicate with his eyes , or draw .
thank you .
thank you very much .
so at the end of the two weeks , we went back into tempts room .
i love this picture because it &apos;s the room of somebody else , and that &apos;s his room .
now , there &apos;s all this rummel in front of the great revelation .
and after about a year of planning , two weeks of programmierarbeit , nudelparties and durchgemachten nights , tony zeichnete for the first time after seven years .
and this is an amazing picture , because this is his life support system , and he &apos;s looking out of his life support system .
we &apos;ve stopped his bed so he can see outside .
we put a projektor on a wall of the parkplatztes .
and he drew back to the first time , in the beisein of his family and friends -- and you can only imagine what a feeling that was in the parking lot .
we had to also have a lot of lustigerweise in the parking lot , so we felt as a part of the sprüher-szene .
and then , by the end , he sent an email with the content : &quot; for the first time , i &apos;ve drawn something .
i feel like i was held under water , and finally someone gegriffen down and my head is raised so i can breathe .
isn &apos;t that overwhelming ?
that &apos;s something like our kampfschrei .
that &apos;s keeping us on the shelf and keep us going on .
and we need to improve a lot of this device .
it &apos;s an amazing device , but it &apos;s coming in a zaubertafel .
and someone who has such a künstlerisches potential , it deserves so much more .
so we &apos;re finding out how to make it better , faster and stronger .
since that time , we &apos;ve got all kinds of recognition .
we won some awards .
remember it &apos;s free , none of us deserve .
it &apos;s all from our own pockets .
so the auszeichnungen were , &quot; oh , that &apos;s fantastic . &quot;
armstrong twitterte and then , in december , we honored the time-magazine , as one of the 50 best inventions in 2010 , which was really great .
the coolste of it -- and that includes the whole circle -- that this april , when the geffen moca in downtown los angeles , a exhibition will be put in the downtown of the streets .
and there &apos;s probably the most toughest vertreter of the straßenkunstszene to the straßenkunstszene -- banksy , shepard fairey , caws -- all these guys are going to be there .
tempt will be part of the show , which is quite abgefahren .
so basically , i &apos;m about this : if you see something that &apos;s impossible , you can do it .
everything in this room was impossible -- this stage , this computer , this microphone , the eyewriter -- everything was impossible .
make it possible -- you all here .
i &apos;m not a programmer , and i never had anything to do with augenerfassungstechnologie , but i just got it to something and i &apos;ve been around with amazing people so we could put something together .
and this question is , every single day you want to do , and that &apos;s a little day where you have something that needs to do , and if not now when then ? and when i don &apos;t , who ?
thank you .
so i write for children , and i &apos;m probably most of america &apos;s most gelesener .
and i &apos;m always saying people always , i don &apos;t want to come like a scientist .
you can have a farmer , or in leather , but nobody has ever chosen a farmer .
i &apos;d like to tell you about circles and offenbarungen .
well , a enlightenment is usually something you find out because you have dropped it somewhere .
you go to the block and take it a revelation .
this is a painting of a circle .
one of my friends made it -- richard bollingbroke .
it &apos;s the kind of complicated circle that i &apos;m going to tell you about today .
my circle at the time in the &apos; 60s was at high school in stow , ohio , where i was the klassenschwuchtel .
i was the one that was grün every week in the jungentoilette green and blue until a teacher saved my life .
she saved my life by using the toilet in the lehrerzimmer .
it &apos;s actually heimlich her .
she did it for three years .
and i had to go from the city .
i had a thumb , i had 85 dollars , and it struck me to san francisco in california -- i found a lover -- and then in the &apos; 80s i found it a work on aids-organisationen record .
about three or four years ago , i got a call from this teacher , woman who said , &quot; i have to see you .
i &apos;m sad that we never know each other as adults .
you can go to ohio , and please come together with the guy who i know you &apos;ve found it .
and i should say that i &apos;ve got a bauspeicheldrüsenkrebs , and i want you to go and get a ride . &quot;
well , the next day we were in cleveland .
we looked at them , we laughed , we cried , and we knew they had to be in a hospiz .
we found one for them , we took them , and we took us to them , and we gave them eight , because it needed to be eight .
it was something we knew .
and as the woman who had to know me as adults , i met to know , she turned into a box of asche and got put into my hands .
what happened was that the circle had closed , it was a circle -- and the revelation i spoke to it .
the revelation is , the death is a part of life .
she has saved my life , and my partner and i saved her .
and you know , this part of life needs everything that needs the rest of life .
he takes truth and beauty , and i &apos;m so glad that this is so often mentioned .
it takes the same -- it &apos;s going to need , love and pleasure , and it &apos;s to be able to give these things .
thank you .
imagine a big explosion in the way you go up on 1,000 feet .
you know a plane full of smoke .
imagine a triebwerk that klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack .
that sounds fear .
now , i had a unique place on this day , i was sitting on 1d .
i was the only one who could speak to the flugbegleitern .
so i looked at them right , and they said , &quot; no problem , we &apos;ve probably caught some birds . &quot;
the pilot had the machine , and we weren &apos;t so far away .
you could see manhattan .
two minutes later , three things happened at the same time .
the pilot &apos;s got the machine out of the hudson river .
that &apos;s not usually the route .
it turns off the triebwerke .
you &apos;ll imagine an geräuschloses airplane .
and then he said three words -- the emotionslosesten words i &apos;ve ever heard .
he says , &quot; bereitmachen for the aufprall . &quot;
i had to talk to the bordpersonal .
i could see it in her eyes , because it was horror , life was at the end .
i want to share with you three things that i &apos;ve learned from that day .
i learned that in a moment , everything is different .
we have these lebensplan , we have these things that we want to do in life , and i thought about all the people i wanted to reach a hand and not act , all the fences i wanted to do , all the experience i wanted to do .
and while i was thinking about it , a phrase , which is , &quot; i &apos;m not collecting bad wine . &quot;
because if the wine is there and the person is there , i open it .
i &apos;m never going to move anything in life .
and that urgency , this goal , has really changed my life .
the second thing i learned about this day -- and that was when we verfehlten george washington bridge , so pretty much about haaresbreite -- there i thought , human , there &apos;s one thing that i really am .
i had a good life .
in my own humanity , and with my mistakes , i strebte to become better at all the things i &apos;m doing .
but in my humanity , i gave my ego to my ego .
and i &apos;m bedauerte the time i wasted the dinge thing for bedeutungslose things , with people who mean something .
and i thought about the relationship with my wife , friends , to people .
and then , when i was thinking about it , i decided to ban negative energy from my life .
it &apos;s not perfect , but it &apos;s much better .
i didn &apos;t get to my wife &apos;s wife .
it feels great .
i &apos;m not trying to have anymore , right ; i &apos;m going to be happy to be happy .
the third thing i learned , and while the internal clock is , &quot; 15 , 14 , 13 , ... &quot;
you see the water .
i said , &quot; please flieg in the air . &quot;
i don &apos;t want this thing to do in 20 parts , how you know it from a dokumentationen .
while we were abstürzen , i had this feeling , human being , to die , is not scary .
almost like we prepare for our lives for a long time .
but it was very sad .
i didn &apos;t want to go ; i love my life .
and those sadness really , really , in a thought , which is that i &apos;d just wish for one thing .
i just wish i could grow my children up .
about a month after i went to a auftritt &apos;s party -- erstklässler , not a lot of künstlerisches talent .
not yet .
and i &apos;m feiere , i &apos;m like a little kid .
and in the world , everything made a sense of me .
i realized then by connecting the dots to each other , that it &apos;s a great father in life .
more than anything , everything else , my one is to be a good goal in life .
i was going to have the wonder of dying in this day .
i got one of the gift , which is to see the future and go back and live in the future .
my call to all of you today is , imagine the same thing on your flight -- please don &apos;t -- but imagine it , and how would you change ?
what would you do it , which you put it in , because you think it &apos;s always there for you ?
how would you change your relationships and the negative energy in it ?
and more than anything else , are they the best parents that they can only be ?
thank you .
the idea behind the stuxnet computer-wurm is quite simple .
we don &apos;t want iran to build bomb .
the most important post for the development of nuclear weapons is the uran-anreicherungs-einrichtung in natanz .
the gray boxes you see here are echtzeit-kontrollsysteme .
now , if we can now to kompromittieren systems , which control the drehzahlen and the valves , then we can actually create a lot of problems with the oil .
these grauen boxes are not running with windows-software ; they &apos;re based on a completely different technology .
but if we do it , an effective windows-virus on a laptop einnistet uses it &apos;s used by a wartungsingenieur , to put this gray box , we &apos;re in business .
and that &apos;s the planning behind .
so we start with a windows-dropper .
the nutzdaten are going to go into the gray box , and the zentrifuge and the iranian kernenergie-programm verzögert on -- mission .
that &apos;s a piece of kinderspiel , right ?
i want to tell you how we found that .
when we started stuxnet our research six months ago , it was completely unknown , which was the sense of the purpose of this konstrukts .
the only thing we knew is very , very complicated , which is the most windows- part , the dropper- part , and he made unzähligen day- &apos;s schwachstellen .
and it seemed to be a little bit of vorzuhaben , with these grauen boxes , this echtzeit- kontrollsystemen .
and the erregte our attention and we began a project project where we infected our environment with stuxnet , and we looked at this .
and then something weird happened .
stuxnet was just like a laborratte that doesn &apos;t like our cheese -- schnüffelte , but didn &apos;t want to eat it .
that made no sense in my eyes .
and after we &apos;ve been experimenting with various kinds of cheese , i was going to be an gezielter attack .
completely , on a particular goal .
the dropper streift , aktiv , aktiv on the gray box , when a special configuration was discovered , even if the special program that &apos;s going to do on this goal .
and if not , it &apos;s not doing anything .
so , that really got my interest , and we started working with this , almost around the clock , because i thought , well , we don &apos;t know what the goal is .
it could say , for example , an us- american power station , or a chemieanlage in germany .
so , we should better find out what the goal is .
so , extrahierten and dekompilierten the code code and we found that it &apos;s a two digital sprengköpfe -- a smaller one and a larger one .
and we also noticed that they were very professional constructed by people who obviously had all the information information available .
they knew all kinds of bits and bytes that they had to attack .
you know , you know , even the schuhgröße of the maschinenbedieners .
so they knew everything .
and if you &apos;ve already noticed that the dropper of stuxnet complex and high-tech , let me tell you , the nutzdaten are a science for you .
it &apos;s much more difficult than anything we &apos;ve ever seen .
here &apos;s a clip from this angriffs- code .
we &apos;re talking about here -- about 15,000 lines of code .
looks pretty much like this is the altmodische assemblersprache .
and i want to tell you how we &apos;re able to become smart in the situation .
so , after the first thing we looked for , we were systemfunktions- aufrufe , because we know what that cause .
and then we looked for timern and datenstrukturen and tried to connect to the real world -- with potential goals in the real world .
so we needed theories about these goals that we could demonstrate or widerlegen .
so to remember these theories , we will remember that it &apos;s definitely hochgradige sabotage , it has to be a very hochwertiges goal , and it &apos;s very likely to be in iran , because most of the infections were reported .
now , in this area there &apos;s not several thousand goals .
basically , it &apos;s going out to the buschehr , and on the urananreicherungsanlage .
so i said to my assistant , &quot; i &apos;m going to bring me a list of all the experts on zentrifugen and kraftwerke and kraftwerke . &quot;
and i called her to and i call her knowledge to compare her to the expertise , what we found in the code and in the data .
and that worked very well .
so , it was possible to connect the little digital sprengkopf with the rotorsteuerung .
the second is that &apos;s moving part of the ice , this black object that you see .
and when you &apos;re manipulated the speed of this rotors , you actually , in the able to crack the ball of the bottom line , and then even let the zentrifuge explode .
and what we found out is that the goal of the attack was actually slowly and incredibly , slowly and incredibly , very much , to make wartungsingenieure verzweifeln , so they couldn &apos;t be able to get to the very quickly .
the big digital sprengkopf -- we got a insight by looking at the data and datenstrukturen .
so for example , the number 164 is very sticht from this code ; you can &apos;t miss it .
i began to durchzuarbeiten scientific literature on it , and it was like these zentrifugen built in natanz , and found that they &apos;re strukturiert in so-called kaskaden , and every kaskade contains 164 zentrifugen .
so that made sense , it made .
and it &apos;s been better .
these zentrifugen in iran are aufgeteilt in 15 so-called levels .
and guess what we found in the angriffscode ?
an almost identical structure .
so again , that &apos;s what they do .
and this gave us a lot of confidence for that we looked at this .
now , don &apos;t understand me wrong , that didn &apos;t just go .
these results have been achieved by several weeks of hard work .
and often we just ran into a sackgasse and we had to collect .
anyway , we found that both digital sprengköpfe are actually on one and the same goal , but from different directions .
the little sprengkopf takes a kaskade , and it &apos;s überdreht the rotoren and it slowed it down and the large sprengkopf tritt with six kaskaden in interaction and manipulated .
so , in large and all , we &apos;re very confident that we actually have determines what the goal is .
it &apos;s natanz , and it &apos;s just natanz .
so we don &apos;t have to worry that other goals could be hit by stuxnet .
here &apos;s something really cool stuff that we &apos;ve discovered -- it &apos;s really gehauen me .
there &apos;s the gray box down there , and you see on top of it , you see the zentrifugen .
now what this thing is , it &apos;s abfängt the eingehenden values of sensors -- so for example , von and vibrationssensoren -- and it &apos;s stellt code that &apos;s still on the attack , with the wrong eingehenden data .
and in fact , this falschen is recorded from stuxnet earlier .
so it &apos;s just like in hollywoodfilmen , where the verfolgungsjagd is fed the überwachungskamera überwachungskamera , the überwachungskamera of the vorher .
that &apos;s cool , right ?
and the idea here is obviously not only the maschinenbediener of the control room .
in fact , it &apos;s much more dangerous and more .
the idea is to überlisten a digital sicherheitssystem .
we need digital sicherheitssysteme where a human maschinenbediener can &apos;t respond fast enough .
so , in a power station , for example , if the big dampfturbine is rapidly fast , you need to open up entlastungsventile in scratch .
of course , this can &apos;t be done by a human maschinenführer .
so , in this place , we need digital sicherheitssysteme .
and when the danger are , you can see really bad things .
the power station can explode .
and neither the maschinenführer , nor the sicherheitssystem will notice .
that &apos;s scary .
but it &apos;s going to worse .
and what i &apos;m saying now is very important .
think about it . this attack is generisch .
he doesn &apos;t have anything to do with zentrifugen , with urananreicherung .
so for example , he would work exactly this -- in a power station or in a automobilfabrik .
it &apos;s generisch .
and you don &apos;t have to -- as the angreifer -- you don &apos;t have to put the nutzdaten on a usb- stick , as we saw it in stuxnet .
you could also use ordinary wurm- technology .
you just have to spread it as far as possible .
and if you do that , you end up getting a cyber- massenvernichtungswaffe .
that &apos;s the consequence we need to ask .
so unfortunately , the biggest number of goals for goals is not in the middle east .
they &apos;re in the united states , in europe and japan .
so all these green areas are the most zielreichsten environments .
we have to think the consequences and we &apos;re getting better ready to prepare .
thank you .
i have a question .
ralph , it &apos;s been very much covered that people assume that the mossad is the hauptorganisation .
is that also your opinion ?
okay , you want to know this ?
yes . okay .
i think it &apos;s involved in the world &apos;s mossad , but the driving force is not israel .
so the driving force is the most cyber- superpower .
there &apos;s only one and that &apos;s the united states -- fortunately , happiness .
because otherwise our problem would be even bigger .
thank you for a heidenangst eingejagt . thank you , i &apos;m ralph .
i &apos;ve spent the last few years to place myself in situations that normally are very difficult and at the same time .
i went to prison -- hard .
i worked in a kohlebergwerk -- dangerous .
i filmed in kriegsgebieten -- hard and dangerous .
and i spent 30 days spent nothing to eat here -- spaßig , in the beginning , a little bit hard in the middle , very dangerous at the end .
in fact , i have been exposed to the biggest part of my career in fürchterlichen situations , and it &apos;s all just trying to study social in the way that they &apos;re compelling and interesting , and hopefully in a way of understanding what it makes for the audience and accessible .
so when i knew that i would come here to look at this in a tedtalk , and look at the world of branding and sponsoring , i knew i would do something slightly different .
some of you may have heard that i had been taking an ad on ebay a couple of weeks ago .
i &apos;d like to go through some facebook-nachrichten , some twitter-nachrichten , and i gave people the opportunity to erstehen the namensrechte on my tedtalk 2011 .
really , some happy people and companies , for-profit and non-profit , got the unique opportunity -- because i &apos;m sure chris anderson never will let that will never let -- the namensrechte of the talk you just see at the time that she didn &apos;t have a title , and there was a lot of content , and not a lot of evidence about what the subject was going
so what you got to do is : your name is : my tedtalk , you know , from which you have no idea what &apos;s going to be the subject , and the one you ever have to fly to the content to fly the ears , especially if i was making her company stupid .
but apart from that , it &apos;s a very good kind of mediale opportunity .
you know how many people look at these tedtalks ?
a whole lot .
this is just the arbeitstitel .
so despite this warning , i knew anybody would buy the namensrechte .
if you had asked me this one year ago , i would not have been able to say that to you .
but in the new project i work on , my new film , we &apos;re studying the world of marketing , the advertising .
as i said , i &apos;ve been going to have some pretty terrible situations over the years of some time , but nothing could prepare for me , nothing could be able to get me to do something that was so hard and dangerous as i could go into a room with these guys .
you know , i had the idea for a movie .
what i want to do is a film about product placement , marketing and advertising , which is funded by the entire film to be funded by product placement , marketing and advertising .
and the movie will be called &quot; the greatest movie ever . &quot;
so what happens in &quot; the greatest movie ever &quot; is that everything from above to the bottom , from the beginning to the end , completely versehen with brands -- the titelsponsor you see in the movie , that &apos;s the brand x. , that &apos;s the brand .
now this brand , the qualcomm stadion , the staples center .
these people are being connected to the movie in eternity -- forever .
and so the movie will look at this whole idea -- this is what ? in eternity , for forever ?
i &apos;m a redundante person .
that was more of the emphasis .
it was &quot; in eternity , forever . &quot;
but we &apos;re not only going to have the brand x as a titelsponsor , but we &apos;ll be sure that we will be selling any possible category in the movie .
so we might sell a shoe , and it &apos;s going to be the greatest shoe you &apos;ve ever carried .
the most powerful car you &apos;ve ever made from &quot; the greatest movie ever sold &quot; the greatest drink you &apos;ve ever had , a attention from &quot; the greatest movie ever . &quot;
so the idea is , besides showing that brands are part of life , actually to make them to fund the movie ?
and we &apos;re actually showing the whole process of how it works .
the goal of the entire film is transparency .
you &apos;ll see the whole thing in the movie of the movie .
so this is the whole concept , the whole movie , from beginning to end .
and i would look forward if i &apos;d help ceg to do this .
you know , it &apos;s funny , because when i heard it first , it &apos;s the ultimate respect for the audience .
i don &apos;t know how people will be .
have a perspective -- i don &apos;t want to use perspective , because that has a negative konnotation -- but you know how to do that ?
how much money is needed to do this ?
1.5 million .
i think it &apos;s hard to meet you , but i think it &apos;s worth the case of what &apos;s really known to be a little bit known .
who knows when the movie comes out , we might see a horde vollidioten .
what do you think the answer is going to be ?
the answer is absolutely likely to be no .
but is it a difficult thing about the film or a difficult thing about me ?
nm : both .
so , it means not so optimistic .
so , my gentleman , can you help me ? i need help .
i can help .
okay .
fantastic .
we need to think about what brands .
yeah .
when you look at the people who they have to do it .
there are some places we can apply to .
put the camera out .
i thought , &quot; imagine the camera , &quot; would mean that we wanted to lead a hintergrundgespräch .
it turns out that it was actually meant , &quot; we want to do nothing with your movie . &quot;
and so , all these companies disappeared , one after the other .
no one wanted to do something about the movie .
i was amazed .
they wanted to do absolutely nothing with the project .
and i was confused , because i thought the whole concept , the idea of advertising is to present your product as many people as possible as possible , as many people as possible .
especially in the world today , at this intersection of new and old media and the media media media -- it &apos;s not the idea of being in this new exciting vermittlungsinstrument , that the masses is getting this message .
no , that was what i thought .
but look , the problem was that my idea had a fatalen error , and that was the following .
actually , no , that was not the mistake .
that would be no problem at all .
that would be okay .
but what this picture is , is a problem .
and look at transparency , if you &apos;re in the google-suche , is -- this is one of the first images that seems to be .
i really like your kind , sergey sergey . now .
this was the problem : transparency -- frei from deception and tücke , just to explore and durchschauen , and it &apos;s charakterisiert , and charakterisiert , and access to information , especially , in terms of information , especially , in terms of geschäftspraktiken -- the last line is certainly the biggest problem .
you know , we &apos;re listening to a whole lot of transparency .
our politicians say it , our president says it , even our ceos say it .
but when it comes to the extent that it &apos;s going to be done , something changed .
but why ? well transparency is fear of einflößend -- like this strange bear that &apos;s still brüllt .
it &apos;s unvorhersagbar -- like this strange landstraße .
and she &apos;s also very risky .
what else is risky ?
a whole bottle of cool food .
this is very risky .
so when i started talking to the companies and tell them that we wanted to tell this story , they said , &quot; no , we want you to tell a story .
we want you to tell a story , but we just want you to tell our story . &quot;
you see , when i was a kid , and my dad caught me in the lie -- and he &apos;s sitting and looking at this view -- he would say , &quot; my son , there &apos;s three versions of each story .
there &apos;s your version , there &apos;s my version , and there &apos;s the real version . &quot;
so , you see , with this film , we wanted to tell the real version .
but there &apos;s only one company , an agency , a agentur , is ready to help us -- and it &apos;s only because i know john bond and richard kirshenbaum for years -- i found that i needed to do it alone , and i had to go around the mittelsmann and go directly with my team to companies .
so what you suddenly began to understand -- or what i began to understand -- was that when you start talking to these companies , the idea of how your brand is understood , a very umfassendes problem .
i have friends , the big , giant hollywood-filme , and i have friends , who are doing small independent-filme like i do .
and my friends , the big , giant hollywood-filme , say that the reason your films are so successful , the markenpartnern they have .
and then my friends say , the little independent-filme , &quot; well , how are we going to compete with these big giant giant companies ? &quot;
and the movie is called &quot; the greatest movie ever . &quot;
so how exactly are we going to see in the movie ?
whenever i make my way , and whenever i open the medizinschrank , you &apos;ll see ban deodorant .
and every time i interviewe somebody , i can say , &quot; are you fresh enough for this interview ?
are they so far ? you see a little bit nervous .
i want to help you calm down .
so maybe you should be a little bit of this guy in front of the interview . &quot;
and then we have to offer one of these great düfte .
either &quot; floral fusion &quot; or a &quot; paradise winds , &quot; you &apos;ll have the election .
we will be empowered for men and for women -- fest , roll-on , or a stick , whatever .
that &apos;s the kurzfassung .
now i can answer all of your questions and give you an ausfühliche .
we &apos;re a smaller brand .
as you &apos;ve talked about the smaller movies , we &apos;re a herausforderer .
so we don &apos;t have a budget like the other brands .
so , you know , these things -- you know , reminds people of the ban -- that &apos;s kind of why we &apos;re interested .
in which words would you describe to describe ?
ban is blank .
that &apos;s a great question .
woman &apos;s technology .
technology is not the way you should describe something that &apos;s going to do under the achseln .
we speak of kühn , fresh .
i think , &quot; well , &quot; i think , &quot; well , &quot; is a great word that this category is really going to be a little positive , as opposed to &quot; bekämpft odor and humidity . &quot;
it &apos;s keeping you fresh .
how can we keep them longer -- better fresh fresh , more fresh , three times .
these things have an positivere effect .
and that &apos;s a millionen-konzern .
what about me ? what about the druchschittstypen ?
i have to talk to the guy on the street that &apos;s like me , otto-normal-verbraucher .
you should tell me something about my brand .
how would you describe your brand ?
hmmm , my brand ?
i don &apos;t know .
i like beautiful clothes like beautiful clothes .
woman : &apos; 80s trifft trifft on skaterpunk , except at the waschtag .
well , what &apos;s the brand ?
unique .
i think the genre , the style i &apos;ve got , is probably &quot; dark glamour . &quot;
i like a lot of black colors , a lot of grautöne and so on .
but normally i have a accessoire , like sonnenbrillen , or a jewelry and a kind of a zeugs .
if dan would be a brand , he would probably be a classic mercedes .
man 2 : the brand i &apos;m is , i would say , lässige fly .
woman 2 : partly , part of it , partly , in part of the country -- i don &apos;t know .
man 3 : i &apos;m the schmusetyp .
i &apos;m selling schmusetiere all around the country .
so i think that &apos;s my brand .
this is my brand in my little verzerrten industry .
the mann 4 : my brand is to be , because i was ausliefere .
man 5 : brand gescheiteter alkoholsüchtiger .
is that ?
lawyer : i &apos;m a anwaltsmarke .
i &apos;m tom .
now , we can &apos;t all be the tom-marke , but i often see the interface of dark glamour and lässiger fly .
and what happened was i needed an expert .
i needed someone who could go into my head , someone who really could help me understand what you call the &quot; markenpersönlichkeit . &quot;
and so i found a company called olson zaltman in pittsburg .
they have companies like nestle , febreze , hallmark , to find these markenpersönlichkeit .
if they could do it for the , they could also help me .
they brought their pictures , yes ?
i have this . the first picture is a picture of my family .
tell me a little bit about how that is connected to your thoughts and feelings about it .
these are the people who are making my worldview .
tell me about this world .
md : this world , i think the world is the world you live in -- like people around you , the friends , the family , the way you live life , the work and the way .
all these things come and start from a place and come to me and start with my family in west virginia .
what &apos;s the next thing you want to talk about .
the next . this was the most beautiful day of my life .
what context is that to the mind and feelings of you ?
it &apos;s like i &apos;d like to be .
i like things that are different .
i like things that are weird . i like strange things .
tell me about the &quot; why &quot; -phase -- what does it mean ?
what &apos;s the machete ? what are the puppenstadium in which puppenstadium are you ?
why is it important , neuzustarten ? what is the red ?
tell me a little bit about this part .
a little bit more about you , that &apos;s not you .
what else did they go through ?
and ... that &apos;s not a fear of being scared . what kind of achterbahn are you ?
eeeeee ! no , thank you .
thank you for your patience .
yes . well .
yeah , i don &apos;t know what &apos;s going to be coming out of it .
there &apos;s a lot of crazy things going on .
the first thing i saw was this idea that their markenpersönlichekti were two separate , but it &apos;s ergänzende pages -- the morgan spurlock-marke is a achtsame / verspielte brand .
the ergänzen is very good .
and i think there &apos;s almost a contradiction .
and i think some companies are only focusing on a strength , rather than both .
many companies tend to -- and that &apos;s the human nature to avoid things where they &apos;re not sure , they &apos;re afraid to avoid these elements , and they welcome to that welcome , and they turn them into something that &apos;s a geschickter , and that &apos;s a geschickter schachzug .
what other brands do ?
the first one is a classic , apple .
and you can see it here , target , target , wii , mini of the mini and jetblue .
now , there &apos;s verspielte brands and brands brands , these things that come and go , but a verspielte , achtsame brand is a fairly strong thing .
a achtsame , verspielte brand . how is your brand ?
if someone would ask them to describe their markenidentität , their markenpersönlichkeit , how would they be ?
you &apos;re a up-attribut ? are you something that &apos;s going to bring blood in wallungen ?
or are they more like a down-attribut ?
are you something that &apos;s a little bit more quiet , reservierter , more conservative ?
up-attribute are things that are playful , fresh like the fresh prince , zeitgemäß , abenteuerlich , ausgefallen , ausgefallen and lieblich like erol flynn , agile and agile , profan , herrisch , magisch and mystisch .
or are they more like a down-attribut ?
are they achtsam and mondän like 007 ?
are they established , traditionell , pflegend , beschützend , compassionate , compassionate .
is it verlässlich , stable , familiär , safe , geborgen , holy , bedacht , and the way the dalai lama or yoda ?
in the course of the film , we had more than 500 companies that were up and down-firmen and the no , &quot; no , &quot; they were going to be part of the project .
they wanted to do nothing with this film , because they don &apos;t have control , no control over the finished product .
but what &apos;s been willing to do with 17 markenpartner who were willing to give up these control that were going to do with a lot of businesses , and i think , and i finally told the story that we would normally have never had to tell -- stories that never would be a werber of a werber .
they befähigten us to tell us the story of the neuromarketing , so we tell the story in this film that you use mris nowadays to make the lustzentren of the brain , both to make an advertising and movies .
we were all headed to sao paulo where außenwerbung is banned .
in the entire city , there &apos;s no anzeigentafel , no poster , no flyer , no one .
and we drove in school in school where companies are able to make their path in an verarmte schools , in all of america .
the incredible thing for me is that the projects that i got most of the feedback or where i had the greatest success , those are where i &apos;m going to do directly with things .
and that &apos;s what these brands have done .
because they were umgingen the mittelsmann , they umgingen the agencies , and they said that the agencies might not really have their interest in mind .
i &apos;m going to negotiate with the artist .
i &apos;m going to work with him and create something completely different , something that people will think of the way that we think our view are challenges .
and how did it be for you ? what do it ?
now , since the movie film , film , we could see that , we can see that .
loud burrelles was the premiere on january , and since -- and this is not even the whole thing -- there was 900 million aufrufe of this film .
it &apos;s actually just a time of two one in two weeks .
this is just online -- no press , no television .
the film was not going to be yet .
there &apos;s not even online . no streaming .
he &apos;s not coming out in other countries .
well , finally , the film has a very large momentum .
and that &apos;s not bad for a project , where almost every single school of the werbeagentur , where we talked to , their customer , is to make the fingers .
something i &apos;m very sure is that when you take your chance to take risks , taking risks , that we are in these risks .
i think , if you prevent people from that , you &apos;re going to get closer to the failure .
i think that if you train your employees to avoid risks , you prepared to get a profit in the whole company .
i feel that we have to encourage people to take risks .
we need to encourage people to have a fear of having a fear of the possibility that they might be verängstigen .
finally , in the process , we should welcome the fear .
we should put the bear in the cage .
they &apos;re saying that fear of the fear is welcome .
a big löffel , so we &apos;re going to welcome the risk .
and finally , we should welcome transparency .
nowadays , more than ever before , a little honesty brings us very far .
and that said , honesty and transparency , my whole talk &quot; &quot; heißen &quot; you &quot; was to welcome transparency , &quot; which was to show you from my good friends of emc , who paid $ 7100 for the namensrechte for ebay .
big data will be transformed for organizations around the world .
emc presents &quot; &quot; heißen &quot;
thank you .
now , morgan , in the name of transparency , this is what &apos;s going on with the $ of 7100 .
that &apos;s a great question .
i have a check in my pocket , put on the oberorganisation of the ted-organisation , the sapling-stiftung -- a check in altitude of dollars to fund my next year in the next year .
my name is amit .
18 months ago i made something different in google , and i was regte to do something with museums and art . my chefin , which is also , was green light .
and it took 18 months .
a lot of spaßiger and stories , i can tell you , with 17 , very interesting museums in nine countries .
but i &apos;m going to focus on the demo .
there &apos;s a lot of stories about why we &apos;ve done this .
i think my personal perspective is very simple with this slide and its access to it .
i grew up in india .
i was a great education -- i didn &apos;t -- but i had a lot of museums and this art works .
and when i went to go to visit these museums , i started to learn a lot .
and while i worked for google , i tried to make this desire to do more -- to make art more accessible -- to bring technology together .
we then formed a team , a great team , and we started with this .
i &apos;m going to start to show the demonstration , and i &apos;ll tell you some interesting things that happened since the start .
so you &apos;re just going to go to googleartproject.com. .
you can look around in all these museums .
there &apos;s the uffizi , moma , the hermitage , the rijks , the van gogh .
i actually come in one of my favorite , the metropolitan museum of art in new york .
you get in two ways to go in -- very simple .
click , and wumms , is in the museum .
it doesn &apos;t matter where they are -- bombay , mexico , it doesn &apos;t make any difference .
you go around and you &apos;re amüsiert .
they want to go to the museum ?
open the map , and jump with a click .
in the way , they &apos;re going to go to the end of the gang .
just on . a lot of fun .
look at them .
thank you , but the best one is coming .
so i &apos;m in front of a lieblingsbilder erntearbeiter , erntearbeiter breugel in the met .
i see this pluszeichen .
when the museum gave us the picture , you click on it .
now this is one of the images .
this is all the metadaten .
those of you who are really interested in art , can you click here -- but i &apos;ll click it off .
this is one of the images we &apos;ve recorded with the so-called gigapixel-technologie .
so , for example , this picture has about 10 billion bildpunkte , i think .
and a lot of people ask me , &quot; what do you get to do 10 billion ? &quot;
i &apos;m going to show you that .
you can easily in and rauszoomen .
you see something fun here .
i love this guy ; his expression is unbezahlbar .
but then you really want to go deep .
and so i started playing around , and i found that there is something happening .
and i thought , &quot; wait a minute , that sounds interesting . &quot;
i went close to the very , and i started to see that these kids actually beat something .
i did a little forschte , i spoke with some familiar with the met , and actually , it turns out that it &apos;s a game called squail , which is a gans a gans gans with a stick .
it seems to be popular .
i don &apos;t know why they did it , but i learned something about it .
to go close to the really close , you can go to the cracks .
just to give you the überblick , i &apos;m going to show you what you get .
here we were , and this is the painting .
the best one is coming out , but in a second .
let &apos;s jump to moma quickly , again in new york .
another lieblingsbild of me .
the previous example , it &apos;s about finding detail .
but what if you want to see the pinselstriche ?
and what &apos;s only when you want to see how van gogh is creating this thing ?
you put in . you can really go inside .
i &apos;m going to zoom in one of my favorite computer imaging , until i really am in the part .
this is sternennacht , probably never seen before .
now i &apos;m going to show you my favorite function .
there &apos;s many more , but i don &apos;t have time .
this is the really cool part , it &apos;s called the collections .
each of them , everybody -- the same thing you have or poor , whether you have a great house -- doesn &apos;t matter .
you can go and create your own museum , from all these images , can you put your own collection .
just easy , you go in -- and i created this , it &apos;s called the power of the zoom -- you can umherzoomen .
this is the gesandten , in the nationalgallerie .
you can put everything on the anmerkungen , send your friends , and so a conversation start about what you feel when you look at these meisterwerke .
i think conclude , for me , is the main thing that all the wonderful things don &apos;t come from google .
you don &apos;t even come from the museums .
i should not say that .
they come from artists .
and that was an experience in humility to me .
i mean , i hope we &apos;re going to just just like this digital medium of art , and you &apos;re ordentlich online .
and the biggest question that i &apos;m asked to do is , &quot; did you do this to replicate the experience of a museumsbesuchs ? &quot;
the answer is no .
it &apos;s supposed to add up .
that &apos;s why . thank you .
thank you .
this is a representation of your brain . your brain can be split in two .
this is the left half , which is the logical side , and then the right half the one is the intuitive .
if we had a scale to measure the aptitute of every single hemisphere , we could be in the brain .
for example , this one would be the complete logical .
this is somebody who &apos;s completely intuitive .
now , where would you actually take your brain on this scale ?
some of us may have chosen to one of those extremes , but i think most people in the audience , their brain looks like this -- with a high aptitute , which is in both hemisphären .
it &apos;s not as if they &apos;re both of the exklusiv or something like that .
you can be logical and intuitive .
and so i see myself as one of the people , in common with the most other experimental quantenphysikern , which need a good percentage of logic to add complex ideas together .
but at the same time , we need a good percentage of intuition to do the experiments .
how do we develop this intuition ? well , we love to play things with things .
so we go out and play with it , and then look like it reacting , and then we start to develop our intuition .
basically , they do the same thing .
so one of the intuitionen that you evolved over the years is probably , that one thing can only be in a place at the same time .
i mean , it may seem strange to think that a thing at the same time is at the same time in two different places , but they didn &apos;t even have the idea , they developed .
i remember looking at a child at a bodenschwelle .
he was a kleinkind and not very good at it , and he &apos;s constantly going .
but i bet that it was a very valuable lesson with the bodenschwelle , which is a very valuable lesson , which is that the great things don &apos;t just leave you , and that they &apos;re going to be a place .
and that &apos;s a great konzeptionelles model of the world , so long they &apos;re not a teilchenphysiker .
it would be a very awful model for a teilchenphysiker , because they don &apos;t play with bodenschwellen , but with these little odd particles .
and when you play with your particles , you &apos;re going to be able to find all kinds of weird things -- how they &apos;re going right through walls , or you can be at the same time at two different places .
and so they wrote all these observations , and they called the theory of quantum mechanics .
that was the physics of the physics , a few years ago ; it was taken quantum mechanics to describe the little tiny particles .
but you didn &apos;t need to describe them about the great everyday objects around us .
it &apos;s not like my intuition , and it may only be because i don &apos;t play with particles so often .
well , i sometimes play with you , but not very often .
and i &apos;ve never seen them .
i mean , nobody has ever seen a particle .
but my logical side didn &apos;t like it .
because if all things are out of particles and all these particles follow the rules of quantum mechanics , then not just everything will follow the rules of quantum mechanics ?
i don &apos;t see why it should not be .
so i would be able to make a deutliche , so i would feel better with the whole thing , if we could kind of show that alltagsgegenstände also follow the rules of quantum mechanics .
so i did a few years ago , and i did that .
i created one .
this is the first object you can see , that was in the quantenmechanischen .
so what we &apos;re looking at here is a tiny computer chip .
and you can see this green point in the middle .
this is the piece of metal that i &apos;m going to talk about .
this is an image of the object .
here i &apos;m going to get it up . we &apos;re looking at the center of the center .
and here &apos;s a really large picture of the little piece of metal .
so what we &apos;re looking at is a little bit of metal it &apos;s shaped like a sprungbrett , and it &apos;s over the edge .
so i made this thing in similar ways that you make a computer chip .
i went to a clean room with new siliziumscheiben , and rackerte for 100 hours to all of these big devices .
for the last little bit , i had to build my own machine -- to get this a swimming pool of geformte hole and the thing .
this thing has the ability to be in the quantenmechanischen , but it takes a little help to do it .
and look , let me give you an analogy .
you know how did it be the unbehaglich that &apos;s going to be on a full elevator ?
i mean , when i &apos;m in the elevator , i do all kinds of weird things , but then you go to get other people , and i hear all these things , because i don &apos;t want to go through it or , frankly , they &apos;re verschrecke .
so quantum mechanics says that unbewegliche objects are just as much as they feel .
the mitfahrer for unbewegliche objects are not only humans , but also the light that seems to you and the wind that &apos;s coming over and the heat of the space .
and so we knew that if we wanted this piece of metal to be quantenmechanisch , we had to schmeissen the entire mitreisenden .
and we did that .
we turned off the lights , put it into a vacuum and saugten the air , and it was almost to the lift , and almost to the time , the piece of metal was free to behave as it was always .
so we measured his movement .
we found that it &apos;s really strange .
instead of just quiet it , it &apos;s just ruhig , it &apos;s vibrierte . the way it vibrierte was like this -- like a ausdehnender and zusammen blasebalg .
and in the way we gave him a little push , we could get it to the same time and not to get to the vibrieren -- something that &apos;s just allowed in quantum mechanics .
so what i &apos;m just about is a fantastic thing .
what does it mean to produce for an object at the same time , not to make it ?
let &apos;s think about the atoms .
so the first case : all the trillionen of atoms that are the piece of metal , there are silent , and at the same time , the same atoms move up and down .
just to make sure , präzisen voices .
the rest of the time is delokalisiert .
that means that every atom of the atom is at two different places in the same time , which means that the entire piece of metal is in two different places .
i think that &apos;s really cool .
really .
it was worth me for all this year in the green room , because , check that , the massstabsunterschied between a single atom and this piece of metal is about just as the difference between the piece of metal and you .
so if a single atom can be two different places , this piece of metal can be in two different places , why not even you ?
i mean , that &apos;s just what my logical side says .
so , imagine you &apos;d be at the same time in a couple of places , how would that feel like ?
how would your mind actually deal with your body in the room ?
there &apos;s one more aspect of history .
when we aufwärmten it , the light and the box reinschauten , we saw that the piece of metal was always there in a piece .
and so i had to develop these new intuition that it looks like all the objects in the elevator are actually only quanten objects that are gefercht in a small room .
you hear a lot of talk about how quantum mechanics says that everything is connected to everything .
now , that &apos;s not quite right .
there &apos;s more behind it , it &apos;s still deeper .
it &apos;s like these connections , their connections to all of these things around you , literally define who you are , and that &apos;s the tiefsinnige and the strange thing of quantum mechanics .
thank you .
in 2007 , i decided we should be rekonzeptualisieren , how we think about economic development .
it should be our goal , that if families are thinking about where they live and work , they &apos;ve given the opportunity to pick them between at least one hand of a fully variety of cities that all in competition are going to be in the competition .
right now , we &apos;re far far from this goal .
there are billions of people in developing countries , which is not even a single city that they welcome to .
but the astonishing thing about cities is that they are so much worth it than it costs them to build .
so we could actually take the world very simple , maybe even hundreds of new cities .
now this may sound absurd for you , if you never have thought about new cities .
and they &apos;re just going to share the building from homes for the cities .
imagine half of the people who want to live in homes , they do this , but they don &apos;t yet have the other half .
they could try to expand the capacity of existing homes .
but you know what they were going to be doing to be in these homes , and their environment are herrschen laws to avoid about and abzulenken .
so it turns out , as a very hard , we &apos;re going to go all these major .
but you could go to a completely new place , building a completely new building block , the law would be able to support and it would be behindern .
so i &apos;ve proposed that governments create new surfaces that provide enough place for a city and gave them a name : charter .
i found out later that , about the same time , javier and octavio , about the challenge of reform reform , in the course of the challenge .
they knew that every year , the 75.000 honduraner verlassen the country to auszuwandern in the united states , and they wanted to know what they could do to make sure that these people can stay in their country and do the same thing in the same .
and at this point , javier has said , &quot; what happens if we just put a unbesiedelte area of our country , and when we just take a message from the american message , and when people work with the canadian rules or the united states , can they work , and can do everything they have to do to canada or america , what they &apos;re going to
in the summer of 2009 , there was a major verfassungskrise .
the next planmäßigen elections , pepe lobo , made a umschwung , whose program and schlichtung and schlichtung .
he asked octavio to become his stabschef .
in the meanwhile , i was doing a talk at tedglobal .
in improvement , test and through the study of consumers , i &apos;ve tried to reduce this complicated concept of charter city on the fundamental elements .
the first point is the importance of laws , law , which determine that you can &apos;t really stören existing wohnungsbesitzer .
we give new technologies to pay attention , but for progress , it requires technologies and law , and it &apos;s common laws that we know .
in the fall of 2010 , a friend of guatemala octavio sent the link to the tedtalk .
and again , it showed him .
the two people call me .
and said , &quot; let &apos;s present this to the head of our country . &quot;
so , in december , we met in the sitzungssaal of a hotels in miami .
i &apos;ve been trying to make it clear , how valuable cities are , how much more valuable they are .
and i &apos;ve been using this graph to show how valuable rohland is a place like new york . think that a area in some cases is worth thousands of dollars per square meter .
but it was a pretty abstract discussion , at a point when there was a break , and said , &quot; paul , we might be looking at the tedtalk . &quot;
so the tedtalk is in very simple form that a charter city is a place whose beginning of unbewohntes land is a gründungsvertrag , which defines the laws that are there and people have the opportunity to decide either under those rules or not .
so i was asked by the president of the president , who said that we have to do this project that it matters , and that this is the way that we get anywhere .
i was asked to go to tegucigalpa and even the fourth and fifth of the fifth of january .
so i &apos;ve given another mit lecture that has a graphic like this one , which has tried to illustrate that if you want to create a lot of value , it &apos;s a very large city .
this is a picture of the city , and the sketch is the new airport that was built in denver .
by the only one , the airport has a surface of 100 quadratkilometern .
so i &apos;ve tried to convince the honduraner of if you want to build a new city , you have to start with a area of at least 1,000 quadratkilometern .
that &apos;s more than 250 thousand tomorrow .
polite , all the applaudiert .
the faces of the audience were very serious and paying attention .
the director of the congress came up on stage and said , &quot; professor romer , thank you for your talk , but maybe we might be looking at the tedtalk .
i &apos;ve got him on my laptop here . &quot;
so i sat down , and you played the tedtalk .
and i &apos;ve come to the line of the line that a new city offers new possibilities .
there were the possibility in a city that would be in honduras , rather than hundreds of miles away from north miles .
and a new city is also schließt new ways for leaders .
the leaders in the government were angewiesen , and they could help from their partnerländern , they would be able to support the law for these charter and to do that , everyone can trust that the charter is really going to be durchgesetzt .
and the realization of president lobo , was that the gewissheit of the durchsetzung that i thought of as a way to get foreign investors to get to the city and build this city , could be gleichbedeutend for all parties in honduras who suffer under fear and mistrust .
we &apos;ve driven in an area .
this picture is from this place .
it &apos;s mühelos a thousand square miles .
and shortly after , on the 19th of january , they voted in congress for a change in the constitution , to have a verfassungsgemäße policy that &apos;s zulässig for special entwicklungsgebiete .
in a country that has just been a heftige crisis , congress voted for this verfassungsänderung with 124 .
all parties , all the fraktionen of the society , supported this .
in order to be part of the constitution , it has to be approved twice by congress .
on the 17th february , it was genehmigt to a vote for a voice .
so , immediately after that election , between the 21st and the february of february , one of the delegation of about 30 hunduranern of the two places in the world that were most interested in the business of the städtebaus .
one place is south korea .
this is a picture of a big , new city of downtown that in south korea built a lot of wurde- in the center of the center .
all you can see in this picture was built within four years after it took four years to get the genehmigungen .
the other place that was very interested in the städtebau is singapore .
there were already two cities in china , and the third is in preparation .
so , as a convenient , you can think about it , is that where we are today .
you &apos;ve already got a baugrundstück , and you &apos;re already looking at this area for the second city .
it &apos;s been working on a system that allows managern to participate , and it &apos;s also working on a external system .
a country has already offered its top court as a dish for the entgültige calling of the dortigen system .
also , städtedesigner and -bauer are very interested .
they &apos;re even getting funding .
one thing you know , you know , has been already , there &apos;s a lot of mieter .
there are many of those who love to be in america , especially in a place with a freihandelszone , and there are a lot of people who &apos;d like to live there .
around the world there are 700 million people who report they want to live in a different place .
one million people leave out of america and go out to the united states .
many of you are fathers who are forced to be zurückzulassen their families to be zurückzulassen , sometimes they &apos;re single mothers who need to earn enough money to eat and buy clothes .
unfortunately , sometimes children are even trying to find their parents that they have , in some cases , since a decade hasn &apos;t seen anymore .
so what is it for an idea to think about building a completely new city in the world ?
or even duzende , building the cities , or are all distributed to the world ?
so what &apos;s it for an idea that every family has a choice between a number of cities that are in competition with new residents ?
this is an idea that &apos;s worth spreading .
my friends from my honduras asked me to say thank you ted .
do you know how many decisions you do in a typical day ?
you know how many decisions you &apos;re going to meet in a typical week ?
i recently done with over 2,000 americans and the average number of decisions , the average number of decisions , a typical american americans , is a 70. american american day a day is 70. .
but recently , a study has done a study with ceos in which they saw the ceo &apos;s business .
and these scientists have just documented the different topics that these are ceo , and how much time they have to make decisions that related to the topics .
and they found that a average ceo of the week is doing 139 tasks .
each of these topics , of course , made of many , many smaller decisions .
50 percent of their decisions were made in nine minutes or less .
only for about 12 percent of their decisions they needed an hour or more of their time .
think about your own decisions .
you know how many decisions you &apos;re going to meet in the nine minutes of category in one hour of category ?
how good , think , are you going to deal with the decisions ?
today i want to talk about one of the greatest entscheidungsprobleme of our modern time , the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem .
i want to talk about the problem and some of the possible solutions .
now , when i talk about this problem , i &apos;m going to ask you some questions , and i want to know your answers .
if i ask you a question , you raise , because i &apos;m blind , just your hand , if you want to burn some calories .
otherwise , i ask you , if i ask you a question , and your answer is yes , so my first question is , are you ready to hear something about the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem ?
thank you .
when i was a abschlussstudent at stanford university , i went to this very , very exklusiven store , at least in the days .
it was a store that was draeger &apos;s .
this business , it was almost like a vergnügungspark .
they had 250 different kinds of mustard and essig and over 500 different species of fruit and vegetables , and more than two dozen different species -- and that was a time when we actually drink leitungswasser .
i loved it to this business , but at a point i asked myself , well , how does you never do anything ?
here &apos;s the olive gear .
they had about 75 different kinds of oil olive , including the ones that were locked into boxes that came from a thousand years of old olivenbäumen .
so i decided to go to the leader one day , and i asked the ladder , &quot; does this model work for the people all these possibilities ? &quot;
and he showed the busladungen of tourists that came every day and usually had their cameras .
we decided to do an experiment to do , and we chose marmelade for our experiment .
here &apos;s her marmeladen gear .
they had 348 different types of marmelade .
we put a little verkostungsecke right at the entrance of the geschäfts .
we have six different tastes marmelade , or 24 different tastes , and we looked at two things : first , i can &apos;t , what case would be more people standing and try to get a marmelade ?
it &apos;s more people standing when it was 24 , about 60 percent when it was six , about 40 percent .
and then , what we saw in what was the case people were actually bought a glass of marmelade .
now we saw the opposite effect .
and the people who were standing on the face were 24 percent actually kauften a glass of marmelade .
the people who are still standing than six were , now , now we saw that 30 percent of them actually bought a glass of marmelade .
now , if you calculate it , people actually bought a glas of a glass of marmelade , who they had six times , when they had six choice when they had 24 / selection .
now , not to decide to decide not to buy a glass of marmelade is probably good for us -- at least it &apos;s good for our taille -- but it turns out that the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem is also affected a very konsequenzreichen decisions .
we don &apos;t decide to decide when it &apos;s about our own best interests .
so the theme of the day , financial resources .
i &apos;m going to describe you a study that i did with gur huberman , emir kamenica , wei jang , where we were looking at decisions about the retirement of almost a million americans from about 650 plans in the entire united states .
and what we looked at was whether the number of fondsangebote that were possible , the 401 plan , the chance of it would be saved by tomorrow .
and we found that there was a correlation in fact .
so in these plans , we had about 657 plans that would be provided something between two to the other people of the 59 .
and what we found was that the more fund the more fund were offered , that , in fact , the participation rate was less .
if you look at the extreme , the plans that are anboten , the two fund , a teilnahmerate in the siebzigern -- still , not as much as we want .
in the plans , the nearly 60 fund , the teilnahmerate now fell on the sechzigsten .
now , it turns out , even if you were to participate in a entschliessen , when there were more choices to choice , it has negative consequences .
so the people who decided to participate in that more and more opportunities , the more opportunities they were available , the more they can help them to choose it and to choose the aktien .
the more options you have , the more you put your money in pure money .
none of these extreme decisions , to make decisions , people who would recommend people who care about the future of well-being .
now , in the last decade , we &apos;ve seen three essential of the negative consequences that have to be in the offer of more and more choices .
they put the decision on -- they &apos;re going to push it out , even if it &apos;s about their own best interest .
they make more worse decisions -- worse financial and worse health decisions .
they &apos;re more likely to make things that they make themselves less happy , even if you make it better .
the main reason for this is that we might enjoy this vast regale of mayonaise , mustard , essig and marmelade , but we can &apos;t actually make the comparison and the abgrenzungen , and then actually , can be something out of the fantastic supply .
so what i want to suggest to you today is four simple techniques -- techniques that we &apos;ve tested in different ways and different types of information -- they can just apply them in their business .
first , let &apos;s go .
you heard it earlier , but it was never true than today that less is more .
people are always worried about me when i say , &quot; limit . &quot;
they &apos;re always worried that they lose regalfläche .
but in fact , we &apos;re always going to see it more and more , that if you &apos;re willing to be able to limit and the unwichtigen of gleichartigen opportunities , well , there &apos;s a increase in sales , it &apos;s going to be reduced , &amp; amp ; and there &apos;s an improvement in the entscheidungswahrnehmung .
as a proctor and gamble , the different head and shoulders species of 26 , you &apos;ve got an increase in sales to 10 percent .
when the golden cat corporation , you were 10 at the last selling katzenstreus , you would have the profit to anstiegen 87 percent of the anstiegen -- a result of both , the increase of sales and the reduction of cost .
you know , the average supermakrt today is giving you the same products .
a typical wal-mart is offering you today 100,000 products .
but the neuntgrößte supermarket , the world &apos;s neuntgrößte supermarket in the world is aldi , and they only offer them to a mere 1.400 -- a kind of tomato sauce in a doses .
now in the world of the world , i think one of the best examples that i &apos;ve been recently has come to the market is how to managt the choices , and it was something that david laibson has very strong mitgestaltet , it &apos;s a program that &apos;s been offered at harvard .
every single harvard person , now , automatically , automatically takes into a lebenszeitfond part .
those who really want to make a choice is about 20 , 20 , not 300 or more .
you know , as people often say , &quot; i don &apos;t know how to limit it .
it &apos;s all important possibilities . &quot;
and the first thing i &apos;m asking is the staff of the staff , &quot; tell me how the possibilities are different from each other .
and if your staff can &apos;t be able to auseinanderhalten them , it can &apos;t be their customers . &quot;
now before we started having lunch today , i had a conversation with gary .
and gary said that he would be ready to offer all people in this audience to offer a all-inklusive bezahlten vacation to the most beautiful street in the world .
here &apos;s a description of the road .
and i &apos;d like to read you .
and now i &apos;m going to give you a couple of seconds to read it , and then i &apos;m asking you clapping if you &apos;re willing to take a gary on the offer .
okay . everybody who &apos;s ready to take a gary s .
are that ?
well , let me show you something more of it .
you knew it was a trick , right ?
now , who &apos;s ready for this trip .
i think i &apos;ve heard more hands .
all right .
the fact that you see in mind when the first time the first time , when the second time , but i would like to take a car to make it real time in the second time .
because the images made it feel real .
what brings me to the second technology that helps them deal with the problem of entscheidungsüberlastung , it &apos;s the konkretisierung .
it &apos;s about understanding people , to understand the difference between the ways , have to understand what consequences with the individual possibilities are associated and that have to be felt of the consequences of vivid and specific .
why do people spend average 15 to 30 percent more than if they use a ec-karte or a card card , when they &apos;re in the paper ?
because it doesn &apos;t feel like it really .
and it turns out that if you make it , it &apos;s a very good tool , it &apos;s a very good tool , so you get people to save more .
so we did in a study that i did with shlomo benartzi and alessandro previtero , we did a study with people at ing -- employees who worked all for the ing -- and these people were all in a meeting where they &apos;ve been doing their participation for their rentensparplan .
and during that meeting , we have the meeting as leaving this session as well as she was always , we just added a little bit more .
the little thing we &apos;ve added to do was that we asked people to just think of all the positive things that would happen in their lives if they were saving money .
and in the case that we did this simple thing , there was a spike in the participation in 20 percent , and there was an increase in the number of people who were ready to save or an increase in order to four percent of the amount they were ready to pay for the sparkonto .
third technique : kategorisierung .
we can get better with more categories than more choice .
here &apos;s an example , a study that we did in a zeitschriftengang .
it turns out it &apos;s in the wegmans , the top and below in the northeast area , is a number of zeitschriften verschiedenen and hoch magazines .
but you know what ?
if i show you 600 magazines and show you about 400 categories , or i show you 400 magazines , and those in 20 categories , you believe that i gave you more choices and a better way of auswahlerfahrung , when i gave them the 400 , if i gave them the 600 .
because categories tell me how to keep it apart .
here are two different types of dna .
one is called jazz , and the other is called &quot; swing . &quot;
if you think the left display is swing and the display of the right is jazz , you clapping in your hands .
okay , there &apos;s a couple .
if you think that the left side is jazz and the one on the right is swing , and then you clapping .
okay , a few more .
well , it turns out they &apos;re right .
the one on the left is jazz and the ones on the right is swing , but you know what ?
this is a highly unnützes kategorisierungsschema .
the categories have to say something that &apos;s bereitstellt the selection .
and this problem often , you see , if you look at the long list of all of this .
who do you want to know ?
my fourth technique : the premise for complexity .
it turns out that we can actually deal with more information than we think we &apos;re just going to simplify it .
we need to increase complexity .
i &apos;ll show you an example of what i mean .
let &apos;s take a very , very complicated decision : the purchase of a car .
here &apos;s a german autohersteller , which gives you the opportunity to konfigurieren your car completely .
they have to make a very 62 different decisions about designing their car .
now these decisions are different from the number of choices that they offer a choice .
autofarben , außenfarbe of the car -- i have 56 .
motors , getriebe -- four possibilities .
what i &apos;m doing now is , i change the order of the decisions .
half of the customer is going to go from the many possibilities , 56 autofarben at the very low possibilities , four .
the other half of the customer are all the low opportunities , four getriebe , to the 56 autofarben , many possibilities .
what do i look at ?
how are they interested .
if you keep the standardauswahl on the decision , you know , that they &apos;re being überfordert , the heisste , i &apos;m losing it .
what you find out is that the people who go from the many too the low auswahlmöglichkteiten go over and over the standardauswahl .
we lose them .
and take the little choice to the many , then they &apos;ll be in the process .
it &apos;s the same information . it &apos;s the same number of possibilities .
the only thing i &apos;ve done is to change the order that this information is being presented .
when i start with simple , i learn how i &apos;m doing .
even though the getriebe , i don &apos;t choose to pick up my preferences about the innenausstattung , it &apos;s still a lot of auszuwählen .
it &apos;s also getting me excited about the big product i &apos;m doing , and so i &apos;m ready to get interested in this .
let me wrap up .
i &apos;ve been told you about four techniques that can address the problem of entscheidungsüberlastung -- limit -- will make the überflüssigen alternatives ; they &apos;re doing it -- we &apos;re going to do it , kategorisieren -- we can get better with more categories , less ways to get into complexity .
each of these techniques i &apos;m thinking of today is to help you manage the opportunities -- good for you , you can use it for yourself , good for the people who are offering them .
because i think the key to the best choice is that you &apos;re choosing for selection .
and the more we choose to pick , the better we will be able to practice the art of the decision .
thank you .
hi . i &apos;m kevin allocca , trends-manager on youtube . i &apos;m looking at a youtube-videos .
that &apos;s true .
today we want to talk about how videos are going to be viral , and then , why it &apos;s important to all .
we all want to be stars -- berühmtheiten , singers , comedians -- when i was young , it seemed so infinite .
but webvideos , that we all have to become famous for all of our creative activities , in a part of the culture of our world .
every single one of you could be famous for the internet until next saturday .
but youtube , more than 48 hours of video , are uploaded to a minute .
it &apos;s only going to be a tiny percentage of ever , and it will be seen thousands and the cultural moment .
so how does that work ?
three things : tastemaker , teilnahmecommunities and the unexpected .
well , we want to go .
oh my god . oh my god .
oh my god !
woah !
ohhhhh , wowwww .
last year , bear vasquez this video he filmed his house in the yosemite national park .
in 2010 , it was 23 million times .
this graph shows what it looked like when the video of the first time to be popular for the first time .
in fact , bear didn &apos;t want to make a viral video .
he just wanted to share a rainbow .
because you do that , if you &apos;re called a yosemite mountain bear .
he had put a lot of naturvideos .
and this video was actually sent on the january of january .
what &apos;s happened here ?
there was jimmy kimmel .
jimmy kimmel sendete the tweet that made the video so popular .
because tastemaker like jimmy kimmel are asking new and interesting things and show you a big audience .
it &apos;s friday . gotta get down on friday . everybody &apos;s looking to the weekend , weekend . friday , friday . gettin on friday . you didn &apos;t think that we would run this conversation without talking about this video .
rebecca blacks &apos;s &quot; friday &quot; is one of the most popular video of the year .
it &apos;s been looking at nearly 200 million times .
this is what the graphics looked like .
just like the &quot; double rainbow &quot; seems to be made of nothing .
what &apos;s happened on this day ?
well , it was friday that &apos;s right .
if you want to know , these other peaks are also freitage .
but what about that day , this particular friday ?
now , tosh.0 gabelte , many blogs started writing about it .
michael j. nelson from the mystery science theater was a first one that made a joke about twitter .
what matters is that a person or a group of tastemakers took a position of view , shared with a large audience and beschleunigte the process .
then this community of people were formed and they shared these big insiderwitz and began to talk about it and to start with this .
now there &apos;s 10,000 parodien of &quot; friday &quot; in youtube .
already in the first seven days , there was a parodie for every single week .
unlike the einseitigen entertainment entertainment entertainment entertainment entertainment , part of the community is our way of being part of this phenomenon -- either by spreading it or make something new from it .
&quot; nyan cat &quot; is animation and music in endlosschleife .
that &apos;s it , it &apos;s easy .
this year , it was almost 50 million times .
and if you think this for crazy , you know , you know that there &apos;s a dreistundenversion that has been looking at four million times .
even cats look at this video .
cats are looking at cats looking at this video .
important , the creativity that &apos;s in the internetkultur of the techies and the geeks .
there was remixe .
somebody made an altmodische version of it .
and then it became international .
a whole remix-gemeinde shot out of the ground that made it from a stupid joke to something that we all could be involved in .
today we don &apos;t just find pleasure in something we do with .
who could have predicted that ?
who would have predicted the &quot; double rainbow &quot; or &quot; rebecca cat &quot; or &quot; nyan cat . &quot;
what drehbücher would you have written to write about that ?
in a world where every minute of every minute is uploaded to two days of video , only is really unique and unexpected hervorstechen like the ones that are the previous videos .
i &apos;m not very much interested in my friend , when i said a friend i should look at this great video , over a guy who was going to be on a parking ticket for the bicycles .
i got a ticket because i &apos;m not on the radweg , but often there &apos;s disability that are not going to be a very nice thing to go on the radweg .
and it was completely surprising and humorvoll , and she was a witzige funny idea and a point of five million times .
and this approach is true of all new things we &apos;re creative .
and all of this leads to the one big question .
what does that mean ?
ohhhh .
what does that mean ?
tastemaker , creative teilnehmergemeinden , completely unexpected , the features of a new kind of media and culture that everybody has access to , and in the audience .
as i said , one of the currently largest stars -- justin bieber -- did his start with youtube .
nobody has to make your ideas green .
and today we &apos;re all feeling as well as the eigentümer of our culture .
and these are not the features of the old media , and they &apos;re barely not even to the media today , but they will determine the entertainment of the future .
thank you .
how can i talk about three generations , and how the astonishing strength of this bond to be about three generations , and how she was in a vierjährigen girl &apos;s life , when she was in a leben of a vierjährigen , with her little sister , her mother and her grandmother , in a small boat in the chinese ocean , and a bond that goes on in
the story is not over .
it &apos;s a puzzle that &apos;s still composed .
i want to tell you about some of the puzzlestückchen .
imagine the first piece of play : a man who &apos;s burning his body &apos;s work .
he &apos;s a poet , a writer , a man whose life was held together by the simple hope of oneness and freedom of his home .
now , think of it as the einmarsch of the kommunisten in saigon , as he &apos;s to say , his life has been a single waste .
the words , so long , his friends , spotteten now .
he moved back to the silence .
he died through the story .
he &apos;s my grandfather .
i never met him personally .
but our lives are so much more than our memories .
my grandmother never let me forget his life .
i had to worry that it wasn &apos;t free , and it was my job to learn that the story was not trying to zerdrücken us , but we &apos;ll go .
the next puzzleteil show shows how a boat in the early morgenrot leise in the early morgenrot .
my mother may was 18 when her father died -- before a arrangierten marriage , with two little girls .
for her life , life had been her job : the escape of your family and a new life in australia .
it was completely ausgeschlossen that it could fail .
after a vierjährigen and filmreifen saga , a boat still on the lake as fischerboot .
all adults were aware of the risks .
the biggest fear was the israeli , rape and death .
as most adults on the boat , my mother carried a little giftflasche .
in a gefangennahme , my sister and i , and i had to drink her and my grandmother .
my first memories is from this boat -- the stetige tuckern of the engine , the clapping of each wave on the front , the weite and empty horizon .
i don &apos;t remember the pirate that many times came to be täuschen , but the todesmut of the men on our boat , or on the ausfall of the engine that didn &apos;t want to do six hours .
but i remember the lights of the ölplattform coast , and the young man who broke up and died , the end of the journey was too much for him , and the taste of the first apfels , which was one of the men on the platform .
no apple ever has ever been geschmeckt .
after three months in a refugee camp , we ended in in melbourne .
and the next puzzlestück is four women in three generations that together build a new life .
we let us down in footscray , one of the arbeiterklasse bewohnten , whose population is made of immigrantenschichten .
unlike the alteingesessenen mittelklassevororten , which existence was completely unknown , there was no anspruchsdenken in footscray .
the smell from the ladentüren came from the rest of the world .
and the fetzen broken englischs were ausgetauscht between people who had a thing in common : they started fresh .
my mother worked on farmen , then on a fließband line in a autofabrik , six days , twice .
it was kind of trying to find time to have english and it-qualifikationen .
we were poor .
every dollar was given , and then got into more education education , and mathematics , no matter what we had to do for this . mostly the new things that came out of the second hand .
two few strümpfe for the school , each one to the holes in the other .
a schuluniform to the knöcheln , because she had to reach six years .
and there were the rare but schmerzhaften chöre of &quot; schlitzauge &quot; and here , &quot; asiaten , go home . &quot;
home , where ?
something versteifte in me .
there was a meeting to the reconciliation and a quiet voice , &quot; i &apos;ll go out of the way . &quot;
my mother , my sister and i slept in the same bed .
my mother was exhausted every night , but we were telling each other about each day , and we heard the bewegungen of our grandmother in the house .
my mother suffered from the boat .
and it was my job to be awake every night until their alpträume came to the way i could get it to .
she opened a computergeschäft , then a kosmetikerausbildung and then she opened a business .
and the women came with their stories about men who didn &apos;t become ertrugen , angry and unflexibel , and sorgenerfüllte children , trapped between two worlds .
loan and donors were searching .
the centers were built .
i lived in parallelwelten .
in one of the classic asian student , the unerbittliche demands turned on itself .
in the other , i was in an unsichere life , the tragic scars of violence , the drogenmissbrauchs and the isolierung .
but so many of these were given for the years .
and because of that aid , i was auserwählt in my last year of the year &apos;s jurastudiums as a young australierin .
and i was katapultiert by a puzzlestück to the next katapultiert , and the edges didn &apos;t fit together .
tan bewohnerin von , anonyme bewohnerin of footscray , has been tan le , refugee and social activist who were invited to speak of places that she never heard , and in housing , whose existence never could have imagined .
i was not familiar with the etikette .
i didn &apos;t know how to use the besteck .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about wine .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about anything .
i wanted to go back to the routine and the comfort of life of an unknown vororts -- a mother and two daughters who had been so much abschlossen every one of their days , by the time 20 years , by telling each other stories of their day and einschliefen , we still in the same bed .
i told my mother , i would not do that .
she reminded me of that , i was as old as they were when we had climbed the boat .
no , no one was an opportunity .
&quot; just like , &quot; do it easy , &quot; she said . &quot; and not what you &apos;re not . &quot;
so i was talking about jugendarbeitslosigkeit and education , and the vernachlässigung of the marginalisierten and entrechteten .
and the more open i spoke , the more i should tell .
i met people in all the lebenslagen , so many of them did what they loved , lived in the borders of what they were .
and although i had my degree , i realized i could not be able to come to a career in a school of law .
there had to be another puzzlestück .
and i realized at the same time that it &apos;s okay to be a außenseiter , a neuankömmling , new in the picture -- and not only all right , but something you need to be grateful for , maybe a gift of the gift .
because dazuzugehören can easily lead to the collapse of the horizonte , it can mean that you &apos;re accepted the assumptions .
i &apos;ve been enough to know that i &apos;ve been enough to know that , yes , the world , but not as you befürchtet it .
the ways that would not be allowed to be allowed .
there was a energy , a unerbittlichen optimism , a strange mixtur of humility and the wagnisses .
so i was following my feeling .
i collected a little team of people around me to the schublade , &quot; not a unwiderstehliche challenge .
we had no cents a year .
at the end of a every year , i &apos;m eating a huge topf soup that we shared .
we worked until late .
most of our ideas were crazy , but there were a couple of brilliant , and we were able to do the breakthrough .
i met the decision to move to the united states .
just after one trip .
my feeling of feeling .
three months later , i was moved to moved , and the adventure went on .
before i talk about the lecture , i &apos;d like to tell you about my grandmother .
she grew up at a time , in the konfuzianismus , the social norm and the local one was the most important person .
life hasn &apos;t changed for centuries .
her father died a little bit of birth .
her mother moved on her alone .
at 17 she was a second woman to a woman whose mother was struck .
no support of her husband , she worried her husband by brachte him in the trial and she was in her own case , and a greater sensation when she won .
&quot; no &quot; turns out to be a unwahr .
i was just duschte in a hotel room in sydney when she died . 1,000 miles away in the melbourne .
i looked through the duschtrennwand and i saw it on the other side .
i knew she had come to say goodbye .
my mother called me a few minutes .
a few days later , we went to a buddhist temple in footscray and sat around her .
we told her stories and we told her , that we were still in her .
at midnight and the monk was coming , and he said , he &apos;s got to conclude the sarg .
my mother asked us to touch their hands .
she asked the monk , &quot; why is your hand warm and the rest of her is so cold ? &quot;
&quot; because she &apos;s last for this day , he said .
&quot; they don &apos;t have it . &quot;
if there &apos;s a band in our family , it &apos;s the women .
you see who we were and how life has been shaped , we can now see the men who may have come to our lives would have come to the quere .
the defeat would be too simple .
now i &apos;d like to have my own children , and i &apos;m still thinking about the boat .
who would ever want one ?
yes , i &apos;m afraid of privilegien , leichtigkeit , vor .
can i give you a front of a front in your life , the brave of the wave , the unbeirrte , stetige tuckern of the engine , the long horizon that will have nothing ?
i don &apos;t know .
but if i could give this and you could make it safe , i would do it .
also , tans mother is here in the fourth or fifth line .
i &apos;m here to share my photography with you .
is it all photography ?
because that &apos;s obviously a picture you can &apos;t record with your camera .
but still , my interest in photography began when i got my first digital digital digital digital digital digital digital digital digital .
i put it on my former vorliebe for drawing , but it was a little different , because the camera was the process in planning .
and if you take a picture with a camera , the process , if you press the trigger .
so for me , photography appeared to be more about being at the right place at the right time .
i thought everybody could do that .
so i wanted to create something different , something that starts when the cause is going to move .
photos like this : a construction site along a much more befahrenen road .
but it has an unexpected twist .
and yet , a realistic plane .
or photos like this -- dark and farbenfroh at the same time , but all of the shared goal to keep a realistic plane .
when i say reality , i &apos;m foto-realität .
because , of course , it &apos;s not something you can really capture , but i &apos;d like to look it as if you could have that , in a photo .
photos , where you have to think a very short moment to figure out the trick .
so it &apos;s more about capture an idea than really a moment .
but what is the trick that makes it realistic ?
is it about the details or the colors ?
is it about the light ?
what does the illusion do ?
sometimes the perspective is illusion .
but in the end , it &apos;s about how we interpret the world , and how it can be made on a two-dimensional area of space .
it &apos;s not about what &apos;s realistic , but what we think about .
so i think the foundations are very simple .
i see it as a puzzle of reality , where you can take a different pieces and make a difference to create an alternative reality .
and let me show you a simple example .
we have three perfect physical objects that we can all identify in a three-dimensional world .
but in a particular way , they can create something that looks still three-dimensional than if it could exist .
but at the same time , we know that this is not possible .
so we &apos;re überlisten our brains because our brains just don &apos;t just think it &apos;s really meaning .
and i see the same process in combine photos .
it &apos;s really just about combining different realities .
so the things that make a picture realistic , i think it &apos;s the things we don &apos;t think about the things that we &apos;re in our lives .
but if we combine photos , it &apos;s really important to think about it , because otherwise they &apos;re just kind of wrong .
so i would say there are three simple rules to follow a result that &apos;s a result .
as you can see , these are not three special pictures .
but combine it , but you can do something special as this .
so the first rule is that the kombinierte of the photos should have the same perspective .
second , the kombinierte of the photos should be the same .
and these two images are making these two demands -- the same altitude , and the same thing .
third is about making it impossible to tell where the individual images start and end by connecting them in a nahtlos .
in fact , it &apos;s impossible to say how the photo was actually composed .
so by angleicht color , contrast and contrast to the individual images of the individual images , like feldtiefe , entsättigte colors and spectrum , we verwischen the borders between the different images and let them look like a single photo , although a picture is basically hundreds of levels .
here &apos;s another example .
you might think that this is just a very thing , and the bottom part is manipulated .
this picture is completely composed of photos of different places .
i personally personally , it &apos;s easier to create a place when you find a place , because you don &apos;t have to go into compromise with the ideas in your head .
but it requires a lot .
and when i had this idea in the winter , i knew that i had to take several months to plan to plan to do the different places for the pieces of the puzzle .
for example , the fish was taken on a anglerausflug .
the bank is from a different place .
the unterwasser-teil is from a steinbruch .
and yes , i actually have the house up on the island of red umgefärbt to make it look like it .
to reach a very realistisches outcome , it &apos;s going to be able to go out of my own .
i always start with a sketch , an idea .
and then it &apos;s about the combination of the different images .
and here &apos;s a very good piece of play .
and then when you make good images , the result can be pretty beautiful , and it &apos;s quite realistic .
so , it &apos;s all the tools , and the only thing that we can do is our imagination .
thank you .
i &apos;d like to talk with you about why so many electronic gesundheits-projekte .
and i think the most important point is we stopped talking to our patients .
and one of the things we introduced to the radboud-universität was a haupt-zuhörer .
and it &apos;s not going to do a very scientific science -- she &apos;s a cup of coffee or tea and ask the patients , families , related , &quot; how do it go ?
how can we help you ? &quot;
and we think we want to think that this is one of the main main main main main : why everyone -- perhaps most of the electronic gesundheits-projekte , because we stopped listening .
this is my wlan-waage . a very simple thing .
she has a button in / .
and every morning i &apos;ll get on it .
and yes , i have a job as you might recognize .
i &apos;ve got my job in 95 pounds .
it &apos;s just going to work , every time i get on the scale , you also send my data on google health .
and there you will also abgerufen from my allgemeinarzt , so it can recognize where my gewichtsproblem is , and not only in the moment i need to support a kardiologische support or something , but also with a look at the past .
there &apos;s something else .
maybe you know , i &apos;ve been familiar with 4,000 follower on twitter .
so every morning i wake up my wlan-waage and people talk to me , before i sit in the car , &quot; for lunch , i just prefer a little salat now , lucien . &quot;
but this is the netteste thing that can happen because this is the gruppenzwang , gruppenzwang , to help patients because that could be used to obesity , or it could be smoking smoking .
but it could also be used to get people from their chairs and get them to play some kind of play in order to control their health .
and the next week is coming up .
it will give you this little blutdruck-messgerät that you &apos;ll do on an iphone or so forth .
and it will allow people to measure their blood pressure from home to send him to your doctor and share it with others , for something more than 100 dollars .
at this point , the patient comes in the game , and they can &apos;t only take control of their own ship , but also the way we can do with public health care about the challenges that we are in front of us , and the health care of the health , twice and so on .
they &apos;re doing the techniques that are easy to use and start to give them to the team at the team .
and that can be done by these techniques , but also by crowdsourcing .
and one of the things we &apos;ve done is to share with you through a short video .
we all have the navigationssysteme in our cars .
maybe in our cell phones .
we know exactly where all the machines around the world are around .
we know one of the things that we &apos;re in .
and sure , we can find fastfood-ketten .
but where would the next aed to help this patient ?
we have herumgefragt , and nobody knew it .
nobody knew where the next lebensrettende aed was to find in this moment .
so what did we do ? we did in the netherlands .
we have a website set up and asked a menschenmasse , and i said , &quot; if you see a aed , please share the time when he &apos;s when he &apos;s on , &quot; because sometimes it &apos;s closed while geschäftszeiten , of course .
and over 10,000 aeds were already covered in the netherlands .
the next step was to find apps for this .
and we &apos;ve designed a ipad-app .
we &apos;ve developed an app for layar , extended reality to find these aeds .
and if you &apos;re in a city like maastricht and somebody else , you can use your iphone , and you can also find your microsoft-handy in the next weeks and find the next aed that can save lives .
and now , we don &apos;t like to just do this as a aed4u , as the product is called it , but also introduce as a aed4us .
and we want to bring this to a global plane .
and we ask our colleagues around the world , from other universities , to help us behave how to behave the way that we can do this aeds around the world .
and if you &apos;re on vacation and someone else , it &apos;s your own verwandtschaft or somebody else , you can find a aed .
the other thing we want to ask is that companies around the world will help us with the bestätigung of these aeds .
these could be kurierdienste , or technicians , for example , to make sure that the gemeldete aed is still in its place .
please help us , and try to improve health , but take a little bit .
thank you .
today i &apos;m going to report from unexpected discoveries .
i work in the solartechnologie-branche .
and my little startup , i want to make ourselves to the environment , by doing it .
and then , it &apos;s paying attention .
here &apos;s a short video of what we do .
oh . a moment .
it may be maybe until it &apos;s charged .
now , we can just jump that -- i just just want to jump the video instead .
no .
this is not ...
okay .
solartechnologie is ...
oh , my time is over .
okay . thank you .
so a few years ago , i started a program to get the stars in technology and design to take a year off and work in an environment that &apos;s pretty much all of it , which they actually hate , we have them work in the government .
the program called &quot; code for america , &quot; and it &apos;s a little bit like the friedenscorps for the computerfreaks .
we choose a few fellows every year , and we &apos;re going to work with stadtverwaltungen .
instead of sending them into the third world , we send them in rathäuser .
and they developed great apps , working with urban staff .
but what you really do is show what &apos;s possible for technology today .
so you hit al .
al is a hydrant in the city of boston .
here it looks like he &apos;s looking for a date , but what he really does is someone who &apos;s freischaufelt him when he &apos;s eingeschneit , because he knows , he &apos;s not very good at the brandbekämpfung when he &apos;s zugedeckt by a foot snow .
how did he get to search for help in this particular way ?
we had a team of fellows in boston last year , and we had a team of fellows in boston in boston to program .
they were there in february , and it has been a lot of geschneit .
and they realized that the city never schaufelt these fire fires .
but a particular fellow , a man named erik michaels-ober , noticed something else , and that was that the residents were free of the bürgersteige , right before those parts .
so he did what any good engineers would do , he wrote an app .
it &apos;s a nice little app where you can adopt a fire fire .
you stimmst it to ihn when it &apos;s schneit .
if you do that , you can give him a name , and he called the first al al .
if you don &apos;t do that , you can take it away .
so there &apos;s a nice little game .
this is a very humble little app .
it &apos;s probably the smallest apps that the fellows have written last year .
but she does something that doesn &apos;t do any other regierungstechnologie .
it &apos;s going to go out of rapidly .
there &apos;s this guy in the i.t. department of the city , who saw that he could use these app , not for snow , but for the citizens to adopt tsunami-sirenen .
it &apos;s very important that these tsunami-sirenen work , but the people steal the batteries .
so he got the citizens to test her .
and then seattle decided to use the app to get the citizens to get the verstopften gullys .
and chicago has just introduced them to the buergersteige when it schneit .
we &apos;re now familiar with nine cities , planning to use these app .
and it &apos;s spreading , organic , natural .
if you know something about regierungstechnologie , you know it &apos;s not going to be that way .
the beschaffung of software is usually a few years .
we had a team that worked on a project in boston last year , and it took three people a half and a half .
it was a way of a method that parents can find out of the right public schools for their children .
we got later told that if it was going over the normal channels , it would have taken over two years , and it would cost about two million dollars .
and that &apos;s not even anything .
so there &apos;s a project in the california , in california , which is a steuerzahler that &apos;s been killed two billion dollars , and it doesn &apos;t work .
and there are projects like this at every level of the government .
so an app that &apos;s written in a few days , and then spread from selbt , is a kind of shot off the bug of the government .
she shows how the government could work better -- not more like a private company , how many people think it should be .
and not even like a technik-unternehmen , but rather than the internet itself .
and that means free access , which means open and productive .
and that &apos;s important .
but more importantly , the app is that it represents a new generation that anpackt the problem of government -- not as the problem of an verknöcherten institution , but as a problem of collective action .
and this is a very good news because it turns out we &apos;re very good at the collective action with digital technology .
now there &apos;s a big community of people who make the tools we need to do things in common .
it &apos;s not only code for america , and there are hundreds of people in the country who are standing up and write regierungs-apps , every day in their own communities .
they didn &apos;t give up the government .
they &apos;re awful frustrated with her , but she doesn &apos;t complain about it .
and these people know something that we lost from the eyes .
and that &apos;s when you &apos;re all going to leave you all your feelings about politics and all the other things that we really upset about , is government , at the core , in the words of tim o reilly , &quot; what we do in common , which we can &apos;t do alone . &quot;
now , a lot of people have been giving up the government .
and when you &apos;re one of those people , i &apos;m going to ask you that you &apos;re going to go around because things change .
politics doesn &apos;t change ; the government is in change .
and because the government finally , the government , will be schöpft -- erinner you : &quot; we are the people ? &quot; -- how we think about it , will affect how that change happens .
i didn &apos;t know very much about government when i started this program .
and how many people , i thought , the government is mainly about choosing people in office .
well after two years , i came to the conclusion that it &apos;s all about communities in order to beutelratten .
that &apos;s the call center of service and information .
there you are normally out when you &apos;re anrufst in your town .
if you have ever been to work in your städtisches &apos;s program , like our fellow fellow scott silverman , as part of the program -- in fact , they do all -- you &apos;ll see people , the government , in a way , to call the government to a lot of different problems including that a beutelratte in your house is .
so scott gets this anfruf .
he &apos;s typing &quot; beutelratte &quot; in the official database .
and he doesn &apos;t really have an idea . he starts with the tierfänger .
and finally , he says , &quot; look , can you just open up all the doors in your house and play it really sounds and see if the livestock is abhaut ? &quot;
and that worked . applause for scott .
but that was not the end of the beutelratten .
boston doesn &apos;t just have a call center .
it has an app , a web- and handy-app , called &quot; citizens connect . &quot;
we don &apos;t have written these app .
this is a very smart people at the office of the new urban mechanics in boston .
one day -- this is a real report -- came in . &quot; beutelratte in my mülltonne . can &apos;t tell if she &apos;s dead . &quot;
how do i get it ? &quot;
but what happens with &quot; citizens connect . &quot;
scott was unterhielt to human .
but in &quot; citizens connect &quot; is all public , so everybody can see it .
and in this case , it looked a neighbor .
and the next point we got was , &quot; i went across there , found the mülltonne behind the house .
beutelratte ? yes . alive ? yap .
then the mülltonne turned on the page . go home .
good night , sweet beutelratte . &quot;
pretty simple .
that &apos;s great . here &apos;s the digital thing .
and it &apos;s also a good example of getting the government to get into it .
but it &apos;s also a great example of the government as a platform .
and i don &apos;t mean , i mean , not necessarily a technical definition of platform .
i &apos;m more like a platform for people to help themselves and help others .
a citizen helped another citizen , but the government was a central role here .
they connected these two people .
and you could have them to be able to connect them with government performance , if they were needed , but a neighbor is a far better and cheaper alternative to state services .
when a neighbor helps the other , we strengthen our communities .
let &apos;s call the tierfänger , costs it a lot of money .
one of the most important things is we need to think about it is that government is not the same thing .
and most people understand that , but they think that one is the input from the other .
that our contribution to the system is .
how often we have chosen a political leader -- and sometimes we have used a lot of energy to choose a new political leader -- and then we refuse to lehnen and we expect the government to reflect our values and have our needs , and then hasn &apos;t changed a lot .
that &apos;s because the government is like a farther ocean and politics is the top of the top .
and what &apos;s below is what we call the bureaucracy .
and we use this word with contempt .
but it &apos;s this contempt , which is the one that we own , and for which we pay for something that &apos;s done against us , something else , and then we entmachten ourselves .
people seem to think politics is sexy .
if we want this institution for us , we need to do it for its own sexy .
because that &apos;s where the actual regierungsarbeit is happening .
we need to be einlassen on the government of government .
so the occupythesec-bewegung did it .
have you seen these guys ?
it &apos;s a group of besorgter citizens who wrote a very detailed 325-seitigen report , which is an answer to the sec-memo of the gesetzesvorlage of the finanz-reform .
it &apos;s not politically active , that &apos;s active active .
now , for those of us who have been given up the government , it &apos;s time we think about the world we want to leave our children .
you &apos;ve got to imagine the enormous challenges that you have to imagine .
do we really believe we can do what we need to do without improving an institution that can act on all of us ?
a government is absolutely necessary , but it &apos;s got more efficient .
the good news is that technology makes it possible , the function of the government , in a way that can actually do something by stärkt society .
and there &apos;s a generation that grew up the internet , and it knows that it &apos;s not so hard to do things together , you have to build the only systems .
now the average age of our fellows is 28 , so i &apos;m , unfortunately , nearly a generation older than most of you .
this is a generation that grew up with the voice of course .
they &apos;re not fighting this struggle that we all fight , who &apos;s allowed to talk to who , they &apos;re all allowed to speak .
you can make your opinion , every channel at every time , and they do it .
so , when you &apos;re confronted with the problem of government , you don &apos;t care about using your voices .
they use their hands .
they use their hands to write applications that improves the government .
and these apps , let us use our hands to improve our communities .
that might be a fire fire hydranten , a unkraut , a trash trash with a beutelratte .
and sure , we would have these fire fires all the time , and many people do that .
but these apps are like little digital memories that we &apos;re not only consumers , and we &apos;re not only consumers in government , who are paying taxes .
we are more than that , we are citizens .
and we &apos;re not going to improve government until we improve the world .
so the question i &apos;ve all here is , when it &apos;s about the big important things that we need to do together , all together , we will just be a lot of voices , or are we going to be a lot of hands ?
thank you .
usually my role in explaining people are the new technologies that are the aufkommen , and i thought , because i &apos;m under friends , i would tell you what i really think , and also try and understand what &apos;s going on with this incredible sprüngen , which quickly happened that we can &apos;t keep up with .
i &apos;m going to start to show you a very boring slide .
and ... could you just show the slide .
this is a slide i picked out of my ordner .
it &apos;s not about the details of the slide , but rather the general shape .
this slide shows data from a analysis of us from the power of risc output , compared to the performance of a local area .
the interesting thing here is that this slide , like so many others , which we often find in our field , a kind of a semi-logarithmischen curve .
in other words , every step here is a power of power in the leistungsskala .
and this is a novelty that we need to use this guy to be on a semi-logarithmischen curves in the area of technology .
something very strange happens .
so this is what i &apos;m going to talk about here .
so , if you ask the lights back to the lights .
and something more quickly , because i &apos;m going to draw something on the paper .
now why do we draw graphs on the technology curves ?
the reason i would draw on a normal graph , where we &apos;re going to say , this is the years , so the time the time of a way , and this is a very complex measure of the technology that i want to represent with a graph , that &apos;s a graph albern .
so you see that .
and that doesn &apos;t tell us a lot .
now , if i want to record a different technology , let &apos;s say a transporttechnologie , then it would be very unvernünftig , very unvernünftig , in shape of a flat line .
but if something like this is what happens here , it changes the most qualitativen conditions .
so if the transporttechnologie rate was so quickly going to be able to make the mikroprozessor-technologie progression , we could go into a taxi in a taxi and we would be in tokyo in tokyo .
but that &apos;s not so fast .
it was never before in history of the history of the technologie-entwicklung , this kind of rekursivem growth , which is the way that the scale of the entire few years is exponentially .
the question i want you to ask you is , if you look at these exponential curves , you see , they don &apos;t go on to go on .
it &apos;s not possible that everything has been able to evolve for forever and forever .
there are two options .
either it will be a classic s-kurve , like this , to something completely new , or it will happen here .
it &apos;s about it .
now , i &apos;m an optimist , so i think something like this is going to happen .
so , it &apos;s really like this , which means that we &apos;re right now in a transition right now .
we &apos;re here on this line , in a transition from the world &apos;s world , to a new kind of world .
so the question i want to ask , and i also myself myself , is that this new world is going to be ?
what is this new state that the world is starting to take ?
because the transition seems to be very confusing when you &apos;re in the middle of the inside .
when i was a kid , the future was somewhere in 2000 , and people often talked about what would happen in 2000 .
now we have a conference here where people talk about the future , and you find that the future is still in 2000 .
and more than that , we don &apos;t go .
in other words , the future of the future is a year since i &apos;ve been around in this world .
i think the reason for this is that we &apos;ll notice that there &apos;s something happening .
the transition is happening . we can feel it all .
and we know that at currently , it &apos;s just not a point of trying to look at 30 or 50 years , because everything will be so different , that a simple hochrechnung of what we don &apos;t make a sense is made .
i want to talk about what that might be , that transition that we &apos;re currently in .
to do this , i &apos;m going to talk first about some other things which really have nothing to do with technology or computers .
because i think to really understand this , we need to go back and look at the thing on a longer zeitskala .
and that &apos;s that i want to look at this on the planet &apos;s life of life .
i think the big picture makes sense , if you split it into a few milliarden-schritte .
so let &apos;s go back , and it &apos;s two billion years , and the earth was a big , steriler steinklumpen with many of the darauf chemicals .
now , if you look at the way these chemicals were organized , and that &apos;s a pretty good picture of how they anstellten it .
i think there are theories that are starting to understand how everything started to understand , but i &apos;ll tell you a story about how to tell you a story about that , that at that time , little öltröpfchen herumschwebten , which is what &apos;s held different kinds of chemicals for chemicals .
some of these öltröpfchen have a particular combination of chemicals that allowed them to integrate other chemicals from the outside and grow .
all of those , began to aufzuteilen .
these little öltröpfchen were the primitivste zellenform .
but , however , these öltröpfchen were not about alive in the same sense , because every single one of them was just a little , zufälliges recipe of chemicals .
and every time it divided , they have befindlichen chemicals into the ungleichen quantities .
so every tröpfchen was a little bit different .
in fact , the tröpfchen , which had an optimalere composition of growth as much as others and integrated more and more chemicals from outside , and they shared faster .
so , these neigten , they &apos;ve been neigten to survive longer , and they &apos;re going to go to grösserem .
so this is just a very simple chemical form of life , but more interesting , when this tröpfchen , it &apos;s going to learn a trick about abstraction .
in any way , what we don &apos;t understand is that tröpfchen have the ability to learn , information .
they &apos;ve learned to store the recipe of the cell as information , and in a particular chemical form that we call dna .
in other words , they found in this geistlosen evolutionary way that allowed them to allow them to be made niederzuschreiben of what they were made of , so that this information could be stored and copied .
the amazing thing about this is that this kind of information is store the information over the time of two billion years when they were born .
in fact , the recipe for us is , which is our genes , from the exact same code and the same one .
and that is every living organism , the exact same letter and the same code .
we &apos;re so far as we can , just for the vergnügungszweck , myself , can write the thing in this code .
and i have a hundred mikrogramm of a white pulvers , which i &apos;m trying to keep in airports in airports .
and what i &apos;ve done is -- what i &apos;ve done is , i took this code -- the code is made of normal letters that we use to the symbolisieren -- and i wrote my visitenkarte on a piece of dna , and i &apos;ve got 10 ^ 22 times .
so if someone wants to have a hundred million copies of my visitenkarte , i have enough for everybody in this room and even for everybody in the world , and it &apos;s right here .
if i was a egoist , i would have been a egoist , and then i would have written them on a virus and put it into the room .
so what &apos;s the next step ?
the dna of dna was an interesting step .
and the veranlagten these cells -- that made them happy for another billion years .
but then another , very interesting step , which were completely different , which was , and they started to communicate these cells and exchange information so that communities were born of cells .
i don &apos;t know if you knew that , but bacteria can actually exchange their dna .
and that &apos;s why the beständigkeit is growing .
some bacteria have found out how they can stay from penicillin and have written this information with other bacteria in dna , and now we have a lot of bacteria which are resistant to penicillin because the bacteria communicate with each other .
these communication now allowed the reasons of communities which were in a certain sense in the same boat ; they were synergetisch .
so they either survive , or they had either survive , or they went under , and that meant that if a community was successful , all the individuals of the community were repeated and then bevorzugt from evolution .
now the übergangsstelle is now where these communities so close to the zusammenrückten , that they decided to write the recipe for the entire community to be a zeichenkette .
and the next interesting thing took about another billion years .
at that point , we have an mehrzellige community , communities of many verschiedlichen zellentypen , which are the same organism .
in fact , we are also a mehrzellige community .
we have a lot of cells that are not on their own .
your skin cells are useless without heart cells , muscle cells , brain cells and so on .
so these communities started weiterzuentwickeln , so the plane that was happening was no longer the single cell , but the whole zellengemeinschaft that we call an organism .
the next step was happening within these communities .
the zellengemeinschaften began to abstrahieren information again .
and they developed special structures that made nothing other than information within the organism .
and these are the neural structures .
so the neurons are the informationsverarbeitungsapparat that these zellengemeinschaften have built .
they started to train specialists within the community , special structures , which were responsible for learning , understand and the festhalten of information .
and this was the brain and the nervous system of these communities .
this gave you an evolutionary advantage .
because at that point , an individual -- learning now happened within the time of the lifespan of a single organism , rather than that evolutionary period of time .
so an organism could learn to eat a certain fruit , because they liked bad and made it sick , the last time he ate it .
now , this could happen within the lifespan of an individual organism , where the hunderttausende hundreds of years were needed , because this information has to be learned from the individuals , which were dying because of these frucht , because they haven &apos;t been there yet .
so the nervous system has the evolutionsprozess in this particular brain tissue because evolution could now take within an individual .
she could take place within a time of a time .
what happened after that is that the individual organisms found a way to communicate each other .
as an example , the raffinierteste version of this kommunikationsart version of this kommunikationsart language is the human language .
it &apos;s a fairly amazing invention when you think about it .
i have a very complicated , unordentliche and verwirrte idea in my head .
i &apos;m sitting there and i just give grunzende notes of me , in the hope of creating a similar verwirrte idea in your mind that has a certain kind of similarity of my original idea .
so we take something very complicated , it turns out into notes , a sequence of sound , and producing something very complicated in the minds of others .
so this allows us to work again as a unified organism .
and what we actually did , we , is , we &apos;ve started to see , we started to abstrahieren .
we &apos;ve actually durchgehen the same steps that have been through the durchgemacht -- the abstraction of our methods of how to capture data .
the invention of the language was a little bit of that direction .
telefonie , computer , videobänder , cd-roms and so on , all of our spezialisierten mechanisms that we built in our community , to be able to get this information .
and it &apos;s connecting us all together to something that &apos;s much bigger , and also able to evolve faster than we &apos;ve been so far .
so today , evolution can happen in the period of time .
you &apos;ve also seen tys little evolutionsbeispiel , where he showed a little evolution in the convolution program , right before your eyes .
so we &apos;ve got the zeitskalen again .
the first steps of the history i told you , dauerten a billion years a piece .
the next steps , the nervous system and the brain , dauerten a hundred million years .
then the nächstens steps , like language and so on , dauerten less than a million years .
and these next steps , like electronics , seem to take a few more decades .
the process is feeding itself , and it &apos;s becoming , i think , auto-katalytisch is the word for this -- when something more verstärkt .
the more it changes , the faster it changes .
and i think that &apos;s what we see here in this explosionsartigen curve .
we see the process that &apos;s feeding itself .
i live from building computers , and i know that i &apos;m using the mechanism that i use to build computers , not actually use , without the recent recent advances in computer computing .
so what i have is doing my current activity is to design objects with such a high complexity that it &apos;s impossible to make these in traditional sense .
i don &apos;t know what every single transistor in the verbindungsmaschine .
it has billions of them .
what i do instead , and what the designers of thinking are doing is we think of a certain abstraktionsebene , übergeben that machine , and the machine makes something that we can go far , better and faster than we could ever do it .
and it &apos;s partly in the methods that we don &apos;t even understand .
a method which is particularly interesting , and which i &apos;ve used to have recently used is evolution itself .
and we put a evolutionsprozess in the machine , which is going to be in the mikrosekunden-bereich .
to give an example , in the most extreme cases , we can create a program which is designed to be developed by random rules .
we say , &quot; computers , generiere , a hundred million randomly randomly chosen sequences of the instruktionen .
now , you know , all of these randomly chosen instructions , are all programs , and then pick the ones that i have the next to do . &quot;
so in other words , i &apos;m just define what i want .
let &apos;s say , i want to go a number , which would be a simple example that i &apos;ve been using for that .
so , you find programs that can be the most likely to do the numbers .
and of course , the chance of randomly chosen instruktionen is very small , that you have a chance to have a chance to figure out a number of numbers , so i don &apos;t think the instruktionen are actually going to do this .
but one of them may be very lucky to two numbers in the right order .
now i &apos;m saying , &quot; computers , take the 10 percent of the sequences that i &apos;ve come to the next .
and then , they &apos;re speichere , lösche the rest .
now , all the übriggebliebenen that have the numbers in best .
and that &apos;s a method of rekombinierens , analog to reproduction . &quot;
take two programs and they make children through the exchange of their subroutinen , and the kids have the properties of the two programs of the two programs .
so now i have a new generation of programs that came through the combinations of programs that have come into the vorgaben of the vorgaben .
say , &quot; please repeat this process . &quot;
bewerte them .
some of the mutations might be .
and try this again with another generation .
all these generations need few milliseconds .
and so i can run an evolution of millions of years in the computer in a few minutes , or in more complex , some hours .
and then finally , i get programs that can be able to do a lot of the same .
the fact is , these programs are so much more efficient than any program i can ever have by hand .
and then , if i look at these programs , i can &apos;t tell you how they work .
i &apos;ve tried to understand it .
they &apos;re verworrene and odd programs .
but they do the job .
i know , i &apos;m sure you &apos;re doing the job , because you get from a series of hunderttausenden programs that have done the job .
because their life was on the fact that she did the job right .
i used to sit in a 747 with a 747 minsky , and he ale a map , and he says , &quot; oh look . look at that .
there &apos;s this plane , the flugzeug kleinteilen , which are working together to make your flight safer . don &apos;t you do that ?
we know that a entwicklungsprozess is not optimal when it gets too complicated .
so we start to leave with computer , for a process which is very different from the classical process of music .
it allows us to make things with a much higher complexity than the normal methods would allow .
and yet , we don &apos;t understand the possibility of it .
so gewissermassen überflügelt us .
we use these programs to make the computer a lot faster , so we can do that process to do faster .
so it &apos;s going to be a rückkopplung .
it &apos;s going faster and faster and i think that &apos;s why it seems so confusing .
because all these new technologies are fed themselves .
we raise up .
we &apos;ve been to a point where the analog is at the time , when einzeller-organismen evolved to mehrzeller-organismen .
so we &apos;re the amöben , and we can &apos;t even turn out what &apos;s going to be on the hell of what we &apos;re actually doing .
we &apos;re in the middle of this übergangpunkt .
but i really think that after us , it &apos;s something .
i think it &apos;s very hochmütig of us to say that we are the end of evolution .
and i think we all have part of the creation of what &apos;s next is next .
now , lunch is before and i think i &apos;m listening to the last before i &apos;m going to go .
my story begins in a very close way , in front of two years ago .
i was under the sky in the desert with sufi-sänger mukhtiar ali .
we talked about that nothing has been changed since the time of the ancient indian epos . &quot;
if we were to travel to indians , we were going to go into a car and schwirrten the sky .
now we &apos;re doing this with airplanes .
at the time when the big indian kriegerprinz durst was durst , he took a bow , fired in the ground and water .
now we &apos;re doing this with bohrern and machines .
we came to the conclusion that magic and magic were replaced by machines .
that made me really sad .
i was getting a little bit of fear .
it was scared to me that i could lose the ability to enjoy the sonnenuntergang without camera , and without my friends .
i found technology should be possible to do it and not kill magic .
when i was a little girl , my grandfather gave me his little silberne .
this piece of 50 years old technology became the magischste thing for me .
she became an goldener access to a world of piraten and verunglückter ships and to pictures in my imagination .
i came to think of the schicken and the cameras of them to dream of .
they kept us inspired by this .
and so i went into the world of technology to see how i could use it to make magic of the magic of töten .
i started to illustrate books with 16 .
when i saw the ipad , i saw it as a device to be able to connect the readers around the world .
it can know how we hold it .
it can know where we are .
it &apos;s taking pictures and text together , and animation , sound and touch .
storytelling is always used .
but what do we do with that ?
i just go to khoya , an interactive ipad app .
here &apos;s , &quot; put your fingers on each light . &quot;
and so -- here &apos;s &quot; this box belongs ... &quot; i write my name .
and i &apos;m going to get a character in the book .
and again , a letter goes down to me -- and the ipad knows in gps where i live -- that &apos;s right to me .
the kid in me is really excited about this .
i &apos;ve talked a lot about magic .
i don &apos;t mean by the magician and the drachen , but the magic of childhood , those ideas we all had as children .
it &apos;s always exciting to make it happen .
so you have to put the ipad in the ipad and rauslassen the fireflies .
and he goes through the rest of the book .
another idea that i was fascinated as a kid is that a whole galaxy can be in one single murmel .
and so , here &apos;s a book and every world , a little bit of a murmel , i &apos;m getting here to the magic device in the device .
and this opens a map .
fantasybücher had always maps , but these cards were static .
this map is growing and it &apos;s made and it &apos;s a orientation in the rest of the book .
it also shows you about other places in the book .
i &apos;m going to go in here .
it &apos;s also important to me to do something that is also very zeitgemäß .
these are the apsaras .
we &apos;ve all heard of feen and nymphen , but how many people outside of india know their indian colleagues , the apsaras ?
the poor people were stuck in indras rooms thousands of years in a old muffigen book .
and we bring them back , in a more contemporary history of children .
a story that &apos;s going to be auseinandersetzt with new issues like the umweltkrise .
the theme of umweltkrise , a big problem for the last 10 years is that children are sitting in their rooms , on their computers , without their hands .
but now with mobile technology , we can take our children into the natural world with their technology .
in an interaction of the book you &apos;re going to go to a search , you have to go out and collect the camera of the ipads images of natural objects .
as a child , i had collections of stöckern , rocks , kieseln and muscheln .
somehow , children don &apos;t do anymore .
this is kindheitsritual , you have to go out to go in a chapter one of a flower and tag it .
in one other chapter , you have to take a piece of baumrinde and tag .
so , you really create a digital collection of photos that you can then put online .
a kid in london shows the image of a fuchses , and he says , &quot; oh , i &apos;ve seen a fuchs . &quot;
a kid in india says , &quot; i &apos;ve seen a monkey . &quot;
it creates a kind of social network around a digital collection of photos that you actually recorded .
there &apos;s a variety of ways to connect magic to connect the world and technology .
the next book , we &apos;re going to design an interaction where you use the video of the transistor , and using a animation of that , using this , a animation of the elfen that appear on a plant before the house .
at a point , the screen is filling up with leaves .
you have to make the sound of the winds , and you &apos;ll blow it away and read the rest of the book .
we all move around a world where the forces of technology can come closer and to get to the magic and technology .
we use the energy of the sun .
we bring our children and we &apos;re closer to the natural world and the magic , fun and love of our childhood by the simple medium of a story .
thank you .
this is really an extraordinary honor for me .
i spend most of my time in untersuchungshaft , prison , prison .
i spend most of my time with the social schwächsten in the sozialbausiedlungen and places where there &apos;s been very much .
here at ted , and hear , like , i &apos;m having a real force , i gave me a lot of force .
in the short time here , i &apos;ve got a identity . ted has an identity .
you can tell things that the world &apos;s impact .
and sometimes when something comes about ted , it gets a meaning and force that it would not have .
i say that because i think identity is very important .
we &apos;ve seen some amazing presentations .
i think we &apos;ve learned that the words of a teacher matters , but the words of a dedicated teacher are particularly meaningful .
as a doctor , you can do good . but as a doctor , you can do more .
and so i want to talk about the power of identity .
i didn &apos;t have learned this in my work as a lawyer .
i learned that from my grandmother .
i was a big in a family , a traditional afroamerikanischen household dominated by a matriarchin , and that matriarchin was my grandmother .
she was a taffe , strong woman , she had an impact .
she had the last word in every familienstreit .
she was also the origin of a lot of different differences in our family .
she was a daughter of a sklavenfamilie .
their parents were born in the 1840ern in virginia , in virginia .
she was born in 1880 and the experience of slavery , shaped their view very strong .
my grandmother was strong , but she was also loving .
when i met her as a little boy , she came to me and i was umarmte .
they were so fest me that i could barely breathe , and then they made me off .
one or two hours later , when i met her , she came to me and said , &quot; bryan , you know , you know ? &quot;
and when i said no , i &apos;ll tell you again . when i said yes , she made me quiet .
she was something that made you wanted to be close to her .
the only problem was that they had 10 children .
my mother was the youngest of her 10 children .
sometimes , if i wanted to spend time with her , it was hard to get your attention .
my cousins around all around .
i remember , i have to be eight or nine , that i woke up one morning and went into the living room . all my cousins around .
my grandmother was sitting at the end of the zimmers and i was staring at me .
first i thought that this would be a game .
i looked at her and she &apos;s smiling , but she was looking very serious .
this was the way 15 or 20 minutes . then she stood up and came over to me . she took me out of the hand , and she said , &quot; come , bryan . you and i have to talk . &quot;
i remember it was a little bit like it was yesterday .
i &apos;ll never forget it .
she took me out and said , &quot; bryan , i &apos;m going to tell you something , but you have to promise you don &apos;t get it . &quot;
i said , &quot; promised , grandma . &quot;
she said , &quot; ehrenwort ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
she sat down and looked at me . she said , &quot; i want you to know that i &apos;ve seen you . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you &apos;re special . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you can do anything you want to do . &quot;
i &apos;ll never forget that .
then she said , &quot; you &apos;ve got to promise me three things , bryan . &quot;
i said , &quot; okay , grandma . &quot;
she said , &quot; the first thing to me is you &apos;ll always love your mom . &quot;
she said , &quot; your mom is my baby , and you have to promise you you &apos;re going to take you care of you . &quot;
i &apos;m looking at my mother , so i said , &quot; yes , i &apos;m going to do , &quot; oh , i &apos;m going to do that . &quot;
and then she said , &quot; next to me , you &apos;re always going to do the right thing . &quot; well , when it &apos;s hard to do the right thing .
i thought , and i said , &quot; yes , i promise . &quot;
and finally , she said , &quot; the last thing you have to promise to me is , &quot; you never have alcohol . &quot;
well , i was nine years old , and so i said , &quot; yes , i promise . &quot;
i grew up on the country , in the old , rural south and i have a brother who &apos;s older and a young sister .
when i was about 14 or 15 , my brother came home , and i took this sixpack beer with me , my sister and i was going to go into the forest .
we &apos;re just alberten around it .
then he took a drink of beer and he offered my sister to one , and she took them , and then offered me to one .
i said , &quot; no , no , no . all right . do it . i don &apos;t want a beer . &quot;
my brother said , &quot; well , do it . now we do that , you &apos;re doing everything we do . &quot;
i had what &apos;s going on , and what i had was , and go , and go , a beer .
i said , &quot; i don &apos;t want . just do it . just do it . &quot;
my brother staring me .
he said , &quot; what &apos;s going on with you ? well , what &apos;s going on . &quot;
and then he looked at me and said , &quot; oh no , you don &apos;t do you crazy for the conversation with grandma ? &quot;
i said , &quot; what are you talking about ? &quot;
he said , &quot; grandma tells the grandchildren that they &apos;re special . &quot;
i was devastated .
i &apos;m going to be gestehen to you .
i should probably not do that .
this is perhaps going to be public .
i &apos;m a 52 years old , and i &apos;m gestehe , i never drink a drop of alcohol .
i &apos;m not saying that because i think it &apos;s tugendhaft . i say that because identity is power .
if we can create the right kinds of identity , we can tell people around us , the people that they don &apos;t think of first .
we can get them to do things they thought they could not .
of course , my grandmother would tell their grandchildren , they &apos;re special .
my grandfather was during the prison prison .
my uncle died of alkoholinduzierten diseases .
and she believed that these were the topics that we need to take care of .
i tried to say something about our justizsystem .
this country is different than 40 years ago .
in the back , people were 300,000 people in haftanstalten and prison .
today , it &apos;s 2.3 million .
the united states has the highest world in the world today .
seven million people are released on bewährung or strafaussetzung .
i think , in my opinion , masseninhaftierungen has changed our world .
in social weak and black parts of the population there are despair and despair , because of these changes .
one of three male black black black black and 30 , in prison , in prison , entlassen on bewährung or bedingter .
in urban communities all over the country -- from los angeles to philadelphia , d.c. to washington -- they &apos;re 50 to 60 percent of all black boys in prison in prison , in prison , on bewährung , or mit bedingter .
and not only are we shaped by questions that have rassenzugehörigkeit , it &apos;s also going to be entstellt by poverty .
we have a justizsystem justizsystem in this country , which is much better if they &apos;re rich and guilty of being poor and innocent .
wealth , not verschulden , affected the result .
and yet , we seem to be happy with it .
politics of fear and anger have convinced us that these problems are not our problems .
we &apos;ve lost the contact .
i find that interesting .
there are some more hochinteressante developments .
my home state of alabama is constantly entzieht the wahlrecht when they &apos;re strafrechtlich .
here , and today in alabama , 34 percent of the male black population are permanent their wahlrecht .
we &apos;re prognostizieren , in 10 years , the quote of the aberkennung of the bürgerlichen ehrenrechte will be so high as the verabschiedung of the wahlrechtsgesetzes .
silence is ohrenbetäubend .
i vertrete children .
many of my clients are very young .
the united states of america are the only country in the world who &apos;s convicted of the dreizehnjährige children in prison .
in this country , there are lebenslängliche haftstrafen haftstrafen with no bedingte .
we &apos;ve done a lot of work .
the only country in the world .
i &apos;m vertrete people in todeszellen .
the question of death sentence is an interesting question .
we believe because you &apos;ve taught us that the real question is : has a human being made for one of him who &apos;s begangenes crimes for him ?
this is a very sensitive question .
but you can also think differently about how we see our identity .
the other perspective is not : anybody deserves death for a crimes , but , do we deserve to kill it ?
i find that fascinating .
the death sentence in america are defined by error .
in nine people we were doing , one that we have been hingerichtet for innocent who &apos;s been entlassen from death row .
an astonishing fehlerquote . one of nine innocent .
i find that fascinating .
we would never fly somebody with an airplane if nine planes , and take off , one of a car .
but somehow we can do it , to get ourselves from this problem .
it &apos;s not our problem .
it &apos;s not our burden .
it &apos;s not our struggle .
i &apos;m talking a lot about these questions .
i &apos;m talking about race and the question of whether we &apos;re right to kill it .
and it &apos;s exciting because i &apos;m going to beibringe my students , i &apos;m talking about slavery .
i &apos;m talking about terrorism , the time at the end of the rekonstruktion , to the beginning of the world .
we don &apos;t really know much about it .
but for the afroamerikaner in this country , it was a time of terror .
in many areas , people have to be afraid of lynchmobs .
or bombs .
it was fear of terror , who shaped her life .
these older people now come to me and say , &quot; mr. , stevenson , you talk , they &apos;re talking about talks . they tell people to stop saying that we have to do it for the first time in our nation with terrorism : after 9 / 11 . &quot;
they say , &quot; no -- tell people that we grew up with this . &quot;
and after terrorism , the rassentrennung and decades of rassistisch were willing to commit and to end .
and yet , there are a dynamic in our country , and we don &apos;t like to talk about our problems .
we don &apos;t like to talk about our story .
and so we don &apos;t really understand what the meaning our actions have in historical context .
we &apos;re running up .
we &apos;re always creating new tension and conflict .
it &apos;s hard to talk about race , and i think that &apos;s because we &apos;re not willing to come to the process of truth and reconciliation .
in south africa , people understood that the rassentrennung cannot be overcome without the willingness to truth and reconciliation .
even after the genocide in rwanda , it was the willingness , but not in this country .
i &apos;ve given a few talks about the death row .
it was fascinating because one of the scientists stood up to my talk , and she said , &quot; you know , it &apos;s profoundly verstörend to hear her talk . &quot;
he said , &quot; in germany , there &apos;s no death sentence .
and of course , they can never give them more .
it was silent . then a woman said , &quot; with our story , it &apos;s impossible that we will ever kill ourselves for the systematic killing of people .
it would be gewissenlos of us , consciously and gezielt .
i thought about it .
as it would feel like to live in a world where the german state made people hinrichten , especially if there were a lot of jews .
it would be unerträglich .
it would be gewissenlos .
and yet , here in the states of the old südens , we are richten people -- and here is the risk of being convicted to death , and the victim knows when it &apos;s black , and if it &apos;s black , 22 times higher , if the black black is black and the victim white -- in the same states where the bodies ruhen people .
and yet there &apos;s this mental abkopplung .
i think our identity is threatened .
if we don &apos;t deal with this , with these difficult topics , the positive and wonderful things are affected .
we love innovation .
we love technology and creativity .
we love entertainment .
but finally , these realities are überschattet of suffering , abuse , herabsetzung , ausgrenzung .
i think it &apos;s important to combine both .
because we ultimately talk about that we need more hope , more engagement , more commitment , to be able to pass in a complex world .
for me , time is to make time to think and to talk about the poor , the benachteiligten , the benachteiligten , who will never be at ted .
but think about a way that is integrated into our own lives .
we all have to believe things that we can &apos;t see .
we do that . so we &apos;re rational , as we appreciate it as well .
innovation , creativity , and development are not just from our minds .
they come from ideas that are driven by the belief in our hearts .
it &apos;s this kopf-herz-verbindung , which i think is driving us , not just to be open to all the bright and begeisternden things , but also for the dark and problematischen .
vaclav havel , the great tschechische of politicians , said , &quot;
when we fought in eastern europe , we wanted to do everything , but what we needed most was hope , a mental orientation , the willingness to be the willingness to be in hoffnungslosen places and witness .
this mental orientation is the core of what i think is also going to be engaged in the ted-gemeinschaften .
there &apos;s no way to be human , and design that allows us to be human and even human , as long as we don &apos;t have eyes and ears for poverty , ausgrenzung and injustice .
i want to warn you . this kind of identity is asking a lot more of us than when we don &apos;t take care of us .
she &apos;s going to touch it .
as a young lawyer , i &apos;m a big privilege to meet pink parks .
woman park kept coming back to montgomery , where she traf. two of her oldest women , johnnie carr , johnnie carr , who had organisiert the montgomery-busboykott -- an incredible afroamerikanerin -- and virginia durr , a white , whose husband , clifford durr , dr. king vertrat .
so these women were meeting and they were just a unterhielten .
and then , and i went to call that woman carr and said , &quot; bryan , woman park is coming into the city . we want to talk .
do you want to listen and listen ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; yes , i like to . &quot;
she said , &quot; and what are you going to do when you &apos;re here ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m going to listen . &quot;
and i went over and i just heard .
it was always inspiring , so inspiring .
one day i sat down and hearing these women , and after a few hours , woman was parks to me to tell us , &quot; well , let me tell you what the one is called the same is to be right .
what are trying to do ?
i started with my usual talk .
i said , &quot; we &apos;re trying to do injustice .
wr people want to help people who are innocent verurteilt .
we want to fight bias and discrimination in the strafvollzugssystem .
we want to eliminate lebenslängliche haftstrafen without bedingte strafaussetzung for children .
we want to do something about the death of the death .
we want to reduce the number of death row .
we want to eliminate masseninhaftierungen .
i thought my usual talk , and then she looked at me and said , &quot; mhmm . mhmm . &quot;
she said , &quot; this is going to be very , very tired . &quot;
then she refused to put a finger on my face , and he said , &quot; and so she must be very , very tapfer . &quot;
and so i think the ted community should be tapferer .
we have to ask the ways of asking these challenges : these problems , that suffering .
because ultimately , our humanity is , our humanity , from our humanity .
i learned very simple things in my work .
i learned a few simple things .
we all are more than the worst thing we &apos;ve ever done .
i think that &apos;s true for every human being on the planet .
when someone is lying , it &apos;s not just a liar .
if someone takes something that doesn &apos;t hear it , it &apos;s not just a dieb .
even who kills someone is not just a killer .
and because that &apos;s like that , there &apos;s a fundamental human dignity that has to respect the law .
i also believe in many parts of this country , and with security in many parts of the earth , the opposite of poverty is not wealth .
i don &apos;t think that .
i think that in many places the opposite of poverty is justice .
and finally , i think although it &apos;s so dramatic , so beautiful and inspiring , and so anregend , we &apos;re not going to be measured in our technology at the end of the things that we &apos;re developing not about our intellect and minds .
finally , a society will not be measuring how they treat their rich and powerful and privilegierten , but to be able to deal with the poor , the verurteilten , the inhaftierten .
because in this context , we start to understand the real amazing things that are around us .
sometimes i lose the balance . a story .
i sometimes push too much .
i &apos;m getting tired of the way we all .
sometimes these ideas are going to be ahead of our thinking , in a very important way .
i vertrete these kids who were convicted of sehr strafen .
i go to the untersuchungsgefängnis and visit a client who &apos;s 13 or 14 years old , and who &apos;s supposed to be an adult to be a adult .
and then i wonder : how could that happen ?
how can a judge turn somebody into something that he &apos;s not ?
the judge looks at him as adults , but i see a child .
one night i stayed at night and thought , my goodness , if a judge can turn us into something else , he must have zauberkräfte .
right , bryan , the judge has zauberkräfte .
you should also want to do that .
and because it was late , and i couldn &apos;t think more right , i started working on a antrag .
i had a 14jährigen , poor black boy as a client .
and i started to go on with this . the headline said , &quot; antrag , my poor , 14jährigen black mandanten , to treat a privilegierten , white , 75jährigen topmanager , &quot; ‌ .
in my case , i explained that fehlverhalten of the staatsanwaltschaft and the police were also taking care of the same .
there was a crazy line of that in this country , there &apos;s nothing more rechtens in this country , that there &apos;s only fehlverhalten .
the next morning i woke up and i didn &apos;t know if i was going to have dreamed of this crazy , or i had written it .
and to my horror , i didn &apos;t just write him , but i sent to the court .
a few months , and i had forgotten everything .
but finally , i decided my god , i have to go into the dish and i &apos;m talking to this crazy case .
i got into the car and i was overwhelmed by accident .
so i went to the court .
and i thought that &apos;s going to be so hard .
and finally , i got out of my car , and i went to the court .
when i was hochging. the staircase , there was an elderly , black man who got the janitors in the court .
when he saw me , he came over to me and said , &quot; who are you ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m a lawyer . &quot; he said , &quot; you &apos;re a lawyer ? &quot; i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
he came to me and umarmte me .
then he flüsterte me into the ear .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m so proud of it . &quot;
and i have to say , there was power .
it touched something very deeply in me , identity , the ability of each individual , something that contribute to a community , to a point of hope .
well , i went on to the gerichtssaal .
and as soon as the judge saw me .
he said , &quot; mr. stevenson , did you have put this crazy place ? &quot;
i said , &quot; yes . &quot; and then we started to discuss .
more people in the way they were in , just because they were angry .
i wrote these crazy things .
polizeibeamte came in and stellvertretende staatsanwälte and büroangestellte .
in the handumdrehen , the gerichtssaal of people who were angry , that we were angry , that we were talking about color , about poverty , about inequality .
from my augenwinkel , i looked at the janitors and go off .
he kept looking through the window and could hear the whole thing .
he went on and down .
finally , this old black man came to a very besorgten man with a very besorgten gesichtsausruck in the gerichtssaal and sat down on the verteidigungsbank .
ten minutes later , the judge announced a pause .
and during the break , a polizeibeamter in the break came in a polizeibeamter , which was the janitors in the gerichtssaal .
this deputy ran over to the elderly black .
he said , &quot; jimmy , what do you do in the gerichtssaal ? &quot;
the old black man stood on the deputy , and he looked at me , and he said , &quot; i &apos;m a little bit of a hergekommen to say this young man , don &apos;t lose the goal . &quot; don &apos;t give you on .
i &apos;ve come to ted because i think a lot of you have understood that the moral universe of the universe is far ausschwingt , but that it &apos;s the justice .
we &apos;re not fully evolved as humans , as long as we don &apos;t care about human rights and grundwerte .
that our all survival is connected to each other .
that we have to connect our visions of technology and design , from entertainment and creativity , with humanity , compassion and justice .
and i want to , especially , one of you who can see that , just say , don &apos;t lose the goal in the eyes . don &apos;t give it up .
you &apos;ve seen this audience , and this community &apos;s a obvious wish to help you and do something .
what can we do yet ?
bryan stevenson : well , there are all kinds of ways .
if you live in california , there &apos;s a volksentscheid volksentscheid where it &apos;s about actually doing a effort , something from the geldstrom umzuleiten , which is flows to the politics of the punishment .
here , in california , you will be in the next five years , a billion dollars for the death sentence , a billion dollars .
and yet , 46 percent of the tötungsdelikte end up not with a verhaftung .
56 percent of all the vergewaltigungsfälle don &apos;t get in trial .
here &apos;s the opportunity to do something .
this is a referendum that will suggest that money can invest in more security and security .
i think there are opportunities everywhere .
during the last three decades , the verbrechensrate of the verbrechensrate in america has been immens .
that fact often put into a context of increasing inhaftierungszahlen .
what would you say to someone who believes this ?
now , in fact , the number of gewaltverbrechen has not changed very much .
most of the masseninhaftierungen in this country didn &apos;t really found in the class of the gewaltverbrechen .
it was the fehlgeleitete kreuzzug against drugs .
so the dramatic numbers of the prisoner &apos;s in the prisoner .
we have hinreißen ourselves from the rhetoric of the punishment .
now we have a drei-verstöße -gesetze , which people are always put on grid for a fahrraddiebstahl , for the theft of the theft of geringfügigen good , rather than that they force them to give the victims .
i think we need to do more to help people who have become victims of a straftat , not less .
and i think our current bestrafungsphilosophie are not going to help .
i think that &apos;s what we need to change .
bryan , you &apos;ve actually brought a string string to the schwingen .
they &apos;re a inspiring personality .
thank you for ted . thank you .
so , bin laden &apos;s death is an increase of gefahrenrisiko .
and then two : famine in somalia . and there are three times in the police .
four 4 : bösartige kartelle . speakers five : dangerous kreuzfahrtschiffe .
speakers 6 : social decline . speakers seven : 65 dead .
speakers 8 : tsunamiwarnung . speakers 9 : cyber-attacken , cyber-attacken .
different speakers : drogenkrieg . mass destruction .
recession . death . doomsday . egypt . syria .
crisis . death . disaster .
oh my god .
so these are just a few of the clips that i &apos;ve collected over the last six months -- but it would have been the last six days , or the last six years .
the fact is that the media prefer to show us negative topics , because our minds are getting the attention to these topics .
and there &apos;s also a very good reason for that .
every second day , our senses will start much more information than our brain has ever been able to process .
and because , because of course , it &apos;s more important than our survival , is the first stop for all of the information to all of our temporallappens , the amygdala .
so the amygdala is our frühwarnsystem system , our gefahrendetektor .
it sortiert and durchkämmt all the information on the search for any kind of andeutung of danger in our environment .
so , when we see the news , we prefer to look for negative news .
and the old phrase , &quot; if it blutet , demand is very true .
now , with all our digital devices that we have seven days a week , 24 hours a day , the day , all the negative news , is not a miracle that we &apos;re pessimistic .
it &apos;s not a miracle that everybody thinks that it &apos;s always worse in the world .
but perhaps that &apos;s not the case .
perhaps that &apos;s the reality .
perhaps the vast progress we &apos;ve done in the last century is so strong that it will be possible for us to create a world of the wealth of the world .
now , i &apos;m not saying we don &apos;t have big problems -- climate crisis , artensterben , water water and energieprobleme -- we have .
and as humans , we &apos;re much better at the end of the problems , but they &apos;re going to go on to get over a long term , but they ultimately end up .
but let &apos;s see what we &apos;ve done in the last century , so we can have the development .
in the last hundred years , average lifespan has more than doubled , which has verdreifacht the population of the population .
child mortality has dropped a tenth .
and so , the ernährungs- , elektrizitäts- transport- and kommunikationskosten costs down to have a vielfaches .
steve pinker showed us that we are now living in a very peaceful time .
and according to charles kenny , the alphabetisierungsquote alphabetisierungsquote rate in the last 130 years of 25 years .
we live in a really extraordinary time .
and a lot of people forget this .
and we &apos;re going to increase our expectations .
in fact , we are neu poverty .
remember , a huge percentage of americans who live under poverty poverty is access to electricity , water , toilets , kühlschränken , television , television , mobile , klimaanlagen and cars .
the richest , the richest , the richest , the imperatoren of the earth , never could have dreamed of luxusgüter .
the basis of a lot of these technologies , and these are growing .
my good friend ray kurzweil showed us that every tool that will be information technology , on the curve of moore &apos;s law , is going to make great sprünge , and the preis-performance-quotient preis-performance-quotient all 12 to 24 months .
that &apos;s why the mobile phone cell in your pocket is about a million times less than a supercomputer supercomputer .
now look at this curve .
that &apos;s moore &apos;s law for the last hundred years .
notice two things about this curve .
one , how do they go up -- in good for the bad times , war or peace , recession , depression and hochkonjunktur .
this is the result of the computer computers that build faster computers .
it &apos;s not slowed for any of our big problems .
also , despite your logarithmischen verlaufs on the left , it &apos;s up .
so the growth rate itself is accelerating .
and on this curve , on the back of moore &apos;s law , we find a bunch of remarkable technologies that are all available .
&quot; cloud-computing , &quot; which is to call my friends in autodesk , sensors and networks , robots , 3d printer , which enable the personal production to access our planet , synthetic biology , treibstoffe , impfungen , impfungen , and food , digital medicine , nano-materialien and artificial intelligence .
how many of you have seen the victory of ibms &apos;s supercomputer watson in &quot; risk &quot; ?
that was a big one .
i &apos;d have a durchforstet and looked for the best headlines i could find .
i love this : &quot; watson bezwingt human enemy . &quot;
&quot; risk &quot; is not a simple game .
it &apos;s about understanding the nuancen of language .
imagine that this artificial intelligence would be available for each owner of a mobiltelefones .
four years ago , ray kurzweil , and i &apos;m here at ted , a new university called &quot; the singularity university . &quot;
we teach our students all these technologies , with special focus on how they can be used to solve the great challenges of humankind .
and every year we ask students , companies , to create the companies , products and services that within a decade will be a positive life of people &apos;s lives .
think about that a group of students today can affect the lives of billions of people .
30 years ago , this would have been ridiculous .
today , we can have verweisen dozens of companies that have done this .
when i think of creating abundance , i don &apos;t mean a life full of luxury for everyone on the planet ; it &apos;s about creating a life full of possibilities .
it &apos;s about creating a lot of money .
so , the scarcity is , the kontextbezogen , and technology is a resource of befreiende force .
here &apos;s an example .
this is the history of napoleon iii. in the middle of the 18th century .
he &apos;s the guy on the left .
he invited the king of siam for dinner .
napoleons soldiers got silber-besteck , napoleon himself got gold-besteck .
the king of siam but got aluminium-besteck .
so , aluminium was the most valuable metal on the planet , more valuable than gold and platin .
this is why the dome of the washington-monuments was made of aluminum .
although aluminium einnimmt percent of the erdmasse , it doesn &apos;t come in a pure metal .
it &apos;s being connected by oxygen and silikate .
but then the technology of the elektrolyse was developed and made aluminiumherstellung so cheap that we use it with our wegwerf-mentalität .
then let &apos;s put this analogy into the future .
we think of energieknappheit today .
ladies and gentlemen , we live on a planet that &apos;s filled with 5.000-mal more energy than we consume .
16 terawatt energy prasseln all the 88 minutes .
it &apos;s not about the lack of the problem .
and there &apos;s good news .
in this year , you &apos;ve been able to reduce the cost of solar solar in india to 50 percent of the oil -- 8.8 rupees in comparison to 17 rupees .
the cost of solar energy costs in the last year .
last month , this has published a study that shows that until the end of the end of the sunny areas of the u.s. , at the end of the u.s. , at the end of the u.s. , the 6 of the u.s. average is going to cost to 15 cents in the national average .
and when we have a energieüberschuss , we &apos;ll also have water in abundance .
let &apos;s talk about wasser-kriege .
remember , when carl did the voyager-raumfahrzeug in 1990 , when it was saturn vorbeigezogen , back to earth ?
he took a famous photo . how did it meant ?
&quot; a pale blue . &quot;
because we live on a wasserplaneten .
we live on a planet , which is covered in 70 percent of water .
yes , it &apos;s 97,5 percent of the water , two percent of the water , and we &apos;re fighting for 80 percent of water on the planet , but there &apos;s hope .
and there are new technologies , not in 10 or 20 years , but now .
it &apos;s new nanotechnologien on the way , nano-materialien .
and from a conversation morning with dean kaman , one of the innovators of the do , i want to share with you -- he gave me permission -- his technolgie , the slingshot , which is a viele , and that many of you may have heard . it &apos;s the size of a kühlschranks in the studentenheim .
it can produce a thousand liters of clean water a day , and they can produce water , verschmutztes water , latrine -- and all that is less than two cents a gallon .
the head of coca-cola has just eingewilligt , a large test-projekt test-projekt in the developing world .
and when everything is fine , and i &apos;m very confident , coca-cola is going to apply this technology globally to the entire planet .
this is technologieunterstützte innovation that &apos;s available today .
and we &apos;ve seen this in mobile phones .
oh my goodness , we &apos;re going to reach the 70 percent of the mobiltelefonen in developing countries in the developing world to the end of the end .
just remember that a massai-krieger in the middle of kenya has a better mobil-kommunikation than president reagan , 25 years ago .
and if you &apos;re looking for google on google , you have more access to knowledge and information than president clinton 15 years ago .
they live in a world that has information and communications in the abundance of how no one should have predicted .
and it &apos;s better , the things that you spend and i spend several thousand dollars -- gps , hd-video and photograph , libraries full of books and music , technology for medical imaging -- now literally entmaterialisiert and cheaper in your cell phone .
and the best part of that is perhaps what &apos;s going to be expected to us .
last month , i had the pleasure , with the qualcomm-stiftung that so-called &quot; $ 10 million qualcomm x prize . &quot;
we &apos;re asking teams around the world , to connect all these technologies in a cell phone to be able to speak with the device , because it &apos;s provided with ai , you can test reinhusten or your brain .
and to win , the device has to be a better diagnosis than a team of hochqualifizierter physicians .
imagine this device . right in a developing world , where there are no doctors , but 25 percent of the krankheitslast and 1.3 percent of the staff of the health care .
if this device sequenced a rna- or a dna-virus , which is not known , it calls the gesundheitsbehörde , and it prevents a pandemic before the outbreak of outbreak .
but now , the biggest force that will lead us to a world of the human .
i call it &quot; the next billion &quot; .
the white lines are the population .
we &apos;ve just passed the 7-milliarden-marke .
and only by the way , the largest absicherung in a population is a better way and diet in the world .
in 2010 , we had just connected under two billion people together .
by 2020 , we go up by two to five billion .
three billion new minds that we never heard before , will join global communication .
what do these people need ?
what will they consume ? what are they going to be ?
and instead of wirtschaftlichem , i see one of the greatest economic history of history .
these people represent multiple trillion dollars that are going to be flowing in the global economy .
and they &apos;re going to get healthier and get healthier from the patient &apos;s disease , and they &apos;re getting better trained by the khan-akademie , and they &apos;ll be able to use 3d printer and &quot; infinite computing , &quot; and so much more productive than ever before .
so what can 3 billion growing healthy , healthy , educated , productive members of the menschengemeinde ?
how about a set of new , never before gehörter voices .
how about it , the unterdrückten , wherever you are , to give a voice to pay attention to you and create change , for the first time ?
what will these three billion people bring to people ?
how about beiträgen that we can &apos;t even predict ?
one of the things that i learned through the x prize is that small teams who are motivated by passion and focus , extraordinary things , can create things that big businesses and governments could only do in the past .
i want to conclude with a story that really excites me .
there &apos;s a program that some might have known .
it &apos;s a game called the foldit .
it was developed at the university of washington in seattle .
and it &apos;s a game where people can take a sequence of amino acids to study how the protein is going to evolve .
according to his behavior , we can predict the structure and function .
and this is very important in the medizinforschung .
so far , this was a problem for supercomputer .
and this game was played by professors and so on .
and it &apos;s now hundreds of thousands of people who &apos;ve played the game online .
and it showed that the human pattern recognition are better than the best supercomputer .
and when these people came and looked at who was the best best part of the world , this was not a mit-professor , not a caltech-student , and it was somebody from england , manchester , a woman who worked as a assistentin in a reha-klinik , and at night was the best protein-ordnerin in the world .
ladies and gentlemen , which gives me tremendous faith in our future is the fact that we have more power than individuals to make us the great challenges of our planet .
we have access to tools with exponential technology .
we have a passion of a diy-innovatoren .
we have the capital of the techno-philanthropen .
and we have three billion new minds that we can work online to master the new challenges , and to do that , what needed .
we expect a few remarkable decades .
thank you .
i think we need to do something against a verändernswertes piece of medical culture .
and i think it &apos;s a medical doctor , and i &apos;m here .
and maybe i &apos;m a long enough time that i &apos;m going to allow me to give it a piece of my own falschen prestiges to enable this .
but before i get to my talk to my talk , let &apos;s start with a little baseball .
hey , why not ?
we are close to the saisonende and we &apos;re moving to the world .
we all love baseball , right ?
baseball is full of great statistics .
and there are hundreds of them .
&quot; moneyball &quot; seems to be coming out and turns out to statistics and to make these great baseball team .
i &apos;m going to take a statistic from that i hope most of you &apos;ve heard about .
it &apos;s the durchschnittsleistung of the schlägers .
we &apos;re talking about a 300 person , if a bat beating 300 .
that means that the player is safe to go to three .
that &apos;s the ball schlagen , it &apos;s coming , it &apos;s not caught , and he &apos;s going to get the ball to take the first base , didn &apos;t do it in time and the läufer was in security .
three out of 10 .
you know how to call a 300ter 300ter in major baseball baseball ?
good , really good , maybe a all-star .
you know what you call a 400ter call ?
that &apos;s somebody who &apos;s certainly hit four of 10 .
legendär -- like ted williams -- the last major league baseball player at the while of a regulären season over 400 times .
let &apos;s go back to my world of medicine , where i feel a lot of comfortable , or maybe a little bit less i &apos;ve talked about with them .
suppose they have a blinddarmentzündung , and they &apos;ll be überwiesen to a operateur , which is a durchschnittsleistung 400 in terms of blinddarmentzündungen .
somehow , that doesn &apos;t work , right ?
imagine that they live in a certain remote area , and they have a loved people with verstopften herzkranzgefäßen and her hausarzt überweist to a kardiologen that durchschnittsleistung in gefäßdarstellung with 200 .
but , but you know what ?
it &apos;s a lot better . it &apos;s on the aufsteigenden branch .
and it &apos;s beating a 257 .
somehow it doesn &apos;t work .
but i &apos;m going to ask you a question .
what do you believe in the durchschnittsleistung for a kardiologen or a nurse or a orthopäden , a geburtshelfer , a rettungsassistenten , a rettungsassistenten ?
1,000 , very good .
the truth is that nobody in the entire medicine knows what a good surgeon or doctor or should be .
what we do is that we are including myself in a world , to be aussenden in the world with the claim of the claim .
never make a mistake , no one &apos;s really going to be the details of how this is going to be done .
and that &apos;s the news i took in the medical school .
i was a zwanghaft obsessiver student .
in high school , a mitschüler said that brian goldmann would learn for a bluttest .
and so it was .
and i learned in my little dachstube in the nurses at the hospital of the hospital &apos;s hospital at the toronto general hospital , unweit of here .
i learned everything .
in my anatomievorlesung , i learned the origins and the tail of every single , every branch of any artery , which is the aorta wegführt , obskure and ordinary differentialdiagnosen .
i actually knew the differentialdiagnose differentialdiagnose um azidose .
and the whole time , i collected more and more knowledge .
and i was good , i was doing cum laude .
and i left the school with the impression that i knew everything i knew and knew everything , or at least as much as possible , as close to as possible as possible , that i was immune to that , i think i was immune to be .
and it worked for a while until i met a woman .
i was residierte at a lehrkrankenhaus in toronto , when a woman showed me to me in the hospital hospital hospital .
at that point , i was zugewiesen the kardiologischen layer of the kardiologischen service .
and it was my assignment when the notfallpersonal kardiologischen council was looking for studying the notfallpatienten .
and feedback to my oberarzt .
i was a untersuchte printer , and she was in atemnot .
and when i was hearing her , she made keuchende sounds .
and when i was abhörte her chest with the stethoskope , i could hear a knackendes sound on both sides , which told me that she was suffering from a kongestiver heart failure .
this is a state of the heart , instead of putting the entire blood further , and a part of the blood cells in the lung is determined and filling these gradually , so the kurzatmigkeit .
and that was not a hard diagnosis .
i asked her and i made it treatment .
i gave her aspirin . i gave her medicine to take the pressure of the heart .
i gave her medicine that we call diuretics , water , so they ausschied the liquid .
and over a period of a year and two hours , they started feeling better .
i felt really good .
and i made my first mistake ; i sent them home .
actually , i made two mistakes .
i sent them back home without my oberarzt .
i didn &apos;t take on the one and i did what i should have had , which would have been a call in my oberarzt , so that he had a chance to do a chance .
and he knew her , he would have been able to take additional information to her beizusteuern .
i might have done it for good reason .
i may not want to be the doctor &apos;s doctor .
i may have wanted to be so successful and so able to take his responsibility that i was so concerned and so i would be able to take my patients to get contact with him .
my second mistake was worse .
so that i sent home to you , i would give a quiet voice to me that was trying to say , &quot; goldman , no good idea . do it . &quot;
and i really didn &apos;t have a selbstsicherheit that i asked the nurse who was looking at the woman &apos;s nurse , &quot; do you think it &apos;s okay when you go home ? &quot;
and the nurse thought about it and said , &quot; klar , &quot; i think it &apos;s going to go well . &quot;
i remember it was last yesterday .
so i unterzeichnete the entlassungspapiere and an krankenwagen and rettungsassistenten and brought them home .
and i went back to work .
the rest of the day , i had this nagende feeling in my stomach .
but i kept working .
and at the end of the day , i grabbed my stuff , and i got the hospital , and i went to the parking lot to go home , when i did something i didn &apos;t do .
i went through the notfallabteilung on my way home .
and there &apos;s another nurse who said the sister that &apos;s actually seen after woman &apos;s printer , but a different three words to me and those three words , most of the notfallärzte i know .
other people fear this , but the most notfallmedizin one is very special because we only see the patients so flüchtig .
the three words said : remember ?
&quot; remember the patients that you &apos;ve got to go home to your home ? &quot;
asked the nurse of the nurse .
&quot; so she &apos;s back , &quot; she said in this particular way .
so she was back .
she was back and die .
about an hour after that she arrived at home after i sent her home , she kollabierte and the family called 911 , and the rettungsassistenten brought them back to the notfallstation with a blood pressure of 50 , which is a dangerous schockzustand .
she barely barely atmete and was blue .
the notfallpersonal moved all strands .
they gave her blutdruckerhöher .
they schlossen them to the beatmungsmaschine .
i was shocked , and to the inner zerrüttet .
and i was doing this kind of achterbahn because she went to the intensive care of the intensive care , and i hoped that they would recover .
and after two , three days , it &apos;s clear that she would never be an erwachen .
she had no behandelbaren gehirnschaden .
your family was coming together .
and over the course of the next eight or nine days , they &apos;ve been able to get the geschehenen .
the day day , she liesen her -- woman &apos;s actually , a woman , a mother and grandmother .
you say , you never forget the names of the versterben .
and that was the first time i learned this .
the next weeks i was going to see , and i found the first time of the food that exists in our medical culture -- i felt myself , isolated , not the kind of healthy shame that you feel like because you can &apos;t talk to the colleagues about it .
you know all the healthy shame , if you &apos;re a secret of the best friend &apos;s prize , even though you &apos;re going to put a on verschwiegenheit and you get caught and the best friend you have to do with this , and you get a terrible discussion when you end up the bad conscience and you make it schwört , you know , you &apos;ll never make
when you do wiedergutmachung and never make the mistake again .
that &apos;s the kind of lehrreicher shame .
the most dangerous way i &apos;m talking about is the one who &apos;s sick in the innersten .
it &apos;s the one that says that doesn &apos;t tell you what you &apos;re doing is bad , but you &apos;re bad .
and that was what i felt .
and it wasn &apos;t at my heart &apos;s reason , he was very close .
he spoke to the family , and i &apos;m sure he glättete the wogen and made sure i would not be sued .
but i asked myself these questions .
why did i not ask the oberarzt ? why do i go home ?
and then in my worst moments , how could i make a stupid mistake ?
why am i went in medicine ?
slowly , but it &apos;s certainly a set of it .
i started feeling better .
and then on a day day , there was a hole in the clouds and the sun broke , and i &apos;d like to tell myself , i can feel better again .
and i was like that if i had to double my efforts to perfection and never even beging a mistake that the voice could be verstummen .
and she did .
and i kept working .
and then it happened again .
two years later , i had service in the notfallstation hospital in a hospital hospital , north of toronto , and i went to see 25 years old rachen .
it was a lot of los and i was in a hurry .
he &apos;s shown here .
i looked into the rachen and it was a little pink .
and i gave him a prescription for penicillin and sent him .
and when he walked out of the door , he showed his rachen .
two days later , i came to my next notfalldienst , and my chefärztin asked me to talk to a conversation in your office .
and she said three words : do you remember ?
&quot; do you remember the patient with the gereizten rachen ? &quot;
it turns out he &apos;s a streptokokken-infektion .
he had a potentially lebensgefährliche disease called epiglottitis .
you can google , but it &apos;s not an infection from the rachens , and the upper atemwege , and it causes the verschluss of the atemwege .
and fortunately , he didn &apos;t die .
he got intravenöse antibotica , and he &apos;s got a few days later .
and i went back to the same kind of tortur of shame and selbstzweifel , feeling free and went to work until it was coming back and again .
in a notfallschicht , i have a blinddarmentzündung missing a blinddarmentzündung .
there &apos;s a lot of things about it , especially if you think that you &apos;re working in a hospital that only had 14 patients per night .
in both cases , i didn &apos;t send them back , and there was no way in her treatment .
i thought he had nierensteine .
i ordnete the x-ray of my kidneys , when this was not befund , my colleague , at the patient &apos;s patient &apos;s patient &apos;s patient , and i found a verhärtung in the lower right sector , and he called the operateure .
the other had strong diarrhea .
i ordnete fluide to rehydrieren him and asked my colleagues to be too .
and he did , and when he got a verhärtung on the right sector , he called the operateure .
in both cases , operierte and it was fine .
both cases of nagten to me , fraßen me .
and i would be happy to tell you that my worst mistake only happened in the first five years , what many of my colleagues say , but there &apos;s a total nonsense .
some of my klöpse had happened in the last five years .
alone , beschämt and no support .
here &apos;s the problem : if i don &apos;t end with my mistakes and talk about you , if i can talk to you the silent voice i tell you what really happened , how can i share it with my colleagues ?
how can i teach you my mistakes , so you don &apos;t make the same ?
if i had a room -- like now , i &apos;m just going to have no idea what you think about me .
when did you hear the last time of someone who was talking about fehlschlag about fehlschlag about fehlschlag ?
oh yeah , you go to a cocktail party , and you may hear about any other doctor , but you don &apos;t hear somebody talking about your own mistakes .
if i had a full of colleagues and ask for your sofortige and i would ask you , what i told you was , i would not really do the end of the second story before it was really awkward to you , would be a joke , you would change the topic and forget the rest .
and in fact , if i had my colleagues , if i had a orthopäde orthopäde in my hospital , i &apos;d have taken the wrong leg , and then believe me , i would have trouble looking in the eyes .
that &apos;s the system that we live in .
it &apos;s a completely denial of mistakes .
it &apos;s a system where there are two basic positions -- those who make mistakes and those who don &apos;t do . those who are einschränkt schlafmangel and the limitation that would result with bad results and that with good results .
it &apos;s almost a ideologische reaction like antibodies to attack a human .
and there &apos;s the idea that if we are the ones who make mistakes from medicine , that we &apos;re a safe system .
but there are two problems .
in my approximately 20 years of medicine and journalism , i created a personal medical study in medical error and wrong treatments to make me a falsche treatments for one of my first articles i could see from the toronto star , and i was writing , &quot; white coat , black , black . &quot;
and what i learned is that mistakes are absolutely unumgänglich .
we &apos;re working in a system that &apos;s going to happen in a system where a 10 either medikationen is either wrong or wrong , in the krankenhausinfektionen , and always and the zahlreicher and the destruction , or dead .
in this state , about a 24.000 kanadier of umgänglichen mistakes .
in the united states , the institute of medicine is beziffert the number of 100,000 .
both are strong untertreibungen because we don &apos;t look at the problem as we should .
and it &apos;s the crux .
in a krankenhaussystem in which medical medical know , two or three years , we can &apos;t keep up with the game .
schlafmangel is ubiquitous .
we can &apos;t get it off .
we have a cognitive error , so we can take a perfect krankheitsverlauf for a patient with pain .
then i take the same patient with brustschmerz , mache it and geschwätzig it and i &apos;ll give it a slightly alkoholisierten breath , and suddenly the story of durchsetzt in contempt .
i don &apos;t take the same thing .
i &apos;m not a robot ; i don &apos;t always do things .
and my patients are not cars ; they don &apos;t tell me their symptoms in the same kind of nature .
all of these are zusammengefasst .
so if you take the system so , as i got taught , and all the fehlerbehafteten aussortiert , they &apos;re aussortiert , and then no one is left .
and you know the leier of people who don &apos;t want to talk about their worst cases ?
my show , &quot; white coat , black &quot; i said , &quot; this is my worst mistake , &quot; i would say to anyone from the rettungsassistenten to the chefarzt of the kardiologen , &quot; this is my favorite mistake , &quot; blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , &quot; what about your microphone , &quot; and then i &apos;ll show the microphone to him .
and then your pupillen expand , you &apos;ve come to your head , and look down and you &apos;re going to get hard and you start to tell her stories .
they want to tell their stories . they want to share their stories .
they want to be able to say , &quot; look , don &apos;t make the same mistakes i &apos;m fabrizierte . &quot;
what they need is an environment that they &apos;re able to do .
what you need is a new medical culture .
and it starts with a doctor .
the neu doctor is a human , white to your humanity , accepted them , is not proud to make it wrong , but all of you can learn something from you so that it can be passed on .
it &apos;s shared their experience with others .
it supports when others are talking about their mistakes .
and it shows others their mistakes , not to bloßzustellen , but in a liebevollen , supportive way of all benefit from it .
and she &apos;s working in a medical culture that recognizes that people fill the system with life and if that is , people make mistakes too much time .
so the system is going to make a backups that makes it easier to make mistakes that people are inevitable , and it also allows to create the liebevolle , unterstützenden spaces where everyone who has seen health care , can actually respond things to represent the potential mistakes and that are belohnt in the particular way for people like me , who are making mistakes and for the begradigung
my name is brian goldman .
i &apos;m the neu doctor .
i &apos;m a human . i make mistakes .
i &apos;m bedaure , but i &apos;m trying to learn best possible to give it other people .
i don &apos;t know what they hold me , but i can live .
let me close with three of my own words : i remember .
i &apos;m going to talk about a tiny little idea .
it &apos;s about veränderbare normwerte .
and because you can explain this idea in a minute , i &apos;ll tell you three stories to use the time .
the first story is about charles darwin , one of my hero .
you know , i guess he was 1835 here .
you may think it &apos;s jagte finken , but that &apos;s not true .
it &apos;s actually collecting fish .
he described one of them as a very common .
it was a zackenbarsch .
until the &apos; 80s , he was gefischt in great style .
now , he &apos;s now gefährdeter species .
this story , we &apos;ve heard a lot of times from the galapagos or other places , it &apos;s not very special .
still still , we &apos;re still coming up in the galapagos .
we still think they were originally .
the broschüren describe them still as the unberührt .
what &apos;s happened here ?
the second story is to make a different concept , which is veränderbare .
because i experienced it when i was in a lagune in west-afrika .
i went there because i grew up in europe and i wanted to work in africa .
i thought i could integrate .
and i got a bad sonnenbrand and i felt that i didn &apos;t really get from there .
it was my first sonnenbrand .
as you see , the lagune of palmen and some of the mangroven were umsäumt .
there was buntbarsche buntbarsche about 20 inches , schwarzkinnmaulbrüter , a unterart of the buntbarsche .
the fischgründe of these buntbarsche were very ertragreich and the fishermen lived well and they were making above all the way above .
when i returned to 27 years later , the fish was geschrumpft to half its size .
they pick up five inches .
they were genetically erdrückt .
there were still fish .
people were still happy .
and the fish was also fortunate to be there .
so it has nothing changed , and yet it has changed .
my third little story tells my mittäterschaft to the introduction of schleppnetzfischerei in asia .
in the &apos; 70s -- more of the beginning of the &apos; 60s -- förderte europe was a lot of entwicklungsprojekte .
fischförderung , which were starting to catch 100,000 fish , the industrial fishing , this is a pretty ugly ship , which is called mutiara 4. .
and i drove up on this , and we did all of the erhebungen in the entire southern ocean and especially in the javasee .
we had no words for what we started .
i know it was the reason of the ocean .
90 percent of our fangs were schwämme , other animals that are linked to the cause .
the largest part of the fish , the little dots on the trümmern , the trümmerhaufen , were korallenriff-fische .
essentially , the reason of the ocean was deck and then zurückgeworfen .
these images are extraordinary , because the transition is going very fast .
within one year , you run a survey and then start with the commercial fishing .
the reason is going to change . it &apos;s made -- in this case -- a hard reason or a soft corals is mist matschiger .
this is a dead schildkröte .
they weren &apos;t eating , they threw them away because they were dead .
one of them , we started a living alive .
she wasn &apos;t even ertrunken .
they wanted to kill them because they could eat them .
in fact , this mountain of trümmern will be angesammelt every time of the fishermen , when they &apos;re driving in areas where they never have been gefischt .
it won &apos;t be documented .
we change the world , but we don &apos;t remember .
we fit our normwerte of the new level and we don &apos;t call ourselves in memory of what was there .
if you put it down , what happens .
on the y-axis , there are some good things : biodiversity , number of orca , the green of their country , the wasservorrat .
over time , it changes . it changes because people are , of course , of course .
each generation looks at the images that you &apos;re starting to record at the beginning of your life , as a standard , and it &apos;s going to get all of it .
the difference is that it &apos;s perceived as a loss .
but they don &apos;t take the previous losses .
it can give a order of changes .
and at the end , they just want to get the erbärmlichen remains .
so , that &apos;s what &apos;s really , is the goal .
we want to get things that have disappeared , or things that are not more like they were .
you might think that the problem in people who were certainly betraf , when they lived in räuberischen societies , and they were killing animals , and they were going to realize what they were doing after a few generations .
because obviously , an animal that &apos;s been very often has been rare before it ausstirbt .
so you don &apos;t lose a lot of vorkommenden animals .
you &apos;re always losing rare animals .
and that &apos;s why it &apos;s not seen as a great loss .
and the time we &apos;re focusing on the big animals and the sea , and the big fish .
they &apos;re less likely because we &apos;re going to catch it .
and the time is a little fish left , and we think that &apos;s the normwert .
the question is why people accept that .
now , because they don &apos;t know it was different .
of course , many people , scientists , will tell it , it was really different .
they will confirm it because the evidence , as they were in a former form , they &apos;re not as they would like to argue .
there &apos;s an example that the anekdote of the report , which is in this area , in this area , in this area , can &apos;t be used , or fischereiwissenschaftlern , not gewertet , because it &apos;s not &quot; scientifically . &quot;
so we have the situation that people don &apos;t know the past , although we live in a small societies because they don &apos;t trust the sources of the past .
this shows the tremendous amount of a marine environment .
because in protected areas , we basically put the past .
we &apos;re going to make the past that people can &apos;t understand because the normwerte are changing and very low .
so the people who see a marine reserve and benefit from the way that it allows you to zurücksetzen your normwerte .
what about the people that can &apos;t be possible , because they don &apos;t have access -- the people in the middle west , for example ?
here , i think the art and the movie may fill the gap , and simulation .
this is the simulation of the bay bay .
a long time ago , there were grauwale -- 500 years ago .
and the farbtöne and -schattierungen may remember &quot; the avatar . &quot;
when you think about &quot; the avatar , &quot; when you think about why people were touched , except from the pocahontas-geschichte , why were they touched by the bilderwelt ?
because it wachruft something that has lost in a way .
so my idea , the only one i &apos;m going to give is to be cameron of cameron , so he &apos;s about &quot; avatar ii &quot; under water .
thank you .
in the &apos; 80s , in the kommunistischen , you had to have a schreibmaschine , that government .
they had to be able to do a paper with beispieltext from this schreibmaschine .
the reason for this : the government could have been able to do where a text was coming from .
and they found an article on falschem gedankengut , they could find the creator of this thought .
and we couldn &apos;t understand how anyone could do something like this , and how much the speech would be like to be .
in our own countries we would never do that .
but if you &apos;re now buying a new farblaserdrucker from the leading market market and then you put it on a page , and then this page is the yellow yellow flecke on every page on the side of the page , in a pattern that makes the site clearly on it and your printer .
this is what happens to us .
and that seems no one of the aufzuregen .
and this was an example , which is how our own governments of our own government , the citizens , are the citizens .
and this is one of the three hauptquellen of these existing existing days of today .
let &apos;s see what &apos;s really happening in the world : we can divide the attacks into categories .
we have three hauptgruppen .
there &apos;s online-kriminelle .
for example , this is mr. dimitry golubow from kiew in the ukraine .
and the motive of online-kriminellen are very easy to understand .
these people deserve money .
they use online-angriffe to earn a lot of money , a huge ton of money .
there are several known cases of online-millionären , multimillionären , who have been doing their money through attacks .
this is wladimir tsastsin from tartu in estland .
this is alfred gonzalez .
stephen watts .
björn sundin .
this is matthew anderson , tariq al-daour and so on .
these people are erworben , but they &apos;ve been done so much by using trojaner , for example , to steal money from our bankkonten , while we do our online-banking , or keylogger that we &apos;ve collected on the keyboard , or keylogger , where we &apos;re using the keyboard on the keyboard .
the u.s. intelligence agency , two months ago , the swiss bank account of mr. sam &apos;s jain here , and on this konto , 14,9 million dollars was frozen .
mr. jain himself is on the freiem foot , the aufenthaltsort is unknown .
and i &apos;m saying that it &apos;s more likely to be more likely to be victims of a online-verbrechens than a crime in the real world .
and it &apos;s very obvious that this is going to be even worse .
the future , most of the crime will be .
the second largest zweitgrößte that we can see today is not motivated by money .
they &apos;re motivated by something else -- protest , or a opinion , or through your audience .
groups of anonymous are aufgestiegen over the last 12 months and have become a hauptspieler in the field of online-angriffe .
so these are the three hauptangriffsgruppen : criminals who are doing it because of the anonymous , like anonymous , who are resistance to it , but the last group is nations , governments who run the attacks .
there are cases of what &apos;s going on .
it shows you what happens when governments are going to attack their own citizens .
diginotar is a vollmachtszertifikat in the netherlands -- or it was that .
last fall , it had to be anmelden , because diginotar was been gehackt .
somebody was eingebrochen , and had a gründlich gehackt system .
and last week in a meeting with dutch regierungsvertretern , i asked one of the senior students in this group , whether he could get it to the diginotar-hacks people .
and his answer was yes .
now , how do people die in a consequence of such a hacks ?
diginotar is a zertifizierungsstelle .
they sell zertifikate .
what do you do with zertifikaten ?
now , a certificate you need , if you have a website with https , with ssl-verschlüsselten service , for example , is a gmail .
now we &apos;re all using , or a lot of us , gmail or one of our competitors , but these services are particularly verbreitet in totalitären states like iran , where the dissidenten foreign anbieter are using , because they know that they can trust more than local anbietern , and that they &apos;re verschlüsselt on ssl-verbindungen , so the local government can &apos;t be herumschnüffeln in their conversation
but can you be in a foreign foreign ?
zertifizierungsbehörde hacken and gefälschte zertifikate .
and that &apos;s what happens in the case of diginotar .
what does it compare to the arab spring and the things that have happened in egypt in egypt ?
now in egypt , the aufständischen in april 2011 , in april , the headquarters of egyptian geheimpolizei , and in the process , they found a lot of records .
and in this records , a &quot; ordner &quot; was called &quot; finfisher . &quot;
and in this ordner , notes were a local company , which the egyptian government had sold a few programs with which they could , in very large , -- all of the communication of the egyptian citizens .
they had sold this program for 280.000 dollars on the egyptian government .
the firmenhauptquartier is right here .
so western governments are providing governments to governments with hilfsmitteln , so that they can do it against their own citizens .
but western governments help themselves .
for example , in germany , only a few weeks of the so-called staatstrojaner staatstrojaner , was a trojaner who used to be used by german regierungsvertretern to bespitzeln their own citizens .
if you &apos;re going to be verdächtigt in a kriminalfall , you &apos;ll be ziemlicher your phone .
but today we &apos;re far beyond .
they tap into their internet connection .
they use tools like the staatstrojaner to allow their computers with a trojaner computer system that allows them to monitor their entire communication , their online-diskussionen , their online-diskussionen , their passwörter .
so if we continued to think about these things , the obvious answer is , &quot; ok , that sounds bad , but it doesn &apos;t seem to me because i &apos;m a braver citizen .
i don &apos;t have to worry .
i have nothing to hide . &quot;
and that argument doesn &apos;t make sense .
privacy has to be given .
privacy is not the debate .
it &apos;s not a choice between privacy and security .
it &apos;s a choice between freedom and control .
and while we are now , in 2011 , our governments have trust , but every right that we &apos;re going to do is get to be abgegeben .
and trust , we trust , we &apos;re blind to a state of a government , a government that we might have in 50 years ?
these are the questions that we need to spend the next 50 years .
it may seem strange , but i &apos;m a big fan of betonblocksteinen .
the first betonblocksteine were made and entstammten in a simple idea : module , module , zusammenpassen , fit .
betonbausteine became very rapidly the meistgenutzte baueinheit in the world .
they were putting us in the position to build things bigger than we , buildings , bridges , a rock after the other .
essentially , the betonbaustein was the building of our time .
nearly a hundred years later , in 1947 , lego got out of this .
it was called &quot; automatically verbindende stone . &quot;
and within a few years , lego got a household .
it &apos;s been estimated that over 400 billion rocks were produced -- or 75 stones for every person on this planet .
you don &apos;t have to be an engineer to create beautiful houses , beautiful bridges or beautiful buildings .
lego for all possible .
lego , in the essence , has the betonbaustein , the building block of the world , and we took a building block for our imagination .
in the meanwhile , in the same year , the bell labs in the next revolution , the next building block .
the transistor was a little plastikeinheit , which was bringen us from a world of statischen , aufeinandergestapelten tiles in the world .
like the betonblock , the transistor allows us to build much more , more complex , more complex , a stone after the other .
but there &apos;s a hauptunterschied : the transistor was only for experts .
personally , i don &apos;t accept that the building block of our time for experts is , and so i decided to change that .
eight years ago , i was at the media lab , and i started to study this idea , how to put the power of engineers in the hands of artists and designers .
a few years ago , i started developing littlebits .
let me show you how they work .
littlebits are electronic module that have specific function .
they &apos;re vorgefertigt , light , sound , motor and sensor .
and the best part of it is that they connect with magnets together .
so they can &apos;t be able to sit wrong .
the rocks are farbcodiert .
green is a copy , blue is electricity , pink is input and orange is cables .
so all you have to do is to connect a blue and a green one , and you can build it very quickly .
they put a blue blue on a green , and they can make light .
you can put a switch in between , and you can do a little dimmer .
take the switch out to a pulsmodul , which is , and you put it back in , and you &apos;ve done a little blinker .
and then you add this buzzer to a more additional effect , and you &apos;ve made a lärmmaschine .
i &apos;m going to stop that .
and beyond the simple game , it &apos;s actually quite powerful .
instead of programming , verdrahten , löten , allows you to program a simple , intuitive gestures to code .
so to slow up the behavior , or slow it down , they just turn on that button and it makes the momentum faster or slower .
the idea behind the littlebits is that it &apos;s a growing library .
we want to put every single interaction in the world into a gebrauchsfertigen stone .
lights , notes , solarelemente , motors -- everything should be available .
we &apos;ve been verteilt out of kids and play them with it .
and it was an incredible experience .
the most beautiful thing is , how they start the electronics that you &apos;re in your everyday to see , and you don &apos;t learn to do it in school .
like , for example , a nachtlicht works , or why the doors of the aufzugs offenbleiben , or the ipod to touch .
we also also brought littlebits into designschulen .
so , for example , designers , for example , we had no experience in electronic things , which began to play with littlebits as a material .
here we see with filz , paper and water bottles , like geordie ...
a few weeks ago , we took littlebits to risd , and we gave them some designers who had no technical experience -- just cardboard , wood and paper -- and they said , &quot; do what . &quot;
here &apos;s an example of a project they did , a bewegungsgesteuerte konfetti-kanone .
but wait , this is really my lieblings-projekt .
it &apos;s a hummer of play-doh that was afraid in darkness .
for this nicht-ingenieure , littlebits became another material , electronics was just one more material .
and we want to make this material available for all .
so littlebits open source .
you can go to the website , you can download all the designvorlagen and make them .
we want the world of the creator , the inventor , the mitwirkenden , who are the world we live in , and this is the world we &apos;re in .
so , pull off and start to invent it .
thank you .
