you know , one of the big vernügen in the middle of the travel , and one of the joys of the ethnographischen research is to remember , combined with people who are still able to remember the old steinen rocks , they touch the rain , they berühren into the bitter bar .
just knowing that jaguar-schamanen is still beyond the milky way or the meaning of the mythen of the inuit of the inuit anthropology in the dharma of the dharma anthropology , but it &apos;s just as a model of the anpassung of the inuit of the inuit , but it &apos;s just as a model of the anpassung of the inuit of the inuit , but it &apos;s just as
and of course , we all have the same anpassungsnotwendigkeiten .
we &apos;re all born . we are bringing children .
we &apos;re going to initiationsrituale .
we have to deal with the unaufhaltsamen trennung by death and not to tell us it , we all sing and dance and art .
but , interestingly , the unique tonfall of the liedes , the rhythm of the dance in every culture .
it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s about the penan in the forests of all , or the krieger of nordkenia , the colleague i &apos;m going to take a month to the desert , or even a yak-hirte of nordkenia , the kollege , or even the warrior in the sahara of nordkenia , the kollege , or even a yak-hirte of the qomolangma , everest , the gottmutter
all of these people teach us that there are other existenzmöglichkeiten , other people , other ways of guidance on earth .
and this is a idea that if you think about it , you can fulfill a simple of hope .
together , the world &apos;s third cultures in the world a web and kulturellem life that exceeds the earth and kulturellem , which is equally important for the earth as important as the biological lebensnetz that you &apos;re going to know as a biosphere .
you can imagine this cultural lebensnetz , as a ethnosphäre , ethnosphäre can imagine , and the environment that you have to imagine , and the environment that are affected by the human imagination for the human mind for the human being cut in the human mind .
the ethnosphäre is the great legacy of humanity .
it &apos;s the symbol of all of the things we are and what we &apos;re doing as wondrous species species .
and as the biosphere &apos;s been highly investigating , so this was actually mit -- just with even more unpleasant .
no biologist would be like to say that 50 percent are just not true , and yet , this -- the apokalyptischste szenarium in the field of biological biodiversity -- which is , as a optimistischstes szenarium in the field of the cultural diversity of the cultural diversity of cultural diversity .
and the key is to this is the audience of languages .
as any of you in this room has been born , which was to earth .
now , language isn &apos;t just the coverage of the vokabulars or a series of grammatikregeln .
a language is expression of human mind .
it &apos;s a means that the soul of an culture has access to the physical world .
each language is like a altbestehender forest of the mind , a gedanke , an ecosystem of ecosystems .
and by these 6,000 languages , while we &apos;re sitting on monterey , right here in monterey , right , right , right , right ?
they &apos;re not taught to be taught . that means nothing is being dead , they &apos;re actually already dead .
what could be lonely to be the ultimate schweigen , one of the last of the last of the last people , people who speak to have the wisdom of our own , or the hope to expect children ?
and yet this terrible destiny , in fact , someone else &apos;s actually , on earth , about two weeks , a elderly man , and you take the last nugget of an old language .
and i know that some of you say , &quot; isn &apos;t it ? &quot; not that would be a better place , if we all would talk a language ? &quot; and i say , &quot; well , &quot; well , let &apos;s say , &quot; well , let &apos;s be yoruba . let them be kantonesisch .
let &apos;s be kogi . &quot;
and then you would suddenly recognize how it would be if they couldn &apos;t speak their own language .
so i want to take you today to a journey through the ethnosphäre , a short trip through the ethnosphäre to try to make them understand , what actually happened .
now , some of us , there &apos;s some of us to say that if i say , &quot; miscellaneous idea of the seins , &quot; really different ways of mine .
take this child from the barasana in the northwest department , the people of the anakonda , believe that they were mythologisch den the milchfluss from the eastern seaboard from the heiligen schlangen snakes .
this is a people who don &apos;t know between the colors and green , because the forest of the forest is , from which people depend , gleichgestellt .
they have a thriving language , and a heiratsvorschrift called exogamie exogamie is called the linguistische exogamie : you must marry somebody who is going to speak .
all of this all of this is the mythologischen past , the whole thing that was done in this big potential , in which , who had been talked about someone who would never be able to learn someone who is going to learn .
they &apos;re just listening to and start to speak .
or , one of the most fascinating , which i &apos;ve been trying to ever dealt with the northeast of ecuador , a surprising people who was harassed in 1958 .
in 1957 , at 1957 missionare contact , and they made a schwerwiegenden mistake .
they took a dinosaur from retreating out of air , what we would consider as a second , and they forgot to be able to see that this person had to be seen in their lives .
they were lifted these photographs from the bottom of the forest , the surgeons , the face was looking at the face or the character , but i was that this was the business of the devil , and killed the five missionare with the gun .
but the waorani aren &apos;t just standing on the gun .
they &apos;re gegenseitig .
forty percent of the casualties is determined by durchbohrungen .
we followed the geneaologie eight generations and found two cases of a natural death rate and when we were trying to do the people with low etwas , they gave people so long , he was that he died , he died , and we killed it with the spear .
but meanwhile , they had a clear breast cancer survivor that was amazing .
their hunter could determine the urine of a fellow from 40 steps , and determine that what the animal of this time .
in the early 1930s , i got a really astonishing job when my professor in harvard , my professor in harvard , my professor in harvard , my professor in harvard , i was interested in haiti to go to haiti and tonton macoutes , and the poison , whether i was used to do this , to make sure , to make sure .
so to give this goddamn sensation thing , i had to believe this remarkable belief of knowing , and voodoo , is not the cult of the black magic .
in the opposite , it &apos;s about a complex signal .
it &apos;s interesting .
if i would ask you , the big call , what would you say ?
christianity , islam , buddhism , whatever , whatever .
a continent is always ausgelassen , because the guess was always given us a religious faith , and yet there &apos;s one and voodoo is simply the remnant of this very profound religious thought that during the tragic diaspora of the sklavereizeit .
but what makes the voodoo so interesting , is this faint relationship between the living and the dead .
the living conditions .
the spirits can be able to get from underneath the large water , answers to the ebb of the dance , to verdrängen the seele of the living department for a brief moment moment .
deshab say the voodooisten like , &quot; you white white , &quot; you white fellows .
we dance in the temple and they &apos;re going to be god . &quot;
and because you &apos;re obsessed with , you &apos;re going to be about the spirit of the mind . how can you get damage to the zugefügt ?
you see this amazing demos : voodoo-akolythen in a trancezustand , the coal ohne , eine coal is no longer burning , an amazing notion of the mind that this is aushält when it &apos;s a state of extreme arousal .
now , from all of all the people i met , the kogi was made out of the sierra nevada marta marta in nordkolumbien , the außergewöhnlichsten .
offspring , the old tyrannischen civilization that the caribbean was karibische from columbia , and in the eroberung , the people in a isoliertes vulkanisches massiv massiv that was about karibischen küstenebene .
in a blutbefleckten continent , these people were the only ones that were never going to be conquered by the spaniern .
until the day , they become a ritual priesthood , which is education , but it &apos;s very extraordinary .
the young girls are going to be at age three and four years of 18 , and two periods of their families , to fuße the nine months of the glacier for 18 years , and they &apos;re elected for 18 years , and they &apos;re elected the nine months of pregnancy , and they spend metamorphorisch in the lap of pregnancy , you &apos;re now metamorphorisch in the lap
and during this time , they will culturally culturally culturally in the values of their society , values , the claim that their prayers , that their prayers , that their prayers , the cosmic -- or we could say the ecological ecological -- balance .
at the end of this , this amazing initiation , they toured a day after 18 years , and in this ecstatic moment of the patient &apos;s first time , if the sun starts back and says , &quot; look at the sun , the sun starts back and says , &quot; look at the sun , the sun starts back and says , &quot; look , you see ?
it &apos;s so wonderful . you have to protect it . &quot;
they call post-traumatic the older brothers and say that we are the younger brothers , for the destruction of the world .
now this level of intuition is very important .
and whenever we go to the eingeborene and landscape , we &apos;re either rousseau and the old gerücht in the peer-reviewed noblen , which is either and saying , these people are more connected to nature than we connected .
so , they &apos;re not sentimental , nor is they &apos;re going to be supported by the nostalgie .
it doesn &apos;t work much space for it into the malariaverseuchten , or the cold , but they &apos;ve been to cut up a mysterious citizen of the earth that &apos;s not based on the idea of the idea that the earth can only exist in the idea that the earth can only exist because they &apos;re going to be able to delve into human consciousness .
now , what does that mean ?
it means that a little kid who were being a little kid in the andes that the mountain will be a apu-geist , who &apos;s going to be a whole child from montana , who is his destiny of montana , and another relationship that &apos;s been a hot child from montana , that a mountain kid can be a pile of rocks , that can be used .
whether he &apos;s a aufenthaltsort of a mind or a bunch of erz , is irrelevant .
the interesting thing is the metaphor that the relationship between the individual and nature .
i grew up in the forests of britisch kolumbien , and i believed that these forests tend to be there .
this was another friends , as my friends , the belief of hukuk and the kannibalischen minds of the kannibalischen , and the kannibalischen minds that are spirits in the kannibalischen , the most nordende in the world , they live in their hamatsa-initiation charge .
now , if you start to think about the idea that these cultures can create different realities , you can understand some of your extraordinary discoveries , and so , like this plant here .
it &apos;s a photograph that i just last april speed in the northwest department of the amazon .
this is ayahuasca , from the many of you heard that most of you heard from the repertoire of the schamanen .
what makes fascinating is fascinating , isn &apos;t just the paranormal potential of this präparats , but it &apos;s really going to be made of two different sources , and it &apos;s really going to be really from two different sources , and it &apos;s really going to be really from two different sources , and it &apos;s really going to be really from two different sources , but it
these plant contains a very strong tryptamine that are the serotonin , dimethyltryptamin-5 and methoxydimethyltryptamin .
if you &apos;ve seen the yanomami , as they saw this stuff , these substance that they made out of different ways of excellence .
this is a powder to schnupfen , to be about as as as a gewehrlauf beschossen , gesäumt of barocken gemälden and the landing sea .
it &apos;s not going to be a distortion of reality , but the resolution of reality .
i even connected with my professor , richard evan , the man who &apos;s been able to be able to be able to be able to fill up as a halluzinogen , that you could not have the impacts with the very high effect , you can &apos;t be there to experience a halluzination .
but the thing that &apos;s with tryptaminen is that they can &apos;t be imposed , because you &apos;re going to go through a human expression , naturally enzym enzym of names , denaturiert .
you can only be able to prioritize into connection with some other chemicals that are mao .
now the fascinating thing is that the betakarboline , the in , are the in of the kind of money that is necessary to potenzieren the tryptamine , so they &apos;re going to ask yourself .
how can these people from a collective flora of 80,000 species plants , these two morphologisch are not related plants that when they create a kind of biochemischer version of the whole thing that &apos;s bigger than the sum of its parts ?
we use this great euphemism , and error , what is happening as meaningless .
but you ask the indian indians they say , &quot; the plant is going to give us . &quot;
so what does that mean ?
this tribe , the cofan , 17 , 17 , 17 , 17 , 17 , 17 , 17 , are able to recognize that for our eyes as a kind of a kind of time .
and then you ask them , how they put their taxonomie and they say , &quot; i thought you &apos;re going to be a little bit of plants .
i mean , you know ? &quot; and i said , &quot; no . &quot;
so , it turns out , you &apos;re all the 17 different varieties of vollmond , and they sing to a different set of disease .
now , that &apos;s not going to give you a harvard in harvard , but it &apos;s much more interesting than stamina stamina .
now , the problem of the problem is that even the ones that are given us to have the sympathy and farbenfroh , but they kind of sitting in the past , whereas the real world , the real world , the world , to grow .
so the fact is that you &apos;re looking at the 20th century , 300 years , in 300 years , in 300 years , in 300 years , in 300 years , in 300 years , in 300 years , in 300 years , in 300 years , in 300 years , and the massive destruction of the biological and cultural diversity on earth is either relevant or triple rates
all cultures have been able to engage and over again .
and the problem is not the technology .
the sioux-indianer hörten of the sioux-indianer are not less to sioux sioux when they were using the americans as they stopped americans , when they were pferd and pferdewagen .
not change and technology , the integrity of the ethnosphäre , it &apos;s power . it &apos;s the ugly face of the regime .
and wherever you sit in the world , you &apos;ll find that these cultures are not the untergang meer , and now knechtschaft , and now , in the case of the penan , a volk , and now knechtschaft , and now , in the case of the penan , and now knechtschaft and prostitution , and now , in the case of the penan , and now ,
or if we go to the hills of tibet , where i &apos;m going to make a lot of forsche , you &apos;ll see the ugly face in the political dominance .
you know , the genocide , the phyische of the world &apos;s most popular , the zerstörung of the lifestyle , but the ethnozid , the destruction of the lives of the lives of the lives of the lives of the lives of the lives of the lives of the lives of the lives of the lives of the lives of the lives of the lives of the lives of
and you can &apos;t understand the suffering , if you haven &apos;t been able to have on the unterster level .
i was traveling at the young colleagues , 6,000 miles , meilen meilen durch durch by südost-tibet nach , and just when i saw the face of which monuments , who hears the statistics of which you hear . 6,000 million people who were while the kulturrevolution were killed by the cultural revolution .
the father of this young manns was diagnosed as the soviet union .
this meant that he was killed during the chinese invasion .
his uncle is going to make a lot of your holiness , people have done .
his mother was being locked in the first place for -- for crimes .
he was in the age of two years old , in the prison , to hide her rockzipfel , because they couldn &apos;t live without it .
the sister that had this brave toilet , was in a erziehungslager .
one day she would take her from a armband , and for this übertretung , she had to be for seven years in a tough journal .
the suffering may be unerträglich , but the erlösende spirit of humans is unvergessliches .
and at the end of the end , we really want to vote . we want to do a monochromatischen world of the monotonie or in a more general world of diversity ?
margaret mead , the great anthropologist said before , before we were moving towards a eingeengte thinking , we would have a eingeengte thinking , but that we would think about a thread that we would think of one day , and forgotten , we &apos;ve forgotten that there was a different opportunity .
and it &apos;s amazing to think that our species have been perhaps the same time .
the neolithische revolution that gave us the farming , and we unterwarf the cult of the saatkorns unterwarf , the poetry of the priesthood of priesthood and hierarchy and hierarchie , specialization , specialization , just about 10,000 years ago .
the modern world just as we know it &apos;s barely 300 years old .
now , this shallow story is not telling me that we all have answers on the challenges that we are facing in the ensuing millennia .
if we ask this ingenious weltkulturen of the human genome , it &apos;s going to be a 10,000 of different voices .
and in this song , we will be able to get the possibility of the possibility of what we are : people are aware that all humans are aware that all of the people who have to be zugesichert and gardens , and there &apos;s a great deal of the optimism .
here &apos;s a photograph that i was at the north end of the baffin-inseln , when i was walking around the narwhal-jagd , and this man , olaya , told me a wonderful story of his mind .
the eastern hemlock governance is not always very good at the inuit jahre for the inuit of our regime , they were forced to pull in settlements .
the grandfather &apos;s old man &apos;s old man .
the family , the fear of his life , took him all the tools and all the tools .
now , you have to know that the inuit is not afraid of the cold , they use them .
the gleitschienen of their sled got originally from fish that was made in karibu-haut .
the grandfather didn &apos;t really didn &apos;t get caught before the arctic night .
he moved out , his pants from seehundsfell herunter and defäkierte in his hand , and when the fäkalien began to rebuild , he began to shape them into the shape of a messers .
he sprühte the speichel of the fäkalien-messers and as it completely frozen , he was a dog .
he took the dog and a half a meeting , took the skeleton of the dog and a sled , spannte a different dog and entschwand over the eisschollen with the fäkalien-messer .
that &apos;s not something you can do .
and this is a symbol of a symbol of the resistance of the inuit and all the world in the world .
the eastern hemlock first gave the first government gave the power in the april of the conflict , the complete control over a field of california and the texas .
it &apos;s our new realm of the whole thing .
it &apos;s a independent field . they &apos;re all mineralvorkommen .
an amazing example of how a nation , a state , who can look at with your senses .
and finally , i think , is it quite obvious to be at least for those of us who are learning to these distant goals , to realize that they &apos;re not going to be out at all .
they &apos;re the heimatländer of someone .
they represent the human imagination that are in the past times , and for all of us , the dreams of these children , how dreams of our own children are part of the hope .
what we eventually at national geographic , we &apos;re trying to think that politicians will never believe .
we think that polemik is not pervasive , but we think that storytelling is not pervasive , but we think that storytelling is probably the best institution for storytelling in storytelling . our website , a 35 every month .
156 nationen .
our magazines will read by millions of the users .
and we &apos;re going to have a series of travel into the ethnosphäre , which we &apos;re going to take our audience to the audience of what this world is what we can find a lebensmöglichkeit in a really advanced state of questions that we can find a really positive african world , where the wisdom of all the people can contribute to our shared well-being .
thank you .
what i first do is , as quickly as possible , is the basic work that we have as a virtual one of the virtual front of a virtual year ago , and it &apos;s a umgebung that we have as a übernahme , or from visual data , or out of huge amounts of visual data .
we see lots of gigabytes to digital photographs that you can gain and go around and create fortwährend , and they can create any sense of fresh ways .
and it doesn &apos;t matter how many information we look like these collections are or like big the ones .
most of them are digital photos of a camera , but this one is a scan of the kongressbibliothek and it &apos;s in a domain range of 300 megapixeln .
it doesn &apos;t matter what the only difference is , what the only performance of a system like this , the number of tosses in the screen is the number of tosses in every moment , but it also has a very flexible architecture .
this is a whole book , an example of nichtbild-daten .
this is bleak house from dickens . every column is a chapter .
to prove , to prove that it really is about a text and not to show a picture , we can actually show something like that , to show that this is a real representation of the orchestra and no image .
maybe this is a artificial way to read a e-buch .
i wouldn &apos;t recommend it .
this is a realistischerer case . this is a copy of the guardian .
every big picture is the dawn of a abschnitts .
and that gives you really the pleasure and good experience a real national needle or a newspaper , which is a kind of medium of a medium with a form of several scales .
we also have something to the corner of this particular issue of the guardian .
we have a false ad with very high resolution that makes much higher than a normal ad , and we have added content .
if you want to see the functions of this car , you can see them here .
or other models , or even sexual power .
and this is really this ideas , this limits of these limitations are actually something to the screen .
we hope that this is not a one-way of pop-ups and other nonsense -- that should be not necessary .
of course , is one of the really meaningful applications for a technology like this .
and i don &apos;t want to spend a lot of time trying to say that we &apos;re going to be able to do this area .
but all of the streets in the world are the u.s.a. in the world .
übereinandergelagert oben on the nasa image .
now , let &apos;s go out something else .
this is live in the internet . you can do it .
this is a project called photosynth , which is really two different technologies .
one is seadragon and the others is a very good research research professor about computervision , who &apos;s beratung by noah seitz to the head of steve seitz in the uw of the uw an .
and rick szeliski of microsoft research was done laparoscopically , a very good collaboration .
so this is live in the internet . it &apos;s going to be driven by seadragon .
you can see that if we can see this kind of physical ones where we can penetrate pictures and this experience is generating the mehrfachen .
but the spatial response of the visuals is here in the fact , it &apos;s actually .
the computervision-algorithmen have taken these pictures together so they &apos;re going to be the real room that all the aufnahmen in the kanadischen lakes in the canadian rockies , the most alle gemacht dias dias in the canadian rockies , oder dias and these things that have been done all the time in relation to another .
i don &apos;t know exactly whether i &apos;m going to show you a little bit of other environments .
there are the much more spherical ones .
i would like to show you the most popular pattern of noah , and this is not necessarily so much obvious if you look at the environments that we have on the website .
we had to do because of the lawyers .
this is a rekonstruktion of the kathedrale notre , which is just like , and they &apos;re going to get pictures of the universitätsgelände in the universitätsgelände and on the universitätsgelände , and just give you pictures of men in the t-shirts and on the universitätsgelände , each of these orange represents a picture that was discovered by this model .
so this all means flickr-bilder , and they all stand in the middle of these wise related to this extent .
and we can navigate this very simple fashion .
and you know , you &apos;ve never believed that i &apos;m going to work at microsoft .
i &apos;m very thankful to the reception here .
so , i guess you can see that this many different types of cameras is : everything is to professional professionellen , a pretty large number of you that are all in this environment .
and if i &apos;m possible , i will find some of the weird ones .
so many of you are the faces of the animal kingdom , and so on and so forth .
somewhere here are a series of photographs -- here .
this is actually a poster of an awful lot of living things that was recorded .
we can change from the poster to an physical view of this environment .
the point is , we can do things with social environment , and it &apos;s going to collect data from all of them -- from the collective memory of how , the earth looks like , visual memory -- and all will connected .
all of these photographs are interconnected and they &apos;re connected with each other , and it &apos;s bigger than the sum of the parts .
you get a model that &apos;s made out of the ground .
now look at this as the sequel of the work of the work of the work of virtual earth .
and this is something that &apos;s through the complexity , which is expanding , &quot; is expanding , and they use the use of user for users becoming bigger .
their own photos are filled with metadata , which is a different person .
if somebody has done the trouble , and all this sacred sequence , who you are all , then my photo happened from other people , where these metaverse , the photograph of other people , and i can use it as a point of übergreifender modaler social experience with the other anbietern .
and of course , the most popular thing is the immense rich efforts , the world &apos;s largest reichen models of every single part of the earth , not just durch , but by collective materials , but by collective collective materials .
thank you .
so , i understand you right ? your software devices , in a particular time , the next time all the images that are being used by someone in the world in the world ?
yeah . they don &apos;t do anything else .
if you want to get them to hyperlinks between pictures .
and you &apos;re doing this because of the bildern in the visuals .
and this is really exciting if they &apos;re the abundance of information that has many of these pictures .
how if you &apos;re a websuche for pictures , where they &apos;re sentences and the text of the website contains a lot of information about this , which is the picture .
but how would it be when the image you connected with all their pictures ?
then the scope of the semantischen querverbindung and the abundance that comes out of that , really , really , really , really . it &apos;s a classic netzwerkeffekt .
blaise , that &apos;s really incredible .
thank you very much .
i &apos;m going to tell you some things from my book , like i &apos;m hoping , in the other things you &apos;ve already heard of the other things that they &apos;ve already heard . and i &apos;m going to create some connection if you &apos;re not just as dumb .
i want to start with what i call liquid dogma .
the official dogma of what &apos;s going on ?
the official glaubenssatz of all western societies in societies .
the official dogma is how if our goal is the main goal of our citizen , is this especially mediated by the maximierung of the individual .
the reason is that freedom is good , valuable , meaningful , a unverzichtbare premise for human .
if people were freedom , it &apos;s a lot of us to do the things that our global public services and no one has given us to decide for us .
the path to maximize freedom is to maximize .
the more freedom , the more freedom , they have the more freedom , and the more freedom they have more equal to them .
this is , i think , as deep in our hearts , it &apos;s in our water , that it would not be like to get it .
and it &apos;s also deeply embedded in our lives .
i &apos;ll give you some examples of what makes us modern progress .
this is my supermarket . no big .
i want to say something about salatdressing .
there &apos;s dressings in my supermarkets , if you don &apos;t have to mitzählen the door of a different disciplines and 12 balsamico-essig that they could not buy a big amount of eigenen to make a big amount of eigenen , in the book , that no one &apos;s going to be right in the store .
so that &apos;s how the supermarket is .
and then they go to the verbraucher-elektronik business to a stereo zusammenzustellen -- lautsprecher , cd-player , ein , a kassetten-player radio , radio , and in this one , there &apos;s so many parties .
we can retool 6.5 million different stereo facilities from the components that will be offered in this one .
they have to admit that this is a big selection .
in other areas -- the world of communications .
there was a time when i was a boy , because i could put everybody in the room that you wanted to do was as long as he came from the frozen bell .
they have your phone . they didn &apos;t .
a consequence that was never broken .
these days are over .
we now have almost a infinite choice of telephones , especially in the world of the mobile .
these are the mobile phones .
my favorite one is in the middle -- mp3-player- , nasen-haar-trimmer and crème brûlée .
and if you should not have that until your business , you can be sure that they &apos;re going to be soon .
and what it does is it brings people to go into the business and ask that question .
you know what the answer is ?
the answer is &quot; no . &quot;
it &apos;s not possible to buy a cellphone that doesn &apos;t do too much .
in other aspects of life , which are very much more spherical than they are able to buy the same explosion of choice .
health -- it &apos;s not the case that they go to the doctor , and the doctor &apos;s doctor &apos;s doctor &apos;s doctor .
instead , to go to the doctor , and the doctor &apos;s doctor , we could do a decade or we could make b .
a family &apos;s benefits .
b has this benefits and peril . what do you want to do ?
and they say , &quot; doctor , what do i do ? &quot;
the doctor says , a hat , has this benefits and drive and b , and b .
what do you want ?
and if you say , &quot; if you were , doctor , doctor , what would they do ? &quot;
the doctor says , &quot; but i &apos;m not . &quot;
the result is -- we call it &quot; patient natural autonomy &quot; , which sounds like a good thing , but in reality , one shift of the doctor is not knowing , and the reality is one shift of the burden of the burden of the burden of something -- and therefore not in the best constitution , is a decision to make -- namentlich of patient .
there &apos;s a tremendous marketing marketing for long-term drugs like they and me , if you think about it , not make sense because we don &apos;t buy them .
why would they care about if we can &apos;t buy buying ?
the answer is : you &apos;re expecting to the next morning , the next morning of the next morning , and to ask a change of the prescription .
something like this is how our identity is now a question of choice , like this slide show .
we don &apos;t have identity , we invent them .
and we invent ourselves as many as we want to .
that means that every day , if you wake up on morning , they decide what you want to be .
in terms of marriage , and family , there was a time when the standard-annahme was that almost everybody has had one of one had one of one had to be able to heirateten as quickly as they could .
the only real choice was &quot; who &quot; , &quot; not when , and not what they did .
nowadays everything is just too .
i teach wonderful intelligent students , and i &apos;ll give you 20 percent less work than i did .
and not because they &apos;re less clever , and not because they &apos;re less anxious .
because they are , because they are busy , they are , &quot; should i marry or not ? am i going to marry now ?
shall i marry ? i should have children , or just do you know ? &quot;
these are all handmade questions .
and they &apos;re going to get these questions about whether this means all the tasks that i &apos;m going to show you and not a good grade to my course .
and in fact , what you should do that . these are important questions .
well , we &apos;re blessed like carl anthropologists , with the technology that tells us each other than every day of every single day of every single day of every single day of every single day on the planet -- until the randolph hotel .
there &apos;s a corner of telling you , &quot; i won &apos;t tell you about the wirelesslan .
i &apos;m not going to tell you because i want to use it .
so what it means to do this incredible freedom of choice , again , again , again , and again , whether we should work on or not work .
we can play our kids in soccer looking at soccer , and we have our mobile phone to one of other kinds of imagery , and our laptop is probably on our lap .
and even though they &apos;re all the abgeschaltet , each minute , we &apos;re all the abgeschaltet , in the children , the most likely we &apos;re going to ask ourselves , &quot; should i accept this call .
should i get this email answers ? should i write this letter ? &quot;
and even though the answer to the question , &quot; is it being certainly your experience of the fussballspiels of your child &apos;s very different from the time of your child &apos;s life &apos;s very different .
wherever we look , big things and small things , material things and lifestyle , and a question of the choice is the choice .
and the world in the mind was so out of .
i want to say , there were some other options , but not everything was a question of choice .
and the world is now like this .
and the question is , are good news or bad news ?
the answer is &quot; yes .
we all know what good is , so i &apos;m going to talk about what &apos;s wrong .
all these choices have two effects , two negative effects on people .
a effect , paradoxer , is that he &apos;s just trying to free free .
with a lot of options from the one you can choose , it becomes a very hard to choose .
i &apos;ll give you an example of this , a study of investment in volunteers .
a colleague of mine had access to investitions-akten , the giant fondgesellschaft of a million collaborators and about 2,000 different kinds of media .
and what she found was a mile that was the arbeitgeber anbot , the participation of two percent .
they offer 50 percent less than if they were just part of the only one . why ?
because there are 50 investmentfonds who are selecting to choice , it &apos;s so hard to decide what you want to do it on the morning .
and then tomorrow , and then tomorrow , and tomorrow , and tomorrow , and tomorrow .
understand that this is not only what people would like to go when they &apos;re going to go to the information , but they don &apos;t have enough money so hard to make decisions that they just miss your enemy .
by the participation , they give them up to 5,000 dollars a year on the arbeitsgeber who had happy to reproduce .
paralysis , one of many choices .
and i think it &apos;s kind of thinking that the world looks like this .
you want to meet the choice if it &apos;s all eternity , right ?
they don &apos;t want to pick up investment investment , or even the wrong benchmark .
so that &apos;s the effect . the other effect is that even when we overcome the paralysis and make a decision , we end up less to the outcome of choice , when we have the opportunity to decide between less possibilities .
and there &apos;s several reasons for this .
one of them is to be able to make sure that they could make a different choice of a buy , and it &apos;s not perfect -- and what happens is perfect ? it &apos;s just imagine that they could be able to make a different choice , and it &apos;s not perfect -- and what happens is perfect , and it &apos;s about it , and it &apos;s also
the more ways there is , the easier is nothing to regret at all , the choice you &apos;re going to do .
secondly , what economists call .
dan gilbert has a great point in this morning by watching how much the way we assign things , and they &apos;re going to make it .
okay , if there &apos;s lots of alternatives to think , it &apos;s just fantastic eigenschaften of alternatives that they can do that , that makes them less happy with the alternatives that they chose .
here &apos;s an example . for those of you who are not new yorkers , i apologize .
but here &apos;s what they would have to think .
here &apos;s a few slide to the hamptons .
very expensive stuff .
beautiful beach . great day . they have it all for themselves .
what could be better ? &quot; look at the man , &quot; it &apos;s august .
everybody in my manhattener neighborhood is gone .
i would park directly to my house . &quot;
and he spends a couple of weeks from the mind , the way he missed it , day over day , a great deal .
oppertunitätskosten senken , the satisfaction we get through our choice , even if that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing is .
and the more choices we have to present , the more attractive is going to be more attractive desirable in the oppertunitätskosten .
here &apos;s another example .
now , this cartoon does some of the things .
he does a message about it , and perhaps about it to do things .
but one key thing that he is : always who you decide for you , don &apos;t want to do other things .
and these other things like this , and these other things like many of them , and it will do what they &apos;re going to do less .
third : eskalation .
this has me met when i wanted to exchange my jeans .
i &apos;m wearing , almost all the time .
and there was a time in the only way , and they bought them , they were bought , and they were bought , they were incredibly perceptive and they &apos;ve been bought for a long enough , and they &apos;ve been genug enough , they started &quot; okay . &quot;
so , to buy new jeans , after many years of the old tragens , and i said , &quot; i would have like to have a few jeans , here &apos;s my size . &quot;
and the merchant said , &quot; want to paint , easily , easily , pay attention to us .
they want to spin the heart or reißverschluss ? stone or frustrated ?
do you want to do with the holes ? &quot;
you want to cut down underneath the bottom , kegelig , blah blah blah ... &quot; and so on .
my jaw was down , and after i said i was reading by reading , &quot; i would like the kind of the only kind of the same way . &quot;
he had no idea what was that , so i spent a bell so that all of this bloody bloody bloody verdammten , and i say the truth -- i &apos;ll tell the truth to the best i ever had ever .
i had better . all of these people were getting better .
but i was doing worse .
why ? i wrote a whole book in trying to explain it .
the reason i felt bad was to be connected to all of this available , my expectations of a good dog , went up .
i had very low expectations . i had no idea when they were just in a kind of kind of a kind of time .
when they came in 100 ways , each , a lot of you should have perfect .
and what i was doing was good , but it wasn &apos;t perfect .
and so i &apos;m betting what i expected , and what i had expected , and what i was doing was to what i expected .
the most of opportunities in life of the people have the expectations of people have good about how good they are going to be good .
and this is to be less satisfaction with the results , even if the results are good .
no one in the world of the marketings knows , because if you would know , you know , you know , you know , everybody &apos;s going to be about it .
the truth is more like this .
the reason that was done was , it was worse than anything worse was worse , it was worse for the people who were able to make experiences as a pleasant surprise .
today , in the world we live -- we &apos;re wealthy , citizens , to perfection , to perfection , with perfection as a lot of the hope -- the best part of the best you can expect is to teach it as you would expect it .
they &apos;re never going to be because your expectations , my expectations , haushoch .
the secret to the glücklichkeit -- that &apos;s what they &apos;re all coming in -- the secret to the glücklichkeit rock low expectations .
i want to say -- a short autobiographischer moment -- that i &apos;m married with a woman , and she &apos;s really wonderful .
i couldn &apos;t do it better . i don &apos;t have to go .
but not always , that &apos;s not that one thing .
and one of the most popular of a bad suffer , if there &apos;s only one way , and they &apos;re wondering , who are responsible for you , and they &apos;re wondering , who are responsible for the response . the world is true . what would you do ?
if hundreds of different types of jeans , and they buy a die , and they &apos;re always asking why , who is responsible ?
it &apos;s also clear that the answer is : it &apos;s : it &apos;s .
they would have better .
there &apos;s 100 different species of jeans , there &apos;s no excuse not do it for error .
and so people make decisions , and even if the results of decisions are good , they feel about it , they &apos;re disappointed themselves .
and yet , in the industrial world , in the future of the last generation .
i think a signifikanter -- not the only thing , but a signifikanter beiträger is that people have learned the same thing , and then , if you &apos;ve learned the experiences , you think it would be your fault .
and so the bilanzergebnis is that it &apos;s not a little bit better , and we &apos;re feeling worse .
so let me remember .
this is the official dogma that we all think is completely wrong . it &apos;s not true .
there &apos;s no question that &apos;s just better than no , but it doesn &apos;t follow that more choice than something .
there &apos;s a magic crowd , i don &apos;t know what it is .
i &apos;m pretty sure that we miss this point where we miss this point .
now , as a result -- i &apos;m an answer question , the thing is , the thing that all of these choices is allowing all of these choices that all of these choices allow all of these choices that all of these choices allow all of these choices that all of these choices allow all of these choices that all of these choices allow all of these choices that
there are many places in the world , and we &apos;ve heard of many of you whose problem isn &apos;t .
your problem is that they have too little .
so the things i &apos;m talking about , are a great problem of modern , western societies .
and what &apos;s so frustrating and angry is : steve levitt has told them about how these kinds of expensive and difficult to installierenden car seats , it &apos;s a waste of money .
what i &apos;m telling you is that this precious choices -- it &apos;s not easy to help them .
they even hurts .
they &apos;re worried about that .
if something of our society makes our society makes our society to make the societies in which people have asked to choice , not only life in humans , but our minds would be enhanced .
economists call this a pareto-verbesserungs application .
einkommensumverteilung is that it &apos;s all better than just the poor -- because all of these big selection .
read , reading you please , please , and a kind of person , says , &quot; ah ! what does that fish ?
you know nothing possible to this goldfischglas . &quot;
verarmten phantasie , a kurzsichtige view of the world -- and that &apos;s the way i &apos;ve been reading .
the more i ever thought about , the fish came to the view of the fish .
because the truth is that if you break the oily break that everything is possible , they have no freedom .
if you break the goldfischglas , so that everything is possible to get rid of the satisfaction .
they increase the paralysis and the lower .
everybody needs a goldfischglas .
this is almost cognitive security -- possibly , for the fish , definitely for us .
but the abhanden is his prescription for misery , and i think , &quot; i guess , catastrophe .
thank you .
you know , i &apos;ve already talked about some of these projects already , and what that means to be the means , and over the discovery of genes .
in fact , we start from a new point : we have the biology , and we try to try to try and try from digital code in a new phase of biology , by unlocking new life .
we always have always trying to ask each other .
what is life ? it &apos;s something i think that many biologists were trying to understand and that &apos;s on different levels .
we tried different approaches to simplify the minimum components .
we &apos;ve spent 20 years . when we &apos;ve been doing the most extraordinary thing about the most popular world of the world &apos;s analog world .
now we &apos;re trying to ask , whether we can regenerate life or whether we can make new life , from this digital universe ?
this is the map of a small organism , a poor geitalium , the smallest genome of a species that could be in the lab , and we &apos;re trying to achieve whether we can achieve that with a few more .
we &apos;ve been able to climb out about a hundred genes to the 500 or something that &apos;s here .
but if we look at this metabolic map , the very simple , versus our lives , we trust each other , but if we look at all of those genes , we can actually take this genes , it &apos;s very unlikely that this is too to a living cell .
so we decided that it &apos;s the only way to put this chromosome to the front of this chromosome , which allows us to vary the individual components , and so few of these fundamental questions .
and so we started to deal with the question , we can make a chromosome .
so lets these really large molecules were doing this , which was never done before ?
and if we can do this chromosome , we can launch the chromosome .
one chromosome is just a piece of inertes chemical material .
our steps are exponentially .
our ability to write genetic code , but still , our last thing is now just a exponential curve .
we started to launch this 15 years ago .
it actually took a few years before we did the first experiments .
it &apos;s very difficult to be difficult .
there &apos;s tens of thousands of machines around the world the little pieces of dna , 30 to 50 letters long , 30 to 50 letters , but it &apos;s the longer you do a piece of a force , so much more errors .
so we had to develop a new method , we could develop these little bits and the mistakes .
this was our first attempt to try to get out of the digital information , the genome was the same thing .
it &apos;s a little virus of the bacteria .
we made little bits , made a fehlerkorrektur and had a dna molecule by about 5,000 5,000 letters .
the exciting phase of the phase of the brain stem cells and put this piece of inerte , and the bacteria started to read the genetic code , and made it virale particles .
the viral particles were pulled from the cells and came back and forth .
recently i talked to the oil and they said that they were right right .
they laughed more than you do it .
so , we think that this is a situation in the software actually can build your hardware in a biological system .
but we wanted to go beyond . we wanted to build a more effective chromosome , so we thought , we &apos;re going to build more than 580.000 buchstaben , it &apos;s more than 580.000 code , and it &apos;s got more than 580.000 buchstaben , we could find to understand what the individual cell could come to a living cell .
design is the key , and if you want to do with digital information , this digital information is really going to be .
when we first saw the genome , the fehlerrate was at a mistake of a mistake .
we found 30 30 , when we &apos;ve been able to use the original sequence of the original system would never be able to do it .
part of the design is to make pieces of design , pieces of letters long , and the other 50-buchstaben of the universe is to make smaller überlappen to build smaller sub-einheiten to build smaller .
we have an unique unique response here .
you may have heard that we have waterzeichen .
think about this : a , code : a , c , c , c , g and living , and the dominant code is a 4-buchstaben , g and living , and the dominant code is a und .
so , the letters triplets is -- these letters is kodieren the age of 20 amino acids , and there &apos;s a single purpose of amino acids .
so we can use the genetic code to write our words , to solve , thoughts .
initially , we only signed .
some people were disappointed to me .
we &apos;ve just got the pieces so that we could easily put them with enzymes , there &apos;s 10,000 ones that repair this repair and back .
and we started to formulate pieces of pieces , starting with the bits of the extra sport to siebentausend letters , trying to make these aneinander to make the 24.000-buchstaben-stücke to make these back , to 72.000 .
in each step , we have these pieces in the same way , we could solve them , because we were trying to create a very robust process of what they &apos;re going to see in a minute .
we tried to get the automation .
so , this looks like a basketball-playoff .
if we get to these right big , the one -- with about 100,000 stars -- then we &apos;re not going to grow in correspondence , there &apos;s all the opportunity of modern molecular biology , and so we &apos;re talking about others .
we knew from a mechanism called homologe rekombination , which is the biology of dna , that can use to repair these pieces .
here &apos;s an example of this . there &apos;s a organism called deinococcus radiodurans sharks three million radiation .
you see , in the upper field , it &apos;s just going to happen apart .
12 to 24 hours later , it was just moving again .
we have thousands of organisms that can do that .
these organisms can be completely dried , you can even live in the vacuum .
i &apos;m absolutely sure that life in space and can move forward , on the search for aquatischen .
in fact , nasa has shown that there &apos;s lots of that out there .
here &apos;s a gefügeaufnahme version of the molecule that we &apos;ve made that -- actually we &apos;ve used this one -- actually we &apos;ve just use solar energy use with the right design of the pieces of pieces , and yeast these are automatically .
this is not a reguläre mikroskopaufnahme .
it &apos;s so a big molecule , that we can actually see it with the lichtmikroskop .
this is a good shot over a course of six seconds .
this is the publication that we &apos;ve got recently done .
these are about 580.000 letters an , it &apos;s the largest molecule of the molecule that has ever been generated by people .
it has a molekulargewicht of 300 million .
if we were to be able to do it with a schriftgröße of 10 and no abstände , it would be more effective sites , except for that genetic code .
well , what do we start it ? how do we put it ?
clearly , it &apos;s obvious that it &apos;s filled with a virus that &apos;s very simple . it &apos;s much more complicated with bacteria .
it &apos;s easier to be , if you &apos;re in eukaryonten like we are , you take a different one , and that &apos;s exactly what they &apos;ve heard of cloning .
at the archaebakterien , the chromosome in the cell is the cell in the cell , we &apos;ve shown that you have a full transplant in one cell to the rest of a cell to the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest of the rest
we reinigten the chromosome , and it was very amazing as we could destroy all of the proteins , and it was very amazing than we were able to destroy all of the proteins , and we gave some extra-gene to destroy all the proteins and mice . we gave some extra-gene to destroy all of the proteins , and they &apos;re going to be amazing as we &apos;re going
the new chromosome went into the cell .
in fact , we thought that this is the end , but we &apos;re trying to get the process slightly more .
this is the most promising of evolution in here .
we find all sorts of species here that have a second chromosome , or a third of irgendwoher , every single time a third of a second hinzufügend .
so people who are seeing evolution as a gene that &apos;s going to be a point where much of biology .
there &apos;s the enzymes called the restriktionsenzyme .
the chromosome that was in the cell was , neither . the chromosomes we &apos;ve already talked .
it was done in the cell , and we realized the other chromosome as a few material material , and so we had only one cell in the end of a new chromosome .
it &apos;s the blue blue line because of the genes we had .
and after a very short time , it had all the characteristics of species , and konvertierte completely completely in a new species based on the new software that we gave up the cell .
all the proteins that was the membranes membranen of the membranes that we read the genetic code , it was exactly what we &apos;ve been able to do .
it may sound like sound alchimie , but we can make the software-dna , things fairly dramatic .
now i have no idea that this is not the genesis -- that &apos;s a bit of 3.5 billion years .
and i have learned that we might be able to create a new form of economic explosion in which it can be built new artenbildung in this digital design .
why should we do that ?
i think it &apos;s quite obvious in terms of what we need .
we &apos;re about nine billion people in the next 40 years .
to put it into my relationship : i was born in the year .
today , three people on this planet for everybody has gone missing in the year in the year , within 40 years , it will four .
we have problems with nahrungsmitteln , with frischem water , medicine , fuel for half billion people .
it &apos;s going to offer a challenge that &apos;s been for 9 .
we need five tons of coal , 30-plus billion pounds of oil . that &apos;s a hundred million people .
if we think about biological processes or any kind of process to replace that , is it going to challenge .
then , of course , there &apos;s all the co2 of this material that goes into the atmosphere .
we now have this , from our discoveries from all over the world , a database of about 20 million genes , and i want to believe that these are the future of the future .
the elektronikindustrie had a dozen components and see the diversity of that .
we &apos;ve seen here in the limitations of biological realities and on the way of those idea .
we now have today today , today , today , this is what we call kombinatorische genetics .
we have the opportunity to build a big scale of chromosomes in the day .
if you imagine these 20 million different genes , or drug new vaccines , we can change with a just small team more of the molecular biology than the past 20 years .
and it &apos;s just nurmale selection . we can selektieren selektieren , production , production or treibstoffproduktion impfstoffproduktion and so on .
this is a photograph of the wirklicher where you &apos;re actually looking at them and new species on the computer , and new species on the computer .
you know , we don &apos;t necessarily know how it &apos;s going to look like . we know how to code is inherently genetic code .
we focus on the side of the fourth generation .
they &apos;ve seen corn corn , which is just a bad experiment .
we have fuels of the zweiten- and third generation of the dritten , the third generation of higher rates of viel , as oktan or different kinds of butanol .
but , as we think , the only way of the kind of environmental costs in the costs is going to be in the costs to the costs or the limitation of their availability is when we see co2 as a brain , and therefore we &apos;re going to work on cells that we &apos;re going to go back to the road .
and we think we think we &apos;re going to be the first ones to be the first generation , and that &apos;s about 18 months .
sunlight and co2 are a method .
but in our discovery of our discovery in the world , we &apos;ve all sorts of different kinds of different backgrounds .
that &apos;s a organism that we &apos;ve described .
he lives in the deep posts , about ein-einhalb miles deep , at almost kochenden kochenden .
it &apos;s co2 in the methane of hydrogen as a source of hydrogen .
we investigate whether we can use co2 , we can use carbon dioxide to produktionsplätzen that , konvertieren the co2 in fuel , to get this process .
in a short period of time we believe we could have a basic questions of life .
you know , we really have a really -- moderate goals like the ersatz of the entire observable industry , right , if you don &apos;t have to do at ted , where else ?
but equally , we &apos;re working on the same amount of the same time for development .
you &apos;ve seen this year with flu , we &apos;ve always been a year on it , and we have a dollar to a little bit , if it &apos;s about the right vaccine .
i think that can be changed by using rekombinante vaccines .
that &apos;s how could possibly look like the future might look like , today , the evolutionsbaum is spawning to deal with synthetic bacteria , archaen , and perhaps eventuell .
we &apos;re lichtjahre people to improve . our goal is just that we have a chance to survive long enough to survive , and to do that . thank you very much .
at the last ted conference , i was a introduction to the lhc .
and i promised back to you , to try to explain to you as the machine .
so , it &apos;s as far as far as far as far as it . and for all those who were not there , the lhc is the largest scientific experiment ever attempted -- 27 miles in diameter .
his job is to create the conditions that less than a milliardstel second of the universe -- and that &apos;s the way to 600 million times within a second .
it &apos;s just breathtaking .
this is the machine underneath the end of the world .
we take pictures of these metabolic detectors in detectors .
i work . he calls out atlas size -- 44 meters in diameter , 22 feet in diameter .
here &apos;s a spectacular picture of the atlas in the apparatus .
at the 10th of september last year , the machine ran the machine for the first time .
and this image was taken by atlas .
it &apos;s got to immensen jubel .
it &apos;s a picture of the first strahlenpartikels that required to the lhc , then , to be a part of the lhc to make a rain to the detector .
in other words , when we saw this image on the 10th of september , we knew that the machine works , which is a big victory .
i don &apos;t know if this is the biggest jubel , or this , when someone who went out and the upper line .
it means we have a cultural impact on the wheel .
about a week later , there was a problem with this kind of thing that had to do with these devices -- this golden wires here , here &apos;s what you have to do with this kind of thing -- this golden wires here , here &apos;s this golden thing here -- this golden wires here , here &apos;s this golden thing here -- this golden wires here .
this wires is leiten when the machine goes down .
well , the engineers are going to look at you , &quot; no , no , they don &apos;t . that &apos;s little wires . &quot;
you can afford it because if you &apos;re very far very far away , they &apos;re going to be a supraleitern .
so , in minus minus 2,600 degrees , colder than the room between the stars , they can actually get this tension .
in one of the connections , between over neuntausend magnets , there was a manufakturdefekt .
so that &apos;s the wires of the drähte and 13-tausend ampere , the 13-tausend ampere begegneten resistance resistance .
this was the result .
well , this all goes up to imagine , that the magnets over the magnets over 20 tons , and it &apos;s about 30 centimeters .
so we organize about 50 , so we can make it about 50 , so we &apos;re going to put about 50 .
and they had to remove what we did .
we konditionierten them new .
they &apos;re all over again .
at the end of march , the lhc will be more friendly .
we &apos;ll be able to get it , and they expect to get the juni or juli to july , and we start our journey to find out what the building blocks of the universe .
now , of course , in a way , to kind of , is to make the debate of science and ingenieurskunst on the limits . it &apos;s easy to reject something like that .
i think the fact that it &apos;s so hard to think that we &apos;re thinking about our limitations of the way that the value of things like the lhc .
i &apos;m going to do my abschließenden words , humphrey davy , who said , &quot; nothing is a dangerous idea that our scientific notions are , and that &apos;s not a dangerous idea that our triumphe are , and that our triumphe are really vollzählig , and that there &apos;s no new worlds to come . &quot;
thank you .
i &apos;m freezing .
books books is my profession , but it &apos;s natural than that .
it &apos;s also my big , subtle love and fascination .
and i don &apos;t expect that it &apos;s ever .
but , my recent is a little quirky in my life and my career that made me completely , my work .
this curious event was that i wrote a book -- a biography called „ eat , pray , , love “ , pray “ , love “ , love “ , love “ , love “ , for a lot of my previous books from elite , and a big mega-ereignis , international bestseller-ding .
the result is that i &apos;m treated for where i &apos;m treated , i would be treated to be treated .
fiction !
for instance , they come to me and say , &quot; don &apos;t you know that they &apos;re never going to be healthy .
you have no fear of you , they &apos;re going to put their whole life and never again a book that anyone in the world ? never ?
okay , that &apos;s really what makes us .
it would be worse if i hadn &apos;t remember that i couldn &apos;t remember that i was going to be able to talk about 20 years when i was going to be a teenager with the same kind of angstbesetzter response .
people said , don &apos;t have fear , never succeeding .
you don &apos;t worry that you can &apos;t fear that you &apos;re doing that .
you don &apos;t worry that you can navigate your craft to life long , and it &apos;s never going to be a schrotthaufen träume , and you &apos;re going to die on a schrotthaufen , your mouth , your mouth would be the bitter of the country ?
that &apos;s what you know .
the answer -- the short answer to all these questions is : &quot; „ . &quot;
yeah , i &apos;m afraid to do this .
and i always had .
and i &apos;ve got a lot more of a lot of more things , the no one would go .
like algae -- and other things things .
but if it &apos;s about writing about the very far from the very very far , and ask me why ?
is the vernünftig ?
it &apos;s logical that by someone should be fearful that he was afraid to do the work that he feels ?
and what &apos;s happening is to the creative crisis , they &apos;re going to tell us about the human nature -- in a way , what it &apos;s like to do ?
my father , for example , and i can &apos;t really have a situation in his 40 years , in which he was asked if he would have fear , to be afraid .
your chemiker-blockade , john -- how do you get it ?
it just didn &apos;t know ?
but to be fair -- the group of chemists , the centuries of people who are not getting benefited by the alkoholsüchtigen manisch-depressive .
we seem to have this kind of reputation , but not only the writers , but the relevance of all the genres , seem to have that reputation , sensitive unstable is immensely unstable .
all you need to do is , the bitter todeszahlen of the 20th century , really great minds , young and often of the same hand .
and even the ones that couldn &apos;t actually have been suizid , and had their father &apos;s been being neglected to be accused .
norman mailer sagte said , famously speaking in his death in his last interview , „ , i was going to go on a little more than a little bit killed .
so a few years you can do about your life .
but we don &apos;t even know , we don &apos;t even know if we knew somebody hear somebody say , &quot; well , we &apos;ve got this kind of notion of natürlich and collective that kind of zusammengehören and suffering and suffering of them , and that art is -- at the end -- always leads to the seelenqual .
the question i want to ask every one of this : is this idea of what &apos;s going to happen in order ?
you feel like you ? because with just a centimeter plane , i don &apos;t feel at all of this notion .
i find them .
and i find them . and i don &apos;t want to look like it &apos;s going to be a century .
i think it &apos;s better if we want to live our big creative .
and i definitely think it &apos;s been -- in my situation -- very dangerous , this dark path of the vermutung sort of vermutung -- particularly in the fact that i &apos;m just going to go in my career .
this is called -- you see , i &apos;m pretty young . i &apos;m just about 40 years old .
i might have another 40 more arbeitsjahre in me .
and it &apos;s probably probably that everything i &apos;m going to write from now now , as the work is going to be able to do the abgefahrenen success of my last year , right ?
i &apos;ll say it &apos;s because we &apos;re all kind of a kind of friends -- it &apos;s very much likely that my closest success is behind me .
oh jesus , jesus , what a thought .
these are the kind of thinking that someone can get to be 9 o &apos;clock in the morning , gin , and i don &apos;t want to go .
i would rather to do that work i love .
so the question is : how ?
after some time , i think i would write to write , sort of trying to write a kind of schützendem psychological project .
i think , i have to figure out to a way to tell you , to write a safe distance between me and i think very natural beklemmung about how the response to the site .
while i &apos;ve been looking for all of the past year for models , i &apos;ve been trying to figure out , i &apos;ve been trying to figure out , and i tried to find other societies on that , and i tried to find other societies on it , we had to help creative ideas , how to help do with the emotional risks that are connected to creativity
so this quest of me came into old greece and the old age .
please follow me , because the circle is going to end .
but in the old greece , rome have the people who are doing creativity of people &apos;s coming from people .
they thought that creativity was sort of a göttlicher diener-geist , who made out of a distant , unknown source to people -- from unerklärlichen , unbekannten .
the greek of the greek diener-geister of creativity &apos;s law .
and of socrates , that he was known to him , he would have a dämon that would go back from the point .
the roman had the same idea , called this kind of körperlosem kreativem , kreativem genie genius .
this is great . the roman thought that roman was not really a genius , a genius was a particularly clever .
they thought that a genius that kind of magical was magisches , was that it was like dobby , the hauself -- about as dobby , the hauself , the hauself -- the rauskäme and the artist in the work of work , the arbeit is declining and the outcome of the work .
this is brilliant -- there &apos;s that it &apos;s the distance i talked about -- the psychological konstrukt that you protect you from the consequences of your work .
and everybody knew that it was so fragile , right ?
the artist of the altertums was some of the things that , like , for instance , to be much more , right ?
if your work was not all of you to look at everything for you , everybody knew you had this körperlose genius , that you had helped .
when your work has to be floppte -- not complicated your fault , or it ?
everybody knew that genius was born .
so people have been in the west really really have been in the west really long time .
and then the renaissance and all changed . we had this big idea , and this great idea was , let &apos;s put this big idea , and this great idea was , let &apos;s put this big idea , and there &apos;s no room for mystische creatures , the commands of the divine .
it &apos;s the beginning of the rational humanism , and the people started to believe that creativity was completely off from the own individual .
for the first time in history , you hear people like this , or a set of a genius -- instead of that he has a genius .
i have to tell you , i think that was a big mistake .
you know ? i think a few person to make a point , he &apos;s thinking , or it &apos;s like the pelvis and the source of all the time , creative , infinite unendlichen , unendlichen , infinite unendlichen , infinite unendlichen , unendlichen , infinite , a small bit too much to a fragilen , human psyche .
it &apos;s like somebody , the sun .
this is the end of the course of the military , and it creates all these unerreichbaren expectations to success .
i think this libertarian has been the last 500 years of vernichtet years .
and if that &apos;s true , and i think it &apos;s true -- is that it &apos;s true , the question : the question is , is : the question is , is , is , is , is , is , is , is , is , is , is , is , is , is , is , is , is , is , is , is ,
do we change it ?
maybe a lot understanding about the relationship between people and the mystery of the creative .
maybe not .
maybe we can &apos;t just put this out of 500 years of 500 years , not in a 18-minütigen talk .
and there &apos;s certainly people in this audience that really berechtigte scientific scientific , and that &apos;s really berechtigte scientific , and basically -- feen , people nachfolgen and feenzauber on their projects .
probably not probably you all of you to take that journey .
but the question i want to be is : why not ?
why not think about this ?
because it makes much sense like everything i heard of anything i heard about it , the absolute machende launenhaftigkeit of the creative process .
a process that &apos;s -- how everybody knows that it has ever attempted to do something -- so in other words , actually everybody here -- not always .
indeed , he can sometimes feel like a paranormal .
i had a encounter when i met the extraordinary american stone , which is now about 90 , but she told me she was in virginia at the fields , she said she was in the dörflichen virginia , she said she &apos;s gone , she said she &apos;s going to feel and hear as a poem about the landscape of landscape .
she would be like a donnernder train to the air .
the land on land on it was .
she felt if it came to it , because it would be under your feet to the quake .
they knew that they could just do a moment in a moment , and that was -- in their words -- „ rennen .
they ran the devil as they were pursued to be tracked quickly , and it was only the darum that she was taking quickly to a sheet of paper and a pen , so she was able to get through them , and they were able to go through them , and i could go on on the sheet .
at other , they didn &apos;t get the speed of it , and they said it was . she would say it was going to go across country and ran on land , and she was told the house , but she was saying , „ after another poet .
and then there was this moments -- the part i &apos;ve never forget -- she said that there was the california that they had almost .
so she replied , she &apos;s standing in the house , and she grabs a pen , and she grabs a pen you just heard a pen , and then she would she said -- was that it was like it to her other hand after the front door and then go back to the end .
they erwischte the poem on his tail and moved it back into your body and pulled it on the sheet .
the opportunities came to the poem , and intact on the paper -- but -- -- from the last word , from the last word .
when i was like this , i thought that &apos;s exactly what my creative process is going to be on .
i &apos;m not even like my creative process , i &apos;m not the kanal .
i &apos;m a maultier . to work on the same day at the same time , and sweat , mich me and really awkward .
but even in my mind , sometimes this thing .
and i guess many of you have done that .
even , i had work on or ideas that made out of a source of mine that i couldn &apos;t identify .
what is this thing ?
and how we do that in relation to our intellect without losing our intellect , but in the opposite , in the opposite , in the sense , in the sense of understanding ?
for me , the best living example is the best example of how you can do this musician , the musicians , i was going to interview him a few years ago .
we talked about this subject , and you know what ? the most of his time , the most of the modern modern , the greek , trying to be , these unkontrollierbaren creative pulses that are being in the wohnten , and with them .
but then he became older and post . he told me that he went to a round in los angeles , and then there &apos;s all of it all for him .
he went to high speed when he went to a little of a tune , the way it &apos;s been difficult for him , and he wants to do it . it &apos;s hard for him , and it &apos;s prachtvoll . he &apos;s bouncing after it , but he can &apos;t be .
he has no piece of paper , he doesn &apos;t have any pen , he doesn &apos;t have any pen .
so he starts to the old beklemmung in him , like i &apos;m going to lose this thing going on and i will become haunted by this song .
i &apos;m not good enough , i don &apos;t do .
but instead of panic , he stopped just sitting on .
he was alive and done something completely different .
he just looked at the sky and said , &quot; „ , can you not see that i &apos;m going to go out of the time ? &quot;
so i see that i could just a song ?
if you really exist , come to a günstigeren moment , if i could take care of you .
if not , quäle , is someone else .
go and quäle leonard .
his whole life has changed .
not the work itself , the one was to be more as dark as the eh as well .
but the process and the heavy logic that surrounds him was when he was doing nothing to do a ärger , and he was going to zurückließ the genius , he was leaving , he was able to put it as a ärger , he realized that it was not a verinnerlichtes , quälendes thing .
there could be a eigentümliche , wundersame , bizarre collaboration , a kind of conversation between tom and the fremdartigen , the thing that didn &apos;t quite tom .
when i heard this story , it changed a little bit of the way i worked , and i &apos;ve been seeing .
this idea i was growing into the schreibprozess of „ eat , pray , love in one of the zweifels that we drop about something , i was in one of the one of the zweifels that we drop about something that is going to work a disaster . that &apos;s the worst book that was ever written .
not only do not only , but the worst times all time .
i started thinking , i should just pull this project .
but then i remembered the way tom in the school , and i tried to do it .
so i was looking at my sight from the manuscript and talking my commentary in the manuscript , the room .
i talked to : „ , you and i &apos;m going to see if this book is not brilliant , that it &apos;s not really fully my fault , right ?
because you see , i have all of that , i &apos;ve got to say , i don &apos;t have more than that .
so if you want to have better , you have to show up here and your split of the abmachung .
okay . but , if you don &apos;t do it , then the hell of the devil .
i &apos;m going to write and write , because this is my job .
and i want to give you to what i was now to do my part of the jobs here .
because ... it &apos;s like the end . it &apos;s like the following . it &apos;s like the following , and you &apos;ve been starting to wüsten people in the deserts of the nordafrikas and music , the stundenlang land that were hours in the dawn of the dawn .
these strong were always great because the dancers were professional and they were fantastic .
but , again , very rare , something special happened , one of the performers actually did .
and i know you know what i mean , because i know you &apos;ve all seen all of that in your life .
it was as a time , and the dancer , in fact , the dancer , a kind of pforte , it was not a different way of doing nothing -- 1,000 nights before , but all of it together .
and suddenly he no longer have been hearing longer .
he was erhellt and von , and all erhellte sich through a göttliches fire .
so when something happened , knew people who was that . they called it to his name .
they put together the hands together and began singing , „ allah , allah , allah , allah , god , god , god , god .
that &apos;s god , you know ?
interesting historic : when the mohren südspanien was initiated this practice , allah “ zu zu zu zu zu zu , allah “ , olé , olé , olé , olé , das , das , das , that you &apos;re still hearing .
if you see a major one in spain , something magical , has done a little magical , olé , olé , großartig , großartig , großartig , großartig , großartig , großartig , there &apos;s a flüchtiger look at god .
and this is great , because we need it .
but , the tricky part of the next morning , when the dancers is blown out on a tuesday -- and it recognizes that it &apos;s 11 o &apos;clock on a tuesday -- and he &apos;s no longer a fünkchen of god in it .
he &apos;s just a alternder sterblicher , and maybe he never revealed that .
and maybe it &apos;s never going to call me out of god , and they will call me back when it &apos;s about , but what should he do with the rest of his life ?
that &apos;s hard .
this is one of the most basic alignment of a creative life .
but maybe it &apos;s not quite a voller , if you didn &apos;t believe in the beginning , that the most of you will have to have your most aspects of their existence .
if you think that they &apos;re a loaner -- from a unvorstellbaren source of your life , that &apos;s when they &apos;re done in someone else &apos;s passed .
if we start thinking about this , so we think that all that &apos;s all .
so i started thinking , and so i think i &apos;m going to go back to the past months , while i was working on the book , that soon will soon be , to the dangerous , may be expected to erfolgs .
what i &apos;m going to say to myself , i &apos;m going to go to a minute , is : don &apos;t worry .
isn &apos;t it .
just your job .
it &apos;s still alive than that , whatever he is .
if your job is dance , dance .
if that stupid &apos;s genius , if you &apos;re going to be the page , it &apos;s been , for a brief moment , a brief moment of your household , dann ! , „ ! .
and if not , dance , dance .
and „ olé ! “ for you .
i believe i and i feel that , we should teach that .
„ olé ! ! for you , just for you , you know , you have the bloße of the love and the eigensinn , to be there .
thank you .
thank you .
! !
last year , i showed these two slides , to illustrate that the arktische eiskappe that was spent for three million years that had the grösse of the unteren countries to be 40 percent .
but this doesn &apos;t really get strong enough , the seriousness of this special problem , because it &apos;s not the thickness of ice .
in a sense , the arktische eiskappe the planetary heart of our global klimasystems .
it grows in winter and we would have in the summer .
the next slide i &apos;m going to show you is a zeitrafferaufnahme that &apos;s happened in the last 25 years .
the dauereis is labeled .
as you see it , it &apos;s going to be a dunkelblau in winter , and it &apos;s the annual ice in winter , and it &apos;s in the summer .
the so-called dauereis , five years old , or older , almost like blood , which is almost the body .
25 years , it &apos;s going to be gone .
this is a problem , because the gefrorenen of the frozen reason is about the arctic ocean , where there &apos;s a vast amount of gefrorenem carbon , which is , if it &apos;s auftaut , from microbes to methane .
compared to the entire amount of klimaverändernden , in the atmosphere , could double that amount of innovation , if we cross this issue .
now today , sprudelt in some shallow seen in alaska is in alaska of the water today .
professor katey walter in alaska is a whole other set of shallow see lake last winter .
wow ! wow !
you &apos;re fine . the question is , how will it be us .
and one reason is that enormous enormous drop of water is from the north .
this is a jährlicher tauwasserfluss .
but the volume are much bigger than ever before .
this is the kangerlussuaq river in the southwest .
if you want to know , as the sea level goes down here to the ocean .
these rivers are taking too .
at the other end of the planet , the antarctic , the biggest eismasse on the planet .
so last month , researchers scientists that the whole continent has a negative eisbilanz .
and the westantarktis , which is a few unterwasserinseln , is particularly heavily in the melt .
this is 20 feet , like greenland .
in the himalayas , the drittgrössten eismasse , you see the top up new lakes that was a few years ago .
40 percent of all the people in the world are going to get half of their trinkwassers from this .
in the andes , this glacier is the trinkwasserquelle for this city .
the wassermengen have been expanding .
but if you versiegen , it &apos;s also going to be the most drinking water drinking water .
in california , a 40 percent reduction in the sierra saw .
this is the speicherbecken .
and the predictions , as you read , are serious .
this austrocknung in the world leading to a dramatic spike .
and the disasters everywhere in a really ausserordentlichen and never thought before .
so many of these last 30 years of the last 30 years , as in the vorhergegangenen 75. .
this is a completely empathic entwicklungsmuster .
if you look at this in historical context , you can see what it &apos;s like .
over the last five years , we &apos;ve got 70 million tons of tons of co2 tons of co2 24 hours -- 25 million tons of every day .
look at the sphere of the eastern eastern eastern , the american continent , and beiderseits of the indian continent , where there was a commentary decline in the ocean .
the biggest implication of global warming , next to be , which is 20 percent of fossil fuels .
oil is a problem , and coal is the intelligent biggest problem .
the united states is one of the two largest verschmutzer , and we do with china .
and the proposal was to build lots more systemic references .
but we start to see a transformation .
here are the ones that are in the last several years , with some green alternatives .
so , in the country , there &apos;s a political clash in our country .
and the kohleindustrien and ölindustrien have a viertelmilliarde dollar kalendarjahr , to promote clean coal , which is inherently a contradiction in itself .
this painting reminded me .
so to get christmas around the road at home , at home , a billion tons of kohleschlamm .
they saw it warscheinlich in the news .
this is in our entire country of zweitgrösste abfallfluss .
this was a christmas problem .
one of the commercials of the kohleindustrie to solve this .
frosty der is a vergnügter , happy .
it &apos;s in the envelope and abundance and abundance of our economy .
frosty , the kohlenmann is going to clean every day .
it &apos;s affordable and liebenswert , and they &apos;ve got stuck in the lohn and bread .
this is the source of most coal in west virginia .
the most powerful bergarbeiter is the head of massey coal .
let me say you a whole thing , al gore , nancy pelosi , harry reid , they don &apos;t know what they &apos;re talking about .
so the alliance has dedicated to two of the community .
this is one of your mind .
the coalergy , we see climate change as a serious risk for our business .
so we &apos;ve taken this to the top zeil , a beträchtliche geldsumme would spend a werbeaktion to the way that the truth is about coal .
the fact is , isn &apos;t it &apos;s dirty .
we think it &apos;s clean -- and smells still well well even well .
so , don &apos;t worry about climate change .
they &apos;re quiet to us .
saueber coal , they &apos;ve heard a lot of it .
so let &apos;s give us a tour of these modern , sauberen kohlefabrik .
fantastic ! this machine is quite noisy .
but it &apos;s the sound of the clean kohletechnologie .
and yet , the burning of coal for coal is one of the reasons that remarkable clean clean kohletechnologie you see here , changes .
look at this , this is the heutige , clean kohletechnologie .
finally , the positive alternative , the positive alternative , and our challenge of national security security .
america is a crisis , the economy , the national security , the climate crisis .
the red way , which is this all the transportation , our dependence upon the kohlenstoff-basierenden kohle is kraftstoffen as usual .
but now there &apos;s a brave , new solution to free us from this honeycomb .
versorge america with 100 percent of electricity , within the next 10 years , within the next 10 years , within the next 10 years .
to make america to work , to make us safer and help us understand global warming .
finally , a solution that &apos;s big enough to solve our problems .
versorge new . find more .
this is the last .
it &apos;s about a neuversorgung of america .
one of the most common ways of our dependence upon the old , the more likely that our world is to reduce our world .
the future is here . wind , sun and a new system .
new investment to create good jobs .
versorge new . it &apos;s time to accept reality .
there &apos;s a old african thing , &quot; if you want to be able to go quickly , go alone .
if you come to come to go to the time . &quot;
we have to come far , and that &apos;s fast .
thank you .
i want to start to start to take you to the time of their childhood zurückzudenken when they were playing with bauklötzen .
as you realized , how to take the hands and zugreift , the klötze and bewegt , and they learned to try and solve problems and problems with zusammenhänge to solve .
the spatial thinking is deeply intertwined , as we understand a lot of our understanding .
as a computer , inspired by the kind of thinking with real-life fachberater , zusammen patti and my colleagues jeevan kalanithi , i started wonder , what if we could intervene with both hands , the instead of a maus-zeigers , which would be , if we could intervene with both hands and data , i started wonder what we could intervene with the hands and they might be able
so this question was so that we used to get the erforschung of the response to entschieden .
in short , i said , a siftable is a interactive computer in size of a kekses .
you can move your hand , you can see each other , you can take your movements and they have a screen and a funkempfänger .
much more important , are physically , you know , why you can use them as bauklötze just through the hands and you can move .
and the siftables are a new generation of hilfsmitteln to digital digital data .
and if these tools are physical , and you can create consciousness for your movements , each each other and the intricacies of our umgangs , we can start each other and unterhaltsamer interaktionsarten .
i start with some basic examples .
this siftable is for videowiedergabe konfiguriert and when i put it into a direction , it &apos;s going to take action , and i &apos;ll turn it into the other direction , it &apos;s backwards .
and these are portraits , each person .
so if i put it back , you get bored .
if you &apos;re surrounded by voneinader , you &apos;ll notice that and then they &apos;re going to be nervous .
and they &apos;re also feeling their movements .
one very interesting thing that we started to realize was that we could use a tool to data , that we could use a tool to schütten like this is how to do it with something .
in this case , we have three siftables als , and i can use them to use color to the center where they &apos;re going to get mixed .
if we overdo it , we can make a little bit of a wenig .
there &apos;s also some nice application in the education like languages , math , math , math , where we can put the people who have to strike the way and see the results immediately .
here &apos;s me -- this is a fibonacci , which i have with a simple misunderstanding .
this is a game with words , which is kind of a mixture of scrabble and boggle .
basically , you get to get any round on every siftable randomly randomly , and as you &apos;re trying to form words , that we &apos;re going to get to form .
then about 30 seconds , again , again , and you have a new kind of novel and new possibilities .
thank you .
these are some kids who came to the media lab , i could move them to go , and i have a video of it .
they really loved it .
a more interesting situation in this kind of application is that you don &apos;t have to be many orders .
all you have to say is &quot; the words &quot; and you know exactly what to do .
there &apos;s some people that test it .
this is our youngest beta-tester there .
it turned out that he was going to be just furious .
so for him , they were just bauklötze .
this is a interactive trickfilmanwendung .
we wanted to develop a lernmittel for sprachlerner .
that &apos;s 100 .
he can bring new characters into the scene by making the siftable off the table who character this character .
this is what he &apos;s going to do .
the sun is going to be .
now he &apos;s going to take a tractor .
the orange slice .
yeah ! yeah !
by the siftables shake , and they put the characters side , he can interact the characters , the ones , let &apos;s interact the characters .
... his own story .
hi !
it &apos;s a story with the end , and he can decide to decide how they co-evolved .
flying cat .
the last one that i &apos;ve been time to show today is a musik-sequencer for live-auftritte , which we developed in the siftables as a sound , like führungsstimme , bass and drums .
each one has four different variations ; you can select that you want to use .
and you can make these sounds into the sequence of einspeisen that you can put in the financial system .
and you just put them a , by simply a ton-siftable .
there are effects that you can live live , like business and filters .
you hook it with a specific tone , and he &apos;s all of it to it .
and then , in terms of the way effects like the pace and volume that you &apos;re doing all the sequence .
so let &apos;s look .
we start with the führungsstimme in two sequenz-siftable einspeisen and these in a row array , and they &apos;re expanding and a little more of the vote .
now i &apos;m going to make a little bit .
now i &apos;m going to do something more than i &apos;m going to do something .
and now i &apos;m going to push the filters with the drums that i can live with the effect .
i can speed the whole sequence by looking at this as a different direction .
and now i &apos;m going to pull down the filter , with the bass .
i can think the sequence while they &apos;re stuck .
i don &apos;t have to plan to plan to the box , but it &apos;s been able to make it .
and finally , i can get the whole sequence by drawing the lautstärke-siftable to the left .
thank you .
so , as you can see , my excitement in the begeisterung , new mensch-computer-schnittstellen , to develop the better work , how our brains and bodies work .
and today , i had time to show you a part of this new design-welt and some of the ways to show what we &apos;re going to work in our lab .
the idea i want to tell you about , is that we &apos;re taking the threshold of werzeugen to this new generation of werzeugen to interaction with digital media , the information in our world , which is our demands .
thank you .
i &apos;m happy to you all of them , on the conversation .
yeah , good day .
i &apos;m looking at it .
so , what do you want to be ?
i have to just sort of a little ausholen , and that &apos;s the busy beschäftigt nerve to the modern table .
i &apos;m studying biology and a lot of years with the biohacking , and i started because i started to know , and it &apos;s just going to be , because i was going to make a lot of what i learned in the study of the study .
so that &apos;s my primary primäre .
so it was a curiosity , and i was sort of closer to the matter of that .
i think the molecular biology in general is , biotechnology , everything that you are involved in , synthetic biology and so on .
extremely important , now , is now extremely important , and yet much more importantly , much more is going to happen in the future .
there is that way that these whole genetically sachen in the äckern .
there are craig venter in the u.s.a that &apos;s trying to make biofuel , so gas looks like algae .
but there &apos;s also been done things that are totally in the world &apos;s population , which is most people in the world , which is most people , for example , that allowed us to wash with 40 degrees of laundry , including the gentechnisch optimierte enzymes .
and the list can continue to go .
and so , from the interest in this technology , i &apos;m going to continue to continue on the point of this technology .
so what is now ?
most people know the softwarebereich .
computers , and then it gets to keep the media , and then it gets so on , and so on , you know , the hacker break down somewhere somewhere and claws .
this is kind of a kind of very sad thing for the very large hadron collider , because that &apos;s not what they actually did like that really started doing , and what &apos;s going to do it .
and that &apos;s the software-hacker , in the &apos; 70s , achtzigerjahren with computerbasteln , and it &apos;s the internet .
and it &apos;s about to do with a playful , creative way , a problem .
and the problem that is not just a technical problem , it can also be a serious problem , which is also just a very serious problem , and how can you simplify the way , and how can you make it work better .
and it &apos;s been done with software , but there &apos;s also in the elektronikbereich , there &apos;s also a whole bastlerszene that supports with all kinds of abgefahrenen things .
and now we also have this metaphor to biology , and i want to do this metaphor that &apos;s not quite the same as computers , because , it &apos;s not quite the same as computers , because , it &apos;s not quite the same as computers , because it &apos;s matter , because it &apos;s matter , so is matter , so is matter , and not just cyber
but it &apos;s also a code , and you can also code , and you can also code , and you can also code , and that &apos;s what i found out , and that &apos;s what i find utterly fascinating , and i just wanted to go much deeper with it .
it actually just really just happened very much indeed , that these networks are netzwerke .
there &apos;s hackteria dot , which is originally from switzerland , which is originally from switzerland , with a cooperation in india , with a cooperation , but now , but now , in the end , we &apos;ve assembled to have a lot of people around the world .
this is a more artistic chemical , so there &apos;s lots of artists and philosophers and work with scientists and to imagine the creative usage , and we can make the creative thing to do and to make the creative , there &apos;s museumsausstellungen and yes , all sorts of things .
but it &apos;s always about trying to find a lockeren approach to have a framework .
and then there &apos;s do-it-yourself-bio dot , d.i.y.bio .
this is from the u.s.a a network , which is actually more as a kind of forum where you &apos;re looking at it and online .
they &apos;re a little technical ring , and also a little bit of a businessmäßiger , and then there &apos;s also so , no doubt .
and by the networks , the entire done of the popular opera , has been so on a scene that i want to go to just briefly .
here in the upper left , you see a biocurious , this is a hackerspace , so basically , a private school , and we have a private school , and we have no institution where everybody can .
kids , old , all kinds of people go to just a lab , you know , you &apos;ve got a lab to watch and see what you can do when those laborprotokolle are .
here on the left , there &apos;s a group in indonesia , house-of-natural-fibers , who is already pretty much .
they &apos;re both more than these other ones .
it also acts that they are with biological materials and , yes , even elektronikbasteleien , and combine it on quite abgefahre .
one group of the matter i &apos;ve been in front of a while ago , and i &apos;ve got to say , this is a studentengruppe that would like to learn what they &apos;re learning in college and they &apos;ve tried to do so on the straßenfesten and try to explain what &apos;s going on in college .
and i &apos;ve been on the other hand in the other image , a vorlesung in copenhagen in the medical museum in combination with a show .
and that &apos;s , yeah , yeah , this is mostly a young people , but the only thing that you know , all the time , is this fascination in technology .
and what you do with it , and also , quite , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , what you want to do , is your interest , they have your interest , you have to make you so ?
so , o.k , to hack now , you need some material .
you need to have a natürlich biological materials , and you need tools , and that &apos;s a lab .
and so , what you normally normally do is to understand what you normally have to understand , extremely expensive , extremely sensitive , except , nur , ausgebildete , ausgebildete academics and so on .
and our approach was to say , o.k , that actually , actually , that &apos;s actually not to do that .
that &apos;s not necessary because each one has actually given higher , given higher , evolved technology than most of the laborgeräte , that &apos;s really , really .
and it &apos;s been associated with this premise of premise with this premise , for instance , brian versucht in britain , a dampfdruckkochtopf , then a heizplatte , and a heizplatte , and then they got bacteria to work out with it .
so each one of the time once a soup , is he has a soup that he has been doing , even though it was done .
i then put this in my lab home , a little bit , and then i got paid so second-hand-equipment analyse , trying to bought ebay , trying to make a bisschen , so as / fingerprinting , so as d.n.a fingerprinting .
now , this should be not going to be a joke , but it &apos;s not going to be .
here &apos;s the slide here , you see the lab , in anführungsstrichen , so a zugestellte garage , so that &apos;s so a zugestellte garage , so that &apos;s so a zugestellte garage , so that &apos;s so a zugestellte garage , and also quite , pretty interesting things , because i want to be a project .
and this is biocurious , who &apos;s just mentioned , this kind of volkshochschule in the principle for molecular biology .
and yeah , you see it &apos;s relatively heterogen , so that &apos;s why you get there to be the other in the other way to the larger organizations that are more likely to do more online in toraja .
but always the idea that it &apos;s just going to be easy to be available .
the first project we did as a globalized group , we &apos;ve got online , and we &apos;re online , and we &apos;re online , and we &apos;re going online , and we know the people who are always getting and get the people who are always getting and so like that .
and then came from the do-it-yourself-bio org website in the founder , and has said , we have to really meet real meeting , and then has two events , one in london , zweitausend , and short in the u.s.a , in san francisco .
and then it was also about o.k , who are we , what is what we want to do , what do we want to be trying to do ?
and what are our values and what are our contradiction , our grundlage ?
and then we then have a code-of-conduct fractal .
it &apos;s quite a , , so everybody has just so his wishes , and what it moves , it &apos;s moving .
there was a good code , a good code .
and then we then surveyed it &apos;s not , but that &apos;s true , but i think , well , quite well , has quite well to say , people are right in the way that .
and we even tried to do this , it &apos;s also trying to be able to do this , but there &apos;s no way that it &apos;s not like it .
so i think we &apos;re out of the biohackerszene , in the regard , even further further further than the world &apos;s academic world .
well , what projects do we do now ?
a project i did with the hackteria-netzwerk in switzerland was that we wanted to have a sogenannte or optical optical basteln .
this is , if you put a beam , you can put small particles into the room , and then you can move small particles into the liquid and then in this focus , so , it &apos;s like , like this is like a traktorbeamstrahl in principle .
this is actually working , and we then have thought that will be done in the academic trial , and we &apos;ve thought , o.k , we might have thought , the kriegen , the lens , you have a webcam , a microscope that would have a microscope that would have a microscope that would have a microscope .
you see down there .
and then we have a d.v.d brenner , and the brenner den , and then try to focus on this camera .
and this didn &apos;t have been done , but we &apos;ve learnt a lot about it .
so another project that comes from the french group there , which has been out of the fact that &apos;s pretty cool .
and he has this so a bit like this , like a hirnwellenmessgerät , like this , like this , so e.e.g or something , so he &apos;s got to beschäftigt , his nickname is sam neurohack .
he took this one of these diesen helmet , and in cooperation with the museum , the first one .
there could then the visitors in the room , they could put on these chair , moving off the helmet .
and then they were measured their brainwaves , and depending on what they thought or as you thought , is different levels in the room .
it was a pretty common project .
another thing from the united states that can also do with this robotic arm , is the p.c.r , the p.c.r , complicated word .
so it &apos;s about to copy genes , to try to vermehren , d.n.a , fragments , to try to replicate it .
so if i do this the profiler , go , you get a little bit of haarproben , and then they turn those up and then they can turn those up and then you can say , o.k , this hair belongs to this man , so that &apos;s how it is like that .
and the machines that are doing something that are quite expensive , which you buy the kommerziell , the cheapest billigsten .
and this is not a really cool technology that can also affect a lot of it .
so that &apos;s just one application of many , you can do it .
and the ones have been like this two and say , o.k , that we do and try and have a open source , so , you know , you can do this device , so you &apos;ve actually got to be frei , and then they &apos;ve got to be the most anbieter of the world &apos;s heart attack in the world .
i think , sort of like this , or something like that .
but anyway , it &apos;s still cheap , but it &apos;s still not cheap , but it &apos;s certainly in a framework where it &apos;s going to be clear .
so , it &apos;s my opinion , a very gelungener .
a project i was going to start to build on was a gene-gun .
gene-gun is , yeah , like this kind of luftdruckpistole that takes a lot about as far , two inches or something like that .
you put d.n.a d.n.a , and then the goldpartikel , and then in these luftdruckpistole , and then i put the following in the first place , and then i put it down to the pedal with it .
so the device that you see is it doesn &apos;t work .
but that &apos;s so my prototype , which is pretty much like , this thing , and that &apos;s so branch , and that &apos;s the pressure was , and that was the pressure was to be too high , that &apos;s just gone .
and then i took a sahnespender and that &apos;s been plugged to it .
a sahnespender , when you use the full power of water , so the enough , i think , so 40 to the sechtzig bar .
and so you can then get the particles apart enough and then they go into the onion .
and the commercial way costs about 30 dollars or something like this , sahnespender so on the rate .
so it &apos;s not the same efficiency , but it &apos;s basically going to be doable .
and that &apos;s also the kernanliegen of the scene that availability is to increase this availability of technology and also the information and the spiky decision that there &apos;s more people can be able to engage more .
because as the beginning said , it &apos;s extremely important technology , and most people have quite little idea of it and also a chance to form it .
because if you just read it , from sekundärliteratur , that &apos;s not the same as if you &apos;ve done it .
and i think technology will always be more important in our modern societies .
and if you want to meet as a citizen decisions , and you can make decisions and able to do , then you need to know access to the space and to technology .
and then you have to do it and understand it and understand it and understand it .
and then you get into the schlagworten open open open and citizen science .
so you just think that citizens , you can only have to do with these circuits .
and this is the kernanliegen of the biohackern .
these are the people who were at least officially , on the website , d.i.y.bio-dot-org website .
that &apos;s a relatively remarkable number of people worldwide .
and interesting is that they are in southeast asia .
i think that &apos;s what i think are there less people , when actually exist .
so i know some of some of you who don &apos;t have .
and this is now the biohacker , the individual people .
and so with these hackerspaces , so that &apos;s where these places are .
and that &apos;s very much at the beginning .
as i said , it &apos;s just beginning .
and hackerspaces , so the computerhackerspaces , the computerhackerspaces , because the c-base in berlin was the first one .
and this is a gigantic network of a network of very good , yes , infrastrukturzentren , the world &apos;s largest located in the world .
and we also hope that we don &apos;t have to take some of us , and then also similarly , are also related to be able to be able to be involved more .
and i would invite everyone to stop and even even a time of what the auszuprobieren .
it &apos;s not that simple , but it &apos;s not impossible , if you have enough curiosity , and enough energy , you &apos;ll get too far .
thank you .
it was that it was .
yeah , hi .
how do we work humans ?
this is a question that makes me very moving as a designer , but also in the forschungsbereich usability , and in all things in the domain of . .
there &apos;s about how to motivate people in the interactive media , so they use these interactive media , and they make a game that they &apos;re going to create a game .
i think that the interactive media in us , cognitive models , so that the interactive media in the biological memory of life in the biological memory was very , very long ago , and that we just can &apos;t be able to deal with the interactive media .
and this is very amazing because you actually think that this hochtechnologie , which you actually actually think that one is actually in the future , but actually it &apos;s so that the future is exactly what the future is going to us , where our archaischen are .
now , what are now more models now ?
i &apos;ve been talking about four stichworte , and i want to explain to you .
and to cognitive cognitive , and that &apos;s the models that we have in the pre-industrial times .
and to that archaischen , that we have a natural relationship to the virtuality .
so this sounds like this sound .
but i &apos;m going to go back and get to try to try and talk to you that they have a natural relationship to the virtuality .
the second thing is , we &apos;ve been given since this archaischen situation in the situation , really , very , very , even though we &apos;re going to use a language language .
and the third one is actually actually moved from themselves .
we all know that the interactive media is definition to be nonlinear , which is the sensitivity to do , and what makes us of course , that we have as normal as normal .
the fourth thing is that the story of the informationsweitergabe is a place of informationsweitergabe .
now , how is this now with virtuality , which is actually the most profound thing in the world .
i want to give you this .
how many athletes have been living in the way they live ?
we won &apos;t be able to answer that , but it &apos;s going to happen , and it &apos;s going to happen at the moment .
they go in the spirit of this house , in demn , and look at how many doors are there .
and that &apos;s what they do .
they virtualisieren the reality and it &apos;s very much about computers .
fantastic , isn &apos;t it ?
and we give us the most popular thing to the medien-campus reality in our v.r.-labor , we can actually do that all the time .
and this particular thing that spreads the virtual world reality is to virtualisieren that people have had the ocean in the ocean , because they didn &apos;t have anything done .
no books .
or not a bulldozer .
they didn &apos;t have any mass .
the only thing that had had to be your head .
and in this mind , the memory .
in this head , knowledge and virtual images , and virtual pictures that would have been able to do that , but only in this virtual pictures that was only known .
and so much as we can tell us that we can get that with virtuality .
the interesting thing is , if i can do a little trip .
yeah , that &apos;s what we do .
the interesting thing about this is that at that time , the human genome was medienproduzent and media .
now , if you think about a little bit further .
what are media today ?
you &apos;ll notice that it has a transformation .
but i &apos;ll just talk to you .
the most werkzeug tool was the informationsvermittlung of the informationsvermittlung stories .
schamanen , priests , so-called wissenswächter , were extra to preserve stories .
and today we &apos;re very much very , very much .
the author of the book des , , jonathan gottschall , zufolge verbingen , zufolge immer , zufolge immer hours with the rezeption of stories .
that means for a kid , which is that it goes to the beginning of the most profound time with the rezeption of stories .
now we think our love to stories that we have been as a child in the lap of our parents .
no , far , far .
it goes much more back into the cultures of the pre-industrial .
but in the field of the interactive collapse as particularly speakers , that we have to live in wonder in our biological memory , the ability to think .
i &apos;ve given you a quick mitgebracht of the nordamerikanischen tribe .
and the life lived in the küstenregion of british columbia .
and as you can see , this is a very inselreiches area , and you had to be sort of a sort of navigieren to come from the island to get food .
and they did this with these genannten lead-landkarten .
you may have to be able to get a little bit of interest , and then , from the australian ones .
the things have similar principles .
they don &apos;t have lead-landkarten , but they &apos;ve got the so-called lead-landkarten songlines .
and what the interesting thing is that the navigation and the topography of regions over songs .
and that &apos;s the language of feynman tumors .
that &apos;s called navigierte , and over rhythm .
and these sounds , and this rhythm , the ones that are starting to geology that &apos;s called the topography of a region , and that &apos;s also , of course , that you could put these songs and then else to the left , and then turn back to the left and again .
why not do we sing anymore to get from the top of a home ?
anyway , not to navigate .
what &apos;s happened is that &apos;s actually happening .
it &apos;s happening is that the gennante machine .
we &apos;ve been moving on before in this so-called brain .
it &apos;s happened is the machine that &apos;s happened and what &apos;s happened is the fotolitografie .
and that &apos;s what happened is that we are taking care of our memories , and the provision of manufacturing of our individual memories has built on external media .
and then on the image .
so we &apos;ve got to copulate with a piece of time .
for us , for us , for us , and has become more important , and has nothing to do with reality .
bruce brown , a famous designforscher on the brighton-university , is that this is a massenmedien that is , and so on , what we consider as an massenmedien brown , and so on , so on , what we consider as an massenmedien today that these cells have our memories of our memories , and our ability to virtualisieren .
let &apos;s do a little zwischenbilanz .
from the vogt-zeitalter to the machine .
what has the idea of our thinking on our own erinnerungsvermögen ?
then the verblassenden is the pre-industrial cultures .
and they &apos;re going to be more überschrieben and more überschrieben in the course of the land that &apos;s been due to the basic parts of the maschinenzeitalters .
that means we have to remember , we have a lot of work , far , in masses of the memories that we can hang our personal memories .
we produce no longer .
we have a abstract language .
we don &apos;t want to do something more than we don &apos;t know , we &apos;re going to feel our language .
we &apos;ve been used to that things happen .
and we &apos;ve got the better time in the law and there &apos;s only exceptions , like , to the rest of the non-linearität .
what is that it is storytelling .
still , we are the storytelling as a informationsvermittlung informationsvermittlung .
the question is , what is now going to happen ?
we had the vogt -zeitalter , we had the long , and we now take now this so-called cyber-zeitalter .
and that sounds very spacig and then sounds very , very much about the science .
but these concepts of the cyber-zeitalters that makes us back to our ability to make our current .
it &apos;s about virtuality , it &apos;s about non-linearität , it &apos;s about storytelling .
i want to talk about the short time .
there are technical concepts like this is the augmented , which is called the extended reality .
so if you look at google , you know , this is what we can combine our affinität world , which is our affinität to virtualisierung virtual than something , natural , becomes a thing .
another example is the so-called virtual reality .
so , naturally , of course , in the context of my talk , there &apos;s no way we move to physically , virtual worlds , is , very virtual worlds , very much about the vorbild of the holodecks .
and others another example are the ambienten , intelligent systems .
these are spaces that can respond to a human endeavor .
all of this takes the ability to do our basic ability to accept as an actual habitat .
i &apos;m hoping i &apos;m going to be , and i &apos;m hoping that this video , a very , very nice project , this is the bachelorarbeit von , ann-kathrin krenz , joris klause and jan-moritz müller .
and the two letzteren are also today here .
maybe you can get a second time to get them in the two about the project .
and this project , i brought to this project as an example , like again , to this archaischen , cognitive models .
all of this is a game , i have to say .
what &apos;s called extremely entgegenkommt and it &apos;s a computer .
and when i say , you &apos;ve probably got a very likely to see people about konsolen herumhappeln herumhappeln , or that they play with the irgendeiner in in the hands .
anyway , they &apos;re doing it .
this is a game for out .
and that &apos;s what i thought i was going to do is the outside world , so i was going back to the real world .
and this game connects the virtual world , so the data is the datenraum , the datenraum we produce , with the real world .
i tend to make sure i have to make it .
you can do that much better , there &apos;s more complex , more than it .
and that &apos;s what i &apos;m going to do is i think a city , by looking at what &apos;s been positive or negative .
and so i &apos;m going to get from the city of a completely different sight , a whole other idea , which i see , and it &apos;s a kind of different impression i see , and it &apos;s sort of different , virtual landkarte of a very real city .
and this can we actually like to watch .
ah , what you see here , i &apos;m sorry , is a little explanation of what you see .
of course , this virtual world in the walls of our cities , is clear .
and with a kind of a flashlight , we can make this virtual worlds .
so , i &apos;d like to think , you know , my talk , you know , my talk , and that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing in the sense that we can actually be in the patient , and that we are in the patient that we have to be able to be in this way , technological products actually not in the future , but actually it &apos;s
thank you .
yeah , i &apos;m very excited to be in them .
i &apos;ve been asked to have been asked to be there , whether this bag is sack there , and my talk will be .
it &apos;s not going to do this .
i &apos;m also going to get the same as well as it is in there .
but i do it just , i do it just to be some of the things .
yeah , they &apos;re inherently curious from natural curious or should designers .
i &apos;m a gestalter from house , so i &apos;m also talking about the subject of curiosity and how changes the curiosity is happening , and why we &apos;re losing curiosity and have to go into the subject and have to go into the point of curiosity and so on .
this is a whole series of things that you &apos;re going to do with actual devices .
if professors are going to be , they &apos;re going to be n in the same way .
and this is what i &apos;ve been in the last half .
a forschungssemester natural interface is design interface .
now you &apos;re wondering why , that gestalter of the whole landline part of the communication , archaischen urformen of communication , and so on .
and then i just just one of these little devices , because the things always always always always always always do always , and you see , you see , what is really , of course , what is benutzungsfreundlich or intuitiv .
and before the background , i &apos;m going to make science interface with the most popular design , so the next generation is in the relationship of the human computer , as our tools is to do with how our tools is going to be able to do from the computer program , to the digital system .
so i &apos;ve been doing it , when is natural or a home .
maybe even more likely to look at a look again .
why does it happen at all ?
so if we look at the evolution of our society , here , we move from the third in of the third in or gesellschaftsform .
so the modern ones in the computergesellschaft .
every society is shaped by a primärmedium .
at the beginning of language .
that means you found that you could learn to have a common language , and you could communicate with each other , you could communicate , in the same cave , cities has been cities or villages , and they &apos;re so &apos; .
the primärmedium was but the language , something very natural , something very , very smooth .
and yet , you had to learn , so no , but we &apos;re learning it and verhältnismäßig .
this was then built the abgelöst by the ancient society , the first shape of the abstraction .
this was at the time a riesen-aufschrei , because you knew , of course , the vibrant language is what is called the what &apos;s fluid and alive , and is , &quot; i &apos;m going to go back and meißele it in rock and so i &apos;ll just kind of play it in rock .
as i am meißel , and when i got meißel , it &apos;s natural narratives when there &apos;s a kind of different kind of thing .
but sukzessive moved to this script as a primärmedium , was awarded .
then the next generation we &apos;re still alive today .
that &apos;s the ability to pressure and print geprägte to gutenberg and others .
it was just as a affront , where digital , klerus and others have said , are your nachher if the people starts to read , then the nachher are still even able to read , and that &apos;s , of course , totally fatal .
and now we &apos;re going to come into the next generation , and the exciting thing is , so a generationswechsel is only a generationswechsel is just a generationswechsel , and we really are in this honeycomb phase that we might have something that .
the confused , of course , because we see on the one hand , the new media , socil social media , facebook and so on .
and with the total transparency of what the new thinking is what the new thinking is , not that in the old pferdefleisch , not to be a beef or other phenomena , which is that i want to just just vertuschen and just want to do this .
and these two worlds are just like , and old thinking , is thinking .
the exciting thing that is , if you do this , these new society , these computergesellschaft , entlehnt many mechanisms , entlehnt many mechanisms , principles and archaischer denkmuster .
but not to be more local level , but to global level .
we understood that the weather is global .
that &apos;s the subject which is a global ecology .
not when i present here , the neighbor is less organic , it doesn &apos;t work .
that means that local village has become a global village , with the same principles , of course , the same , the intuitive , but also the total transparency .
so , in the village , who has paid what to do with whom and when that &apos;s what happens today to the end today , the most extension of our self will be on the global scale .
it &apos;s that we know globally and always have more and more and more and more .
so , as it used to be done in the village .
the background i &apos;ve just made to work with it , which is what it means to us , what &apos;s going on , of course , what we might have , what is it about to us , what is it for us , and what makes the difference ?
because often , because they can &apos;t do it , they can &apos;t do it , so everybody can make it .
so you have to think about it , what does it mean , and not just change it &apos;s different , but it should be more .
and when of course , a bit of a bit of parallel and how can i take as a result of the impact and also make things that make it so much as much as much as a benutzungsfreundlich , so that &apos;s the intuitive , so they do fun and they &apos;re just too .
you have been bothering , even during the studiums , with the subject of perception and the wahrnehmungspsychologie .
and this is , of course , where you start to go and see and say , okay , now , now i &apos;ll just put into inner self .
and what does it matter ?
so how do we work when we get out there ?
and what does it mean , of course , intuitively , and how work our channels of perception and how does the cognitive work ?
because steve jobs has been told , you know , you to to to to .
so , you have to really look at the details , if i want to make a little bit more risky or a handhabbar , which is what it means to be in the core .
and you know , you know , you know , one of our seven senses , most of us , but you certainly have a lot of , you certainly think , in near seven future , and as extension , and as extension , we &apos;re going to look back in our self .
and look how we process information , how do we take information ?
and say what is information ?
information is the difference that makes a difference .
many of the word , the word , but not what it means to detail .
but i need to understand in the core of the core , when it &apos;s going to be true information , where i know how i know how i know how i know how to do , i know how to do things like , of course , handhabbar .
and of course , how is the power influence on the perception .
we see this here , if i &apos;m going to design things , then i can design them on the right , where i don &apos;t know what is salt and pepper , or i can make them a little bit of time by making things .
so much of natural , it &apos;s in a gefäß , but i see , where &apos;s kind of time , where is salt and pepper .
and when i say somebody , let me go back and pepper , it &apos;s going to be right , where is inside .
and in the left , and i hope to tell me that no sugar is that salt .
but also our perception of self , how do they get us .
for example , this perception of context .
the right circle looks bigger than the little , although it &apos;s not the case , but they &apos;re just the same size , and yet changes our perceptions , depending on what we &apos;re doing things .
anyone know what that is ?
come on .
pattern sollte should work .
there &apos;s been going to be more likely to my glasses .
so it &apos;s just a remote circle .
a second circle starts to try to perform some of the similarities or zu .
and if i get to a halboval dazusetze , you see , we don &apos;t see one more thing , which is still a unit , which is a unit , which is a unit , which is a unit , which is a unit , which is a circle , a circle , a circle , a circle .
and i call gestaltgesetz oder , which is also gestaltpsychologie that we &apos;re also concerned about .
so important for the goods that have done this most often in the first semester that &apos;s great .
gestaltgesetz der , gestaltgesetz of the continuity , etc .
i would forget again .
but that &apos;s a essential climate component , if you &apos;re just making things to make it happen .
the next phenomenon , which is also very interesting about the power of the course .
sounds right now , it &apos;s been completely exciting to get into it .
so we &apos;ve got the eyes and now think we see , we see it from the front .
that &apos;s wrong .
you see the back of the back .
and you just saw a presumption that you see a assumption that you see something they &apos;re seeing .
that means we &apos;re just going to see , we see it &apos;s before we see it back to the back into our seheapparat , to say , okay , okay .
i got cognitive rückkoppelung , you &apos;ve got what projieziert you want .
this is then there that comes back to it back .
then it goes back to front , because the back of the front is not und the front of the front , and he says , &quot; really , again , please stand up and make sure what you see , what you &apos;re seeing , what you want . &quot; you want to see .
and then it goes back to the back and then it &apos;s actually just seen it .
so , a whole process process , like certain things and what these things happen .
i don &apos;t know who &apos;s this picture .
that &apos;s exactly what i &apos;ve described .
now , everybody from this pattern .
i don &apos;t know who &apos;s erkennt .
does something like this ?
a dalmatiner , right .
if i saw this once that is there &apos;s a dalmatiner inside that , you know that .
you &apos;ll never forget about more , because i &apos;m going to show you where the dalmatiner is .
now you see the dalmatiner .
and on now , you &apos;re always going to see it .
so , i &apos;ve actually got them to do this , they actually have the audacity that they don &apos;t realize any pattern , but i &apos;ve got woven at the very short time , and over again , this verworrenen slide .
and this is this projection of the course of the course , rückkopplung , see .
now i know i &apos;m going to go back and i &apos;m going to go back to the front lines .
i see the dalmatiner .
so , honestly , fully , you know , you know , gray , gray , gray , you &apos;re not really , but here &apos;s just the most competitive input on it .
somebody who are three seconds ? three seconds ?
i think .
that &apos;s our present .
so , it &apos;s also interesting to know as designers .
if i know something like three seconds , until i looked like the present , until i also just saw it , very well , i &apos;m going to play it very well by having someone with three seconds .
it has to be first .
then it &apos;s going to the past , and so i can put it very elegant , for instance , at the computer , if i know this phenomena .
what do you get fünfundzwanzig ?
yeah , milliseconds .
also a very exciting phenomena .
this is the period where you love in love .
so that means , the more , if you know that , you &apos;re going to see , you &apos;re looking for yourself , and i couldn &apos;t have any gewähr for what &apos;s happening then .
and sechzehn , also a very exciting phenomena .
this is the most important of most of the things we have .
this is what happens in one of this first impression is going to speed , as we perceive things .
and as we see things , what we &apos;re talking about , and how we also do , we also do , we can actually push ourselves against our environment so that we can think about that .
of course , the law is not just to do with the subject of the subject and the neuronale , or kognitionsergonomie , but natural with the subject of mensch-objekt-beziehung .
so , like , with some kind of things , your own way .
there &apos;s a huge disconnect that &apos;s practical , so it &apos;s so abundant , so it &apos;s fundamental things .
there &apos;s anzeichen-funktionen , where i know exactly where i was actually going to do .
but there &apos;s also symbolic features , why does somebody pose a little täschchen , where they are not so much of the money , so even though it isn &apos;t that practical ?
we are more like we tend to be on the symbolischen , which we think of as a human rights .
back to my actual subject , the natural natural interface , and of course , what of course , is usability .
usability , always , how can i make a certain goal , as a nutzer can be effective effectively effectively , efficient and zufriedenstellend a goal .
that &apos;s how it says the norm .
how can i do something ?
i can use this right directly or i need to do it or do i need to use the training .
and less usable , or benutzungsfreundlich is it .
i just want to make a different , it doesn &apos;t mean that it &apos;s better .
you have to understand .
and if you look at the software that we &apos;ve seen on it , and then you understand why , the i-pad in many areas or i-phone infections , although they &apos;re much more intuitive , even though it &apos;s much more intuitive than classic software .
now , intuitive nicht is not just a elementarer wirtschaftsfaktor , nen elementarer , if i just take a technological devices that you want to do .
why ?
because in the rule we &apos;ve got through this new kind of nutzbarkeit , so the natural user ínterfaces , for five , five times more in the average of our goal .
you have to imagine that if you make something of the classical softrware , five hours , and it &apos;s interacting with this new kind of natural software only even one hour .
that doesn &apos;t mean that they would probably take four hours to home , but your employers or swim , you know , he &apos;s going to be a , , and he &apos;s going to use it with the four hours of stunden .
but i want to say that it &apos;s a corresponding leistungssteigerung , of course , to be a corresponding solution .
if we look at this again , again , this is the first command of line , which was very abstract , where you were months to use months to cope with these systems .
and then the next one that has already been to be able to push the next 15 , mental model , like the software eergonomen , worked , which is , you have a idea of something that is metaphor to make the metaphor of a desktop to make the computer .
so no longer zeros and zeros or kryptische , but it &apos;s just a metaphor .
it was the whole thing we did was , but it also still too much better .
the next generation of the graphischen benutzungsoberflächen is also greatly much more with behavior .
so i &apos;m going to be a very high behavior , much more often than the look .
that &apos;s also a paradigm .
i think that &apos;s always the look , unwichtiger for success , the usability is a applikation .
and if i get a step into this textbook , when i was a natural , per , per , per , per , per , per , per , per , per , per , per , per , and the cursor , i &apos;m still going to be even more quickly and still .
but that &apos;s also too much again , too , as it &apos;s going to be more intuitive ?
if you &apos;re going to be more intuitive , and then i have to come back , and then i have to go back and back to my little friend and what does this mean is , when is really intuitive , is actually intuitive , now .
and this is always a little bit , always , i &apos;m just going to think about it .
so he would like to think , but it just can do it .
the less i &apos;m going to think about it , the more effective .
and what does that designers ?
that means that if we look at the time frame of one of something else , for example , the metaphor , i can make it as a gestalter .
so , i can just get a special , human engineering software , on a software , and so they do the software .
and then , of course , the question is , what is actually the intuitivste handlungsschema of us humans and now i &apos;m going to reveal .
this is called the sogenannte .
this is every one of us and osit is a acronym , and steht , selektieren , transagieren .
it &apos;s all the time of you , but he &apos;s doing it unconsciously and yes , or partly it &apos;s partly .
the model is already ausprägt in the womb and is interkulturell , so it works the world at young and old , and it &apos;s been using the whole time , without realizing that most of the most of the most of the most , which is that this model is present .
osit osit an is about 50 to five times when the siebzigtausend time you have noticed activity , so you have that less frequent strapaziert than the day .
i can put this mental illnesses , selektieren , informieren , transagieren , transagieren übertragen .
and by this kind of transmission , like with metaphor , but not more metaphor is a metaphor of a physical object , but a metaphor of a handlungsmusters , a handlungsprinzips .
and this is on a higher grail of the benutzungsfreundlichkeit as the transmission of a classical structure , which is the desktops of the desktops .
and if i &apos;m going to go to the orientieren , for example , in the middle of the situation , selektieren as a choice , selektieren , i can also see that somewhere , selektieren , and i can also say that somewhere , selektieren , &quot; i can go anywhere or someone , &quot; or something , &quot; or something , shopping , stay and so on .
then i can transmit this .
i &apos;m trying to get a beispiels .
i &apos;ve got no idea .
but now i got the object with object , can wieder .
i &apos;ll get the whole of the whole thing , can be erased , and i can say , show me all of the things i &apos;m going to talk about .
and once upon a interface , which is what &apos;s going to be more intuitive and a lot of natural natural .
because i can get things like this effect , can you get to me , is essential to be more natural than if you &apos;re about hierarchisch degrees websites , or other mechanisms of doing these things .
so , this one of the more important knowledge , and i want to give you the hint with this sentence , and again , again , again , a lot of different ways to get to think differently , and in this sense , thank you for a very specific attention and please .
i want to give you a whole particular aspect of curiosity .
the first thing that you &apos;re going to be as a child , as a baby , is that they are really concerned about , and depending on whether you allowed yourself , and depending on whether you allowed yourself , the more you have to play in the töpfchen and to stir , the more , more or less , if your parents are allowed to be aware of
and the curiosity doesn &apos;t learn .
so all of these are all of that are , they are , in fact , people who have a property that you can &apos;t learn .
i &apos;m going to point out , practically all of these umweltdiskussion , weltuntergang , 40 years , in quality of humanitarian .
and there &apos;s a central point .
and the amount of phosphorus .
a chance .
every day you spend a day , you give you a half of your tedtalk on top of phosphorus , and every day they have to follow them two dollars .
otherwise you can &apos;t have teeth .
you can &apos;t have energy .
you can &apos;t have bone .
we could just be used by amorphe mollusken .
if we don &apos;t get phosphorus and put it in the fact .
amazingly amazingly , it &apos;s so that we &apos;re doing something that &apos;s actually going to be , but not that , isn &apos;t that .
because all of you talk about energy , but no one talks about the phosphor-problem .
the phosphor-problem is much more critical .
we depend on two countries .
we &apos;ve only gone for two years of phosphorus and we &apos;ve now now saved by the phosphor-bergbau world for more more than the environment than in all of them .
in the last 20 years , nuclear tonnen is uran tons of uranium on our fields in germany .
and that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing .
it makes leukemia .
and we think we would protect the environment if we &apos;re a little less harmful .
so , for example , schütz the environment , fahr weniger .
schütz die , mach less .
schütz , verbrauche , less energy .
but that &apos;s not a protection .
that &apos;s how if i say , schütz your child , it &apos;s just three times .
that &apos;s just a little less destruction .
if we think about the wiege to the bahre , then our our whole earth will sooner or later .
it &apos;s just about the wiege to think .
and the most important thing is , let &apos;s take the ground as a result .
at the bottom of the ground is gespeichert .
we &apos;re building corn over 11 and 30 pounds and 30 pounds of tons of pro per acres , or on the scale .
this is what we lose in the ground , we lose more than new .
we can have a little bit of angucken .
and all of this is , yeah or content .
in offenbach , the most popular expressions of the müllmenge is in the process of müllmenge .
and because we are going to become older , they &apos;ll be greater .
that &apos;s sort of a sort of thing in the vorwindelphase .
yeah ?
a baby needs about a baby .
we could reduce this , of course , for 10 percent , but what does it do ?
this is going to be in china in a second .
that &apos;s completely trivial .
so the question is , how do we deal with these things ?
here &apos;s a proof of evidence that men are not pigs .
i want to tell you .
because the phosphorus is going to be in the case of the festen components .
people talk about the urine .
yeah .
so that &apos;s not pigs .
because this is a good thing , right ?
traditionally , we think in the umweltdiskussion , we &apos;re too many of them in the world .
and when you get the people that when you say that if you say that would be better , you don &apos;t have a little bit , then they &apos;re going to go and go .
and so somebody says , like al gore , one of our great heroes , there &apos;s nothing that &apos;s been anything to stabilize humanity .
in israel , you say , if you were a menschenleben , you &apos;re going to get the earth .
here &apos;s the more you more willing to do , the better .
yeah .
the first question is , we really have too many ?
if you look at the ants that the weight of the ants on earth , then the ants are about four times more than we humans .
i could also take a local hernehmen , but in the united states no one , no one in that way , even though they &apos;re vegetarians .
that means ants are more than we are .
and because they physically physically , when we and because it only three , and because they only live three , and because they only live in your weight , in the process of a hundred billion .
we &apos;re not too many , we &apos;re too stupid , ya ?
and as you see , we wanted to be gone , and how sad we are , we wanted to see that we wanted to see that we can see that , for example , for example , for example , to 20 , is that , for example , 20 crisp , you would want to be a klimaneutral , right ?
you can only be klimaneutral , yeah , yeah , yeah ?
the only chance .
have you ever seen a tree maker ?
yeah ?
one ?
that means our whole intelligence means that we would be as a little bit of being as being , yes ?
yeah ?
no tree is kohlenstoffneutral .
luckily , yeah ?
there &apos;s no überbevölkerungsproblem an .
there &apos;s only a allein in the back billion trees .
you &apos;ve heard about the bäumen of trees ?
that means all our intelligence means that we would be as a tree .
and where you see , even at something like that , the strikteste bio- , doesn &apos;t predict our own body language .
every year we lose three million tons of phosphorus , which really had to go into a few places .
and we &apos;re too many .
it &apos;s just about it .
so that means we feel guilty on the earth , we say , there &apos;s no bio-landbau , no bioland , no nature-et-progrès , like they all are , that our own body language .
isn &apos;t it really unhappy ?
we &apos;re too many .
it &apos;s safe to be more harmful to what ölverbrauch angeht .
but where are we useful ?
we &apos;re trying to minimize our ecological footprint , but it &apos;s about to have a big footprint that &apos;s useful .
we want to be good for society , we want to be good for the economy , but if it &apos;s about the environment , is that highest , you can &apos;t be there , right ?
yeah ?
you can only have nullemissionen , if you &apos;re not there .
even if you were to shoot in the face , they would have been cutting .
so they don &apos;t solve that .
we can do it .
we can make our nutrients .
we do in brazil , where we are the nutrients of the nutrients .
clearly , we can get to this kind of weise nutrients in agriculture .
we do this in china for example , where we take the patent .
in china , one of the most popular still today is still , like , yeah , yeah ?
and in our western world , we were always too dumb , our nutrients zurückzubringen .
this is , the entire western zivilisationsgeschichte records that the city is always taken only , but the farmers will never happen .
and then , by doing the cities , they had to grow more , because the farmers went to the cities , and they had to move on the city to get their water .
all of the western empires are always expanding , until they don &apos;t have them done , and they &apos;re implodiert .
yeah ?
in china , it &apos;s different .
you &apos;ve been bruchlos civilization over over over over , because you &apos;ve always been able to put the nutrients zurückzubringen .
even today , even if you &apos;re invited to food , you expect to go in china , you expect to stay in the way , until they get the toilet .
because it &apos;s harder , and the nutrients is folded .
you &apos;ve got them to eat them , not to the nährstoffdiebstahl .
this is called the internet , you can see the nutrients can raise the nutrients .
so what &apos;s nice is that if you do that , so you can take a farmer about a hectare of eintausendfünfhundert dollars , and we &apos;re going to wait a hektar dollar , chickens and pig and pig and schwein and schwein and vegetables .
and the neat thing about this is that the verbrechensrate in the favelas of the favelas , over the favelas .
so we don &apos;t need to be very bad to be very bad .
we can support them to be good .
this is , of course , but the popular forces are .
it &apos;s not clean clean water .
and they &apos;re designed to design a very deep thing that you can just put a mirror .
so that &apos;s what they &apos;re going back to the back .
and not a mess of these facilities , we &apos;ve now been thinking about hundertfünzig over the last 20 years , no one of these sound .
they could easily easily make a liter of altöl reinwerfen , and then it would be the anlage .
not , instead of .
that means we don &apos;t need to control the people , they don &apos;t seem to be very bad .
we can support them to be good .
that means we need to phosphorus phosphorus .
and by the way , if you want to do what you want to do , they write on , in germany , in germany , in germany , in germany , in germany , the kläranlagen of all the time in the frankfurt .
unfortunately , not in offenbach , but maybe you can make a little help you .
because the frankfurter plant could best the phosphorus table .
and that &apos;s got to go back .
we see that phosphorus is really critical .
and we see that it &apos;s going to be .
we &apos;ve been able to deal with three years now .
the dutch government has been declared , they &apos;re going to be the first country in the world , phosphorus phosphorus .
but we need it .
you understand , there &apos;s two countries , the control almost almost the world .
there &apos;s opec a bunch of waisenknaben .
these are sechsundzwanzig countries , the 40 percent of the ölvorräte control .
and oil will be , we can replace them through other forms .
but phosphorus is not replacing them .
it &apos;s not about making the existing slightly less bad to make something really work .
and is particularly to ask everything that &apos;s right .
it means it &apos;s about efficiency , not to be efficiency .
in holland , you understand this , of course , because in holland , in holland , in holland , on flowers .
yeah ?
imagine if you &apos;re a woman , for example , your wife is sad , if you have them geärgert them , and they come with 50 .
completely inefficient .
but it &apos;s effective , right ?
or take a lippenstift .
a woman in germany , about six inches of three pounds of their life .
it &apos;s called .
it &apos;s not just because we don &apos;t know how much it &apos;s going to happen .
but a lippenstift , even with this , i can tell you , is completely inefficient , but it &apos;s very effective , right ?
one thing that is beautiful , isn &apos;t it .
it &apos;s not surprising , but efficiency .
what is the right thing ?
not , the klärschlamm phase of a little bit better , and it starts secreting and able to lose it all of that materials for days , but first time , how do you make arrangements ?
imagine mozart .
yeah ?
if i take her to dinner , and i say , yeah , there &apos;s a pill with offenbach-geschmack and a glass of water .
it &apos;s like , &quot; yeah ? &quot;
that &apos;s efficient .
everything is beautiful , isn &apos;t it as efficient .
if you &apos;re in love with somebody else ?
yeah ?
that means everything , all of the life counts , is not to avoid it .
all the umweltdiskussion .
we say , &quot; yeah , you don &apos;t have any room in the south .
no , this is what &apos;s right , right ?
at any place where you &apos;re wegwirft , from , yeah , you &apos;re going to lebensmöglichkeiten again .
but the wrong things .
if you put the wrong things , you have a müllproblem .
as we &apos;re thinking of north .
there is no footprint .
if you walk , yeah , you have destroyed , everybody else &apos;s footprint .
because the bottom is going to die the edges of death and the wind and the water and the water is taking the ground away .
if you &apos;re in italy , means every rock that is water in the office .
so , it &apos;s about making a big footprint that will be a waste .
not schuldmanagement .
we say sustainability .
yeah ?
but if i ask you how about it , you know ?
what do you say ?
sustainable .
then i say , herzliches , yeah ?
that &apos;s what &apos;s the minimum .
so , avoid , avoid .
everybody &apos;s abfall .
and it &apos;s a lust , if you see , you see the people in italy , they &apos;re like , &quot; look , you get paid to kick the car . &quot;
because , you know , this is a lustvoller process .
it &apos;s not the revierverhalten , right ?
you can show you , i was there .
but with the right design , please .
we &apos;ve developed a eiscremeverpackung , which is developed in the room room .
they can go to the wegschmeißen where they go and stand .
in two hours , they &apos;re everywhere .
and they &apos;re also doing seed plants , so that they can use this through the wegwerfen .
that &apos;s what we &apos;re useful , not less harmful .
so it &apos;s two .
not everything about it .
a television or a washing machine that is just use them .
just the things that verschleißen , like schuhsolen , like bremsbeläge , like autoreifen , who have to go to biological systems .
the things that only can be used , in the technical systems .
but today we &apos;re talking about the biological systems .
yeah ?
for example , yeah , yeah ?
most direct advertising , and not for the company puma , not to be a se , but for that they help this business , these products .
because we don &apos;t do not do things more free .
yeah ?
so , if i &apos;m tuned , you can see them down to the food and say , this is free of hähnchen , then you &apos;re not going to do it .
no , we stuck what &apos;s inside .
positive .
so no , it &apos;s not like detox .
not in there .
it all inside , is useful .
these are the first shoes that you can get the kavalierstart to the fußgängerampel hinlegen , and the rubber will go into biological cycles , yeah ?
everything is kompostierbar of it .
and if we do it , we would have to do it , of course , for nike , for hennes and mauritz and all the textile .
and this is half of all the abwasserprobleme in the world that are causing the textile .
so , they &apos;re going to be able to ask you questions about the people .
hey , puma , power , really , really , really , really , really ?
because the ones have already been twice the vorstandsvorsitzenden .
and i &apos;m not sure whether they really dabeibleiben .
so , they help me a little bit .
but it &apos;s about .
yeah .
that &apos;s what &apos;s been presented .
that &apos;s going on .
we can now make things now , if you &apos;re verschleißen , if you &apos;re kaputtgehen , they can put them in biological loops .
these cycles are just as .
there &apos;s a direct direct error .
this is the first ecological backpack , actually , that &apos;s made to be done in circulation .
so , that &apos;s where you can store the things .
if you come on that , yeah ?
remember the baby even ?
if at the moment , the waste is .
everywhere , this is a way to happen .
in the places where people are going to come to the money .
there &apos;s going on the deponien , but also , in the landscape , yeah , yeah ?
if we change the plastics , so that it can go into biological systems , if we can change the wasserspeicher , the drinnen , the way that they can do with a baby in israel or in tunisia , hundertfünfzig trees .
yeah ?
and as you take this kind of random , they zerkleinern , and it &apos;s taking the powder to plant the trees .
so this baby &apos;s baby for the whole life , right .
so we don &apos;t need to be klimaneutral , we can be motherly .
it &apos;s sort of a beneficial poop .
yeah , so .
yeah ?
we can do it .
we can reinvent it all over the time .
i was a institute .
meanwhile , there are lots of people who are going to engage with them .
there &apos;s been a volunteer set up to , wherever everybody can be involved .
so no longer save , avoid , avoid , no , no , no , you create intelligent .
do you have the curious ?
thank you .
the work of the sinaloa federation .
music language .
in the beschreibung of my talk , i wrote as a interpretin , so i was like a interpretin , so in english , i think .
interpreten are übersetzer in the geschriebenen music .
you don &apos;t have to be a übersetzer word for the text in a different language , but also the deeper sense of words and understand it needs to be a really good translation , everybody who has to do with fremdsprachen .
you know , from the germans , to translate , can you even know more , when you put it down to that , or even to get poetry .
clearly , it &apos;s not a matter of laien , what we do with the public domain .
as a interpretin of a musikstückes , i just mention the other grades .
you think that the composer in the grades has made exactly anything that he was going to have .
in fact , the grades are very portable and ungenau .
these notes are about equivalently or ungenau , like a verbal verbal , if you can see very much penibelst , and description of a landscape .
because in this verbalen landschaftsbeschreibung is the smell of flowers not to smell the body language to erahnen the säuseln of the legal system of the legal system of the legal system doesn &apos;t seem to hear about not .
this is that the interpret has to be able to transfer this ungenauen page in a different , which is , hörbare , nonverbale musiksprache .
today , i want to show you what i &apos;m doing is to say , &quot; so , again , even in a verbal language .
so , practically translation .
so i &apos;m going to do it , because it would rather rather to do it , because if i had to translate it into english , it would be to be able to translation at translation of translation .
so , the music works , so , music works , the music works , for me , as spoken language .
the notierten in the notierten grades is the function of a script .
so it &apos;s not just read just to learn how to learn the way that you see the ability to the piano or the right thing to a violinsaite .
that &apos;s just the characters that you learn to paint .
the point of the letters you can see if you can &apos;t agree the language .
so you need to have a braucht of music at least for the heart of music , as long language .
there &apos;s also abstufungen , whether you &apos;re interested in the hausgebrauch , just simply , or you can talk to the musical driver .
the work of the interpreten of the interpreten is going to be like a theaterregisseurs .
once you get a piece of your car , because you &apos;re excited about it , you &apos;re just first to the urban , you &apos;re going to be a toll of the creation of composition .
you have a piece of the piece in the bookshop .
you &apos;re reading the letters , tagebüchern , notes , or if there &apos;s words , thoughts of the composers .
you studied the works that he had before .
you can make sure .
it &apos;s to write .
how did he did ?
how were his life , how the society and the politics ?
all of me .
you think of that time , by looking at contemporary pictures , or a reading .
but with the time you have a rich camera to know the composers that you &apos;ve ever been to öfters , and it &apos;s still a immer immer and feel it and feel .
the composer is becoming more to the friend that you live together .
his cause to write the piece of your personal cause , more and more of my personal concerns .
now the notes is all other notes than one of the komponisten of the composer , but only a scaffolding , i suppose that i mean , to try and make it back and make meaning .
i say to my own words , what that means could be written .
i &apos;ll play erklärend , which could be these sounds .
now for me , and for composers , and what they might indicate now for him today .
every note , every note , every one of the dance gets a sense , because i &apos;m going to go even because it looks like .
it has to be in here , and now , you know , i can &apos;t convince my audience that my cause is .
it &apos;s always a very happy concert concert , if i have the experience , the piece that i &apos;ve been looking for a long time in the way , like a fresh period .
how do you get a good new day , though , every time , and with the same rituals of life , finally , frühstücken , frühstücken , to work , so i &apos;ve got to go back to new .
i &apos;m going to become a day , the seasons , my pulse goes down as a konzertsaal , in a konzertsaal , it takes longer to be more zurückkommt than at home .
i suppose that breathing , or unbewusst .
all of this affected me and all of this really excites me with the composition .
it &apos;s quite a wonderful thing , when i interacted with a duo-partner on stage stage , and we have the same wavelength .
then the same is what happens in a good conversation .
you bring a new idea , and we &apos;re going to put this scaffold with a response .
it &apos;s exciting , because then it &apos;s exciting things that we don &apos;t have to have the geprobt and what you can &apos;t do that .
it &apos;s great fun to do this , and they &apos;re as the audience , and they have the audience , like the music alive .
so every concert is different .
never just as much as in this moment .
i can &apos;t just like the last 20 years .
there i will be more more than today , and so my palette of the musikklänge still has much more farbnuancen , and emotions and emotions .
i &apos;m going to have some farbtöpfe rausgeschmissen , but for that new dazubekommen .
nice one example .
it was on a klavierkursus for musikstudenten in my beloved , professor jürgen ude , professor ude , a bekannter , , konzertpianist and langjähriger professor of musikhochschule in stuttgart .
unfortunately , i was a lot too young , so he was already a lot of emeritiert when i finally started studying armstrong .
but i had the great fortune to get him very early , with age , and i was so i was going to go to his kursen .
i was at the time at the time , when i was walking back on a time , and i played the last four balladen of chopin , a spätwerk .
he wondered what the preamble was meant for me .
this is a getragenes piece of . .
and in my university i said , erwartung .
he &apos;s got to go , like this ?
that &apos;s what to be the altersunterschied .
because for me , she fought .
he was talking about bellwether .
well , with the power , you &apos;ve got to have dreams , but no significant memories .
i &apos;m going to play this piece of all of years now , and i &apos;ve always changed it for me , although no only has changed .
every time it &apos;s exciting because i &apos;ve always wondered that again , i &apos;ll read something new .
one example of a completely different region , and this is a decade to the seerosen x-mal .
it &apos;s always the same garden , but to differ , different tageszeit , with verschiedenem .
he has the seerosen verschiedentlich , as he saw it , like it , as she was like it .
his personal impressionen of the seerosen .
the x-malige interpretation of a piece of a human is this .
meanwhile , i &apos;ve been in the end of the zweiunddreißig when he wrote the piece .
he just lived only 23,000 years .
and it &apos;s me to look at the message over the course , even if i mean , you can .
to keep zwiesprache , right with the composers .
because the grades are the only correlation right right .
especially when it &apos;s passed .
well , how do you start to speak language of music ?
i said yes , you need about just like the performance language .
often the musikunterricht is that you learn that the grades .
you learn to get it back at all , just before you &apos;re just a word .
you learn the sounds to the noten .
if all of them are going to arrive like it in the noten , then sounds like music , they &apos;re like music .
if the code is , the student &apos;s going to the nächstschwierige piece .
interpretation is scarcely in the anfängerunterricht court .
well , there &apos;s a quick piece of it , which is a quick piece of it .
slowly , slowly .
according to the leisezeichen , and f and b , etc .
that &apos;s what most of you are here .
but even if you get to the current ones , it &apos;s still just a little technical technical .
and yet , it &apos;s not a interpretation interpretation .
i &apos;m feeling .
i wonder you often do something quite a little bit more elementares .
that , to make music on the instrument , the own musical musical musical , and feel that would be present .
singing the singing .
a child , which didn &apos;t learn , because it doesn &apos;t have the parents , it won &apos;t do it .
this is like sprechenlernen .
it &apos;s necessary , his own experiences , and the idea of music , to have a more chance to get a way to get a tool to go .
people who never have the ones who have never been the ones with your body , how it &apos;s to form a note .
it &apos;s a whole person to go to a whole breath .
the instrument is the extension of our body .
the foreign aid was to singen , our hands to dance .
so the hammerköpfe of my fingers are the following of my fingers .
the melody from the gesungenen and the rhythm of dance .
the dauernde berieselung is not förderlich .
you don &apos;t need to be able to understand music if it &apos;s going to be a boring .
no need to be able to make a liedchen or singing .
each music is going to be plattgemacht , if you &apos;re supposed to be overcome by the outside of music .
so , some of you who say , yeah , but what do you do when i don &apos;t start to sing ?
i ask you , a , because they believe they couldn &apos;t sing .
or b , because they don &apos;t learn to sing .
in both , it &apos;s not too late to find out whether they can &apos;t yet , whether you can &apos;t do these little muscles , how you can do these little bits of the bacteria that have been done , right .
that &apos;s how we train .
or c , because you &apos;ve told them they &apos;re untauglich .
i ask , how bloody dinosaurs was this diagnosis ?
have you ever had a zweit- or drittmeinung , how do you say it ?
or d , they don &apos;t like music and therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , to do that .
but what i would regret , because music is just a beautiful , kommunikative .
but maybe you can still be even more inclusive .
well , so , you can see , on all cases , no one must be a aussichtsloser candidate .
but don &apos;t say , i don &apos;t want to classical classical music .
i can &apos;t say whether it &apos;s good or bad .
i said , &quot; but certainly you can tell you whether it doesn &apos;t like it . &quot;
because i don &apos;t think it says , i don &apos;t know if it &apos;s because i &apos;m not cooking .
so she &apos;s not necessarily eating the food , except because they don &apos;t have cooking .
so , you don &apos;t have to be on classical music because they don &apos;t play an instrument .
listen consciously , and they say whether it doesn &apos;t seem to them .
whether you can do music or sweet , is to be sweet .
and tell what they &apos;re feeling .
and you get it and want to be a little bit more or a little bit more or a little bit more complicated .
why am i going to be a bit of my audience , that it &apos;s active ?
because music is a language , and a language is there .
a piece of art that you never have , it &apos;s not a force .
the food that &apos;s been eating by a chef or a chef , or a chef , and not only cause or blame .
so please listen to , if you played a music .
it &apos;s not just a nice geräuschtapete .
when in a neighborhood where the adults are active music or at least present music , a child , it &apos;s easy to ask a kind , to ask what color has your flower ?
can you now have to be in blue games ?
and the kid plays to a gedenkpause , instead of a red flower .
and this is what sounds different than before .
this was the first one of a very first musical musical musical .
so the first step is to a interpretation .
and what happens when you &apos;re going to see a piece of the day that will originally originally originally originally going to show or even before thousands of years ago ?
meanwhile , the instruments are fortentwickelt .
there was no one of the time to be an instrument of the time .
it wasn &apos;t invented yet .
i think that bach would have been excited about when he would have been excited about the klanglichen of the modern table .
i can now have the klangvorstellungen that the bach had that the stream was going to sound , which is a barockes cembalo .
also , from beethoven , you know , he was more hearing than he was deaf .
now , today , this is a modern orchestra in the situation , all of the time a orchestra has been a orchestra of the time .
so , the composers are streaming down to us , which is going to reinvent the pieces .
they &apos;re going to be hörbar , which is just in the mind .
and also , what they would think in mind .
or what i could ask myself to vorstell , because what you could have thought .
thank you .
you know what &apos;s envy ?
was they already right ?
and how did that feel like that ?
thank you .
i was a friend who drives a passerati .
if i come from , with my little v w , piesel w and mich me , come back to this feeling .
i &apos;m looking through the head .
i say , ulf , what do you need so much of your own big ?
this is actually the first year of his entire .
and at all , you &apos;re much less than me .
why do i afford to afford to afford to afford to afford to afford to afford to afford ?
and then it &apos;s immediately me , that &apos;s unfair .
it &apos;s against the justice .
and as i say the word justice , this is a constant sense .
our organism has invented a great way to make these kinds of feelings like a very sudden just to take a neid .
you can also try and try and do it with words like revenge or ähnlichem or a kid .
i want to show you with this mechanism today , or something that &apos;s really relevant to you .
the mechanism comes from .
but think of the course of how you might have heard you may have heard people say , nobody has the intention to build a wall .
and then stones auftürmt , so he &apos;ll show you the lens .
so , on a lie , you see that the public self don &apos;t say what he says .
it &apos;s easy to test a lot of sense that he &apos;s got to test anything in mind .
he just did it , and not himself .
no , the ones i &apos;m talking about talking about , that they &apos;re themselves .
they need these tags to get a lebenslüge to get a reduction .
you can easily easily easily , yes , to it .
they &apos;re beginning to go .
by this period , an anecdote that you might know .
the spanish painter pablo picasso has a woman .
this woman has been , that &apos;s what i won &apos;t look like the portrait .
picasso , wait for them .
it &apos;s going to be more similar .
and on this point , and if you ask them , you see how important that lie is like that , and how much time they need to experience something that artists can tell us .
because artists have a relationship to the lie .
the artist &apos;s rational you with , and particularly , this lady , what she doesn &apos;t see if they look in the mirror .
the artist &apos;s been going to show you a little portrait of what they &apos;re going to be familiar with , if you look at this artwork .
and then , this particular , this experiment , it could not show you a bit similar , and it &apos;s going to be more similar to you .
here they have this mechanism that we can use to the lie as an invention to stabilisierung our lebensverhältnisse .
and not only in the arts , also in the volksmärchen , in the mythology , in stories , it &apos;s back on .
you may know this idea of dame , the jeden of every morning and it asked who &apos;s the most beautiful in the country ?
one day , this mirror , yeah , there &apos;s a schönere .
and then the head of the world &apos;s population and so on .
and you also know how much hostility from that true slope , can &apos;t lie lying from that true auskunft .
but we should just make sure that you can &apos;t tell a woman , there &apos;s a schönere somewhere else .
here &apos;s what we &apos;re going to understand underneath politically correctness , and they &apos;re going to be more successful .
we need these nuclear lie that will allow us the deception of the dna without even .
we don &apos;t have just in the art in the art , but in science , the science of the great lies .
and there &apos;s this story of the woman &apos;s woman &apos;s wife &apos;s wife .
they heard from this book of charles darwin , the origin of the species and the people .
the man should be vom , yeah , it &apos;s at least a common ancestor between people and apes .
and then she ran her to her husband and said that , i &apos;m not going to be true , what charles is there .
the man has been to monkey or a common ancestor .
no , no , no , that &apos;s not .
and if it &apos;s true , then we need to stop that people are used to acquire .
why do we need to stop that people are true of something , it &apos;s true ?
because we cannot live without those lebenslüge .
because we have this opportunity to be great , abstammung of the highest creatures , not by the höchsten of a organism that &apos;s going to be in the highest , not by a pebble , and otherwise things that is for us .
so we can &apos;t even get this stuff .
we need to avoid that people are helping us from things , especially when they &apos;re true .
so you see how slowly these mechanisms are turned to , and like the traces , like the traces , the traces , the traces , the spuren of ourselves , i want to put them another story .
a particularly beautiful story , like me .
my wife told me .
she came from school , she &apos;s a teacher , and they told me .
a autistischer student .
they like him to love him because he &apos;s an neigung .
and she asked him what are your driving to your hobbies ?
and he says , well , i &apos;m a fire .
and because i &apos;m a fire , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
yeah , you feel it , if you &apos;re heiter , there &apos;s something that &apos;s not .
i told my wife , whenever a person in a moral car , the wörtchen , we should use it to replace it through the wörtchen .
do you want to do this , and then they experience the sentence .
even though i &apos;m a fire , i &apos;m interested in pyrotechnische things .
it &apos;s really , this is the actual truth of the avatar .
so a little bub , who cares , don &apos;t care about it .
the interest of interest in feuermachen .
but there &apos;s no way to whom we can use , where you learn where you learn how to fire fire .
there &apos;s only the one thing , just the fire .
there he was going to be .
and überdies , you also tell me , his teacher isn &apos;t going to be called somewhere , and imagine if the fires came out .
no , it &apos;s just a lot better than we show that we are able to fail to capture the dangers that others only do when they put fire .
here they have this little mechanism here .
this one of these verweis suggests that in britain &apos;s been hoping that he actually actually verwandt with the fire , but he can &apos;t say that .
here you have this zensor between the unbewussten and the conscious , which is immediately , without having something to do something about it , and the things they know they look at that , and things you can do something different , so they can be much better for them and other .
so , just so , we just like words that we &apos;re also exploring in the language of the political trial , we use the back of the political trial .
we actually know that something else is the case .
but we know if we are the social version of the social economy .
we can &apos;t just do that .
it &apos;s impossible to present those things in a society that work .
i want to show you , what we found in my institute .
according to the logic , this self-deception , the willingness to be a different reality than that we actually learn that it &apos;s unstable , after the outside .
i want to leave you two , maybe three examples .
the first example is what many of you know know , and some of you are capable of all the time , except very few .
i mean .
what is the soul ?
the soul is something that &apos;s really cute , says about a selection .
she &apos;s something that &apos;s not from that stofflicher , is inherently materieller .
and if you have people who have suppressed belief that you own a kind of conscious , you can say that they are from meat and blood , something you can say , it &apos;s just a kind of steinernes , etwas , etwas , etwas , verwesbares , unwichtiges , ja , yes , yes .
and from that soul , you &apos;re sort of sort of in this kind of wolkigen nature , in this luftigen nature , anima , is that it &apos;s called the lufthauch , the lufthauch , present .
and if that lufthauch then , you have a person , it &apos;s called , it &apos;s spirit , with , with nature , with nature , that only can live only , yes , you know .
and then he can eben .
that &apos;s how the soul goes .
so she &apos;s supposed to be a hinzukommen .
so we should let them feel like something called what necessarily our lives .
and if you have these authentic front , you understand the logic , you know , that happiness is , you can actually improve this happiness by allowing our world .
because now you can use a dreisatz .
you know , dreisatz are out of school .
now this is now a dreisatz that tells us .
this is the hardest part of my talk .
here &apos;s something you need to be something called it , but also the willingness to lie .
so lying , they can &apos;t use these logic .
in this apocalyptic three sentences .
the first sentence is , klaus , there &apos;s no soul .
so the second phrase is , if intestinal has right , it has no soul .
now , there &apos;s a third set .
i did this especially .
a third note , the immediately share the same thing in humans that have a strong feeling for a soul .
who doesn &apos;t have soul who &apos;s dead , and it cannot be anything .
and here &apos;s it .
here &apos;s this logic in this täuschenden talk , in this talk talk .
it immediately .
the first two sentences that are toast .
i can argue anything .
the logic doesn &apos;t make a false talk about reality .
i can say the kanzlerin is a man .
and when i &apos;m right , then the kanzlerin is a man .
if i don &apos;t rightly right , it &apos;s not the kanzlerin .
the logic doesn &apos;t tell you what &apos;s not talking about .
i can argue everything .
but critically , if i &apos;m right , it &apos;s just like it .
so if klaus says there &apos;s no soul .
secondly , if he &apos;s right , it &apos;s got no soul .
these things are compelling .
and now our täuschendes consciousness , that &apos;s what you do .
it &apos;s a third set of the object that had nothing to do with the first two sentences , and the way that it is , as if the opposite of the first sentence is already proven to be able to image .
because actually we should prove if you were to be the soul or not .
but with this logic , that &apos;s just that you use two sentences , and a third dritten , which is like having a good , so that we can save our rescue .
so , we &apos;re doing that it &apos;s actually impossible to be able to live without a soul .
and we &apos;re very happy about it .
we can have these things to different different ways .
in the present , we have a very modern example , that &apos;s dipping the tageszeitungen zone .
you have to take another philosophisches subject , a dauerbrenner , a dauerbrenner of philosophy , your mind .
this has to do this with this , we go back to the vierzehnte .
there was a scholars who was named johannes johannes buridanus and after that the most remarkable esel is esel .
the buridansche is a brain , which is made of creation .
it didn &apos;t have this soul .
that &apos;s a naturding .
and if you &apos;re the exact exactly between two gleichgroßen heuhafen , then it verhungert .
because he doesn &apos;t know , he should go first .
so he &apos;s right in the middle .
so the most primitive .
gleichgroße kräfte einander each other .
nothing nothing at all .
so if you take another example , so if you &apos;re going to take the one of the haystack , it doesn &apos;t need any reason whatsoever .
automatically runs to the right .
so if you think that you see this idea that you &apos;re in nature , determiniert , that the bigger ones , you have a immediately , you have also quickly the feeling that it has to be very quickly as a free will to be .
and if we &apos;ve been able to show you in frankfurt , then remember , i remember the max-planck-institut for it .
there &apos;s a grassroots , which is to say , &quot; the wolf of it , and they &apos;re sometimes , sometimes , and they &apos;re sometimes , &quot; and they &apos;re not willensfreiheit .
now we can eventually monitor the second set of satz and can say , if any of the wolf is right , then he has no willensfreiheit .
these are absolute logical and the correct .
and what we can read now daily daily daily daily daily daily , that &apos;s what they find in this third set .
this looks like this , who doesn &apos;t have any willensfreiheit , not for his actions and behauptungen to responsibility to the responsibility , and he &apos;s so unzurechnungsfähig .
again , you have it again .
they should be told , whether there &apos;s something like willensfreiheit .
but the logic of deception allows us to do this , as if the first sentence of the world &apos;s first sentence of the vornherein of the world &apos;s opposite , and then you have to think of the opposite without evidence .
and now you can just imagine if you want to do anything , if you want to test anything anything , and if you want to make people happy , this guts to lie .
practice , for instance , for instance , if you &apos;re going to meet a human , you can say , there &apos;s no vorhersager .
and please don &apos;t use the german word for the vorhersager , which is what it does .
they couldn &apos;t give you a little political inkorrekt .
they say there &apos;s no vorhersager .
immediately , you &apos;ll be able to do this for granted , for this , you know , you can &apos;t prove it .
and you &apos;ve got a problem .
because whilst they &apos;re busy , they &apos;re not able to prove that they can &apos;t prove that there &apos;s no vorhersager , is that man .
he &apos;s very happy about it because he &apos;s misled .
because he &apos;s got to a fährte fährte , it &apos;s not rocket .
because actually , this person is not going to be addressed .
he &apos;s just interested in remembering to freizuhalten itself , to prove that there &apos;s vorhersager .
so , in the way of the beweislast , you see the brilliance of the lie .
and if you have a way to feel this dreisatz in other people , they &apos;re going to make others , because they &apos;re going to make other happy if you remember this sentiment .
thank you for your attention .
yeah , good day .
i was teaching me to feel like i &apos;m going to mention her .
it &apos;s one of the most favorite one here , and i asked me , i &apos;ve asked , i &apos;ve got to talk a presentation , and my idea my idea .
i have to say , you &apos;ve got to say , it &apos;s been mitgekriegt , it would be hard to talk about my idea .
and i &apos;ll be happy to do my inselprojekt , i &apos;m trying to go through .
but it &apos;s natural , of course , lots of concepts .
i &apos;m probably saying , the two nice girl are still there , i probably have to be a generation , i think , i &apos;ve probably been studying maschinenbau maschinenbau , technische , technical , technical , in karlsruhe , engineering , she &apos;s now , i think , that &apos;s , i think , right .
and i &apos;ve been brought to berlin in the &apos; 80s , berlin and the achtziger years , because i was allowed to do a energien , and that was not in karlsruhe .
there was the kernforschungsanlage leopoldshafen .
the hießen was damals , also hieß .
the hot spots today .
because a good engineer has had great cars or atomkraftanlagen .
but like &apos; solarpendel , from the kind of kind of quadratmeter watt from the square watt , which was a toy .
and in berlin , there was a crazy motivator .
i &apos;m the premium-kola-mensch grateful that he &apos;s the word again again , because after the mauerfall , you didn &apos;t use the word anymore , because it was bad left .
however , that &apos;s not that the achtiziger years .
there was that there was selbstverwaltete alternativbetriebe , and one of them was just sitting in kreuzberg in kreuzberg , where you were to be doing that evil .
the terrorismusses , but that was meant to be wuseltronik and hat and sonnenenergie and i was going to start the mid conversation .
and yeah , a lot of what was said to me , was a lot of beautiful expressions , many of these beautiful expressions were that i &apos;ve also been .
i worked in the collective , i was working in the collective , which was basisdemokratisch .
we were 20 people .
if a no one said no , was the vetoprinzip , which has a completely overturned , and i &apos;ve had my great ingenieurstudium , i had a schwachsinnige thing to do , because all of the nurses ever ever of my father would ever have been given him , you &apos;ve been able to give the money on the window rausgeschmissen .
it &apos;s busy mit .
and this was really very , very bitter , and you &apos;ll get it in the same way , it &apos;s a picture of the picture of the damals , where i was asked to say , a thousand d-mark , a thousand d-mark , a tausend , einheitslohn , einheitslohn , einheitslohn , einheitslohn , einheitslohn , if that &apos;s what really means to be .
and i then got it down to sechsundneunzig , and then we put together with friends , i was documenting the mitbegründer of the company that was mitbegründer with the spin-off q-cells of one of the great zellenhersteller in the world .
now , a riesenerfolgsgeschichte , but we &apos;ve done this problem of a growing , and we &apos;ve got a little bit of a growing , and we &apos;ve got a small group of the future , and we have a small group that is , that &apos;s why we have a small group of the future , and we have a small group that people say , what is
and i brought you a project i brought you to introduce me .
and the title of the vortrages , yeah , yeah , as you get to a hundred percent renewable .
and we just simply just simply just simply have a relatively einfach-verrückten history to ask where might be a memory of a memory of a memory of a memory .
on this island , this is the island of graciosa on the azoren .
yeah , that &apos;s what the data .
there &apos;s a thousand person in humans .
now , today , the last year today , 80 percent .
and the question is , why didn &apos;t you have more ?
simply not just das technologically .
if you spend more windkraft at each other , it starts to fail .
i &apos;m going to tell you the politicians when they put in berlin-adlershof our facility .
it always said , why ?
we &apos;ve been photographed by the time of germany .
now , no problem can be .
but not , we &apos;ve got to europe in europe , and our net is physically , the european union european .
if we had a europe in europe , we would have the same problems that people have on this island .
the question was just simply the question , the first thing was to the first start with the island , but just through .
as big , because the battery was supposed to be a battery , so you add a island on the age , and 50 , 50 , maybe even worse percent renewable .
and yeah , i &apos;m going to go back to the slide .
the world &apos;s largest system looks like this .
by the way , a hundred elektrische electric performance was affecting the world &apos;s largest island in the world .
this is the entspricht of a hundred of a hundred , because that &apos;s particularly true everywhere .
the energiehunger of the world , the place , it gets to be clad , because you don &apos;t need it to .
quickly , quickly .
you put the box down .
and then it looks like this .
in the age of three of the dieseln , two is always gewartet .
yeah , this is what a little bit called the bottom line .
we also have a very detailed data .
and the windkraftanlage or the solaranlage or whatever it is , in the rule of a back-up system , a system , a system , what &apos;s just in small amounts of it .
our goal was just too , okay .
the peak is going to back-up and the wind , the wind will serve the load that they can map the wider percentage .
and if you think about 20 , 30 percent of renewable health , so the power of energy per year , not the achievement , you have to put the diesel off the planet .
that means that moment , you have to make the renewables that renewables can move the entire net .
they can only do it , if you &apos;re going to be in some way here .
this has no one in the world .
so that &apos;s in the small style , so you can also see on the car on a small microchip .
people always ask me , what do you know , actually , in adlershof ?
but that &apos;s what we &apos;re .
if you want to do multiple of these wechselrichtern zusammenschalten , and they should have a net , it &apos;s complicated complicated .
and our goal was just like we wanted to go to the start to go to the grid to three to three to three to three to three percent renewable renewable renewable , and then there &apos;s another one of this last 10 , 60 percent renewable , and that will not work , don &apos;t work , you know , you &apos;re doing that .
that &apos;s going to be a energieträger , which is hydrogen , methane , methane , power , methane , power , methane , power , is going to be aware of the gas or a person that will it be .
they have to go to a saisonalspeicher and winter-sommer and not just tag-nacht .
we wanted to know what &apos;s because with normal , stinknormalen elektrochemischen .
how far is you even even feeling there ?
and then a whole bunch of simulation .
and wind and sun and the load durchsimuliert and came to the conclusion , a very exciting outcome to be a konventionellen conclusion that you can get a middle-aged strompreis of roughly the konventionellen of about fifty cents per million dollars , about vierundvierzig cents .
that was the first military of the six years ago .
and then we said , okay .
well , we have a business model .
we &apos;re cheaper , like the diesel-system , if the five percent of five percent a year .
and then we started to negotiate with the insulanern .
what would be done ?
have investors , i have new gesellschafter .
we were just five people to build a lot of the company .
and here &apos;s the plot here .
the brown is sort of the conventional system , the green is our system .
that our system has a preisanstieg , it &apos;s because we &apos;re still twenty and other than the other things , not durchschlagen .
and the power-utility that took the most elektrizitätsversorgungsunternehmen on the island , it &apos;s been really good .
we also want to support , but we don &apos;t believe that you can &apos;t solve the technical problem .
and so we decided to build a hall that we put into a hall that we used to build the electrical heart of the island of the insel one in the scale of the scale of the scale of the scale of the state of the island .
this is , we &apos;ve been looking at the greatest battery in the world .
here she is .
it comes from the ability to come from asia , in the trap .
and witzigerweise is it in the &apos; 70s , in the &apos; 70s , today , heute , developed , and then became the japanese .
it &apos;s a very , very , very large battery .
they have a megawatt so we &apos;ve got a megawatt and can bring up six hours , and that &apos;s the battery that we &apos;re sort of simulationstechnisch rausbekommen .
and then they came .
we also have one of these diesel-aggregate in the same size , as he says there , in the hall , where the hall are actually filled with the diesel , here &apos;s the big battery , here &apos;s the big battery , here &apos;s the big battery , here &apos;s the big umrichter that we simulate the web .
over here , we took the whole übertragungsleitungsystem , the kilometer-physik of the cable , to put the schwingungsverhalten in the gill net .
and here you see the whole thing .
we can also use zweihundert kilowatt kilowatt on the web .
here &apos;s this again here again , here &apos;s the diesel , here &apos;s the whole thing .
and what we did was , what we did was , all of the time we took it to all of us all the time , all of this , all right , what &apos;s happening here in the world , to developing software , we did .
so we &apos;re not batteriehersteller , but we &apos;re define a company that &apos;s only between the subject , and the subject is in the subject of the subject .
you need to communicate , of course , you can communicate to the network , and that &apos;s very complicated .
the beauty is to the subject , the subject that you basically is now in this island today , we &apos;re going to get the vorwegnehmen in solving problems that we get to get the percentage of renewables .
so this whole discussion , as it is , in the moment , and herbewegt , like the walking , we have the island , for example , we have müdsen the wind and the sun .
natürlicht bietet is smart-grid .
so smart-grid , a riesenthema .
we can start to integrate , to integrate , elektromobilität zu , rumzufragen , you can manage your load .
that means if you have to grow percent , you don &apos;t have that memory .
you can do ads , you can get through the same , yes , that should be on anyway , the percentage erhören , but you never can never be completely blown on the storage .
and that &apos;s so dangerous little .
so many people are also coming to look at this there , because you can see that you can get to get the problems you get .
if we squeeze the peak , you don &apos;t just have to get more like this , they don &apos;t have a certain of different kinds of different kinds of squares .
and our europäisches verbundnetz is basically just from the vast majority of big kraftwerken , where it is the wave of all over the wave of all over the way .
we look at this web , you see the north american , and when it &apos;s neunundvierzig , we &apos;ll catch a few ventilchen aufzumachen , then we &apos;ll get a little bit of merh , then we &apos;ll come up again .
that &apos;s the system .
and of course , is that incredibly peculiar .
if you put it out somewhere , it lasts .
the spinning sector has at least 10 seconds to keep the net .
and in the time they can respond to another .
if you don &apos;t have any more , these spinning mass , they have to replace them with leistungselektronik and replace it .
and we can actually put this big battery two milliseconds .
there you see , which enormous geschwindigkeitsmöglichkeiten are there .
and the message is , we need to be living on these vents of mass destruction , if we were able to capture our goals , 20 percent , and so on , if we want to get the even more likely to ever reach at all .
then we have to create our must-run capacity in the network .
must-run is just to keep the power plant and keeping the frequency .
yeah , this is a riesendebatte moment at the moment , zubau vom , because we don &apos;t have any of them or gasturbinen , because that &apos;s not .
and we &apos;re just trying to figure out that you can create the capacity , and that &apos;s where you put electrochemical stores by the network .
there &apos;s also a lot of studies .
and this purpose that &apos;s going to come and look at our most favorite on the line , and they sort of inselteststand our inselteststand .
and yeah , the discussion goes to the question , how far can you have far future .
and many discussions that i had been in the last six years , were similarly , like the discussion i had been in the last 15 years .
not , is , &quot; is , kinderspielkram , we &apos;ve got rid of all , they never .
we have been in america today , in germany .
that &apos;s vorbildlich .
and i just go out of that we have the same capacity of elektrochemischen in the next 30 years , the same capacity of elektrochemischen in the world .
it &apos;s just like that , it &apos;s going to come .
there &apos;s this whole lot of widerständen and streitereien .
the beauty is that i &apos;ve found out in the last two years , that the scientists are asking on my side .
we &apos;ve got to get tens of millions of förderprojekte , including to klemmen now .
this is going to be in the next april .
so , you also notice there &apos;s a change , and just at this point , it &apos;s just about this abwehrhaltung thing to be able to hear , is the idea of 100 percent renewable .
and if you have a hundred percent renewable , it &apos;s like a autarkes system .
so far , in whatever , always , in whatever , this insulaner , which are doing , that make a different net that has nothing to do with our verbund .
the question is , if you don &apos;t make a laugh , you know , you know , you know , you know , somewhere in the world and they &apos;re going to become more hingebracht , they &apos;re right .
then you consume one thing that &apos;s going on , and wind there , there &apos;s already , where they live .
and this is a little bit of our vision of a vernüftigen , and i &apos;m also aware of a cradle-to-cradle , and i &apos;m also going to use it , use time .
and that &apos;s what we do , and yet , and yet , the talk about premium kola , that you can get a collective and use solar power and solar , here &apos;s a little bit together .
and yeah , i just want to encourage you to get to you , in the sense that you could be a little crazy and also a vision .
and you &apos;ve got to stay quite trivial , but i think that it &apos;s going to happen .
thank you .
when steve lopez , the los angeles times , one day , the streets in the middle of los angeles , he stopped a wonderful music .
she came from a man , a man , sympathisch , rau , who was on a violin , which was just one another .
many of you will know the story because of steves articles later , was steve anthony , mit junior , was steve anthony , mit junior , was steve anthony who was steve for nathaniel , the kontrabassisten , who studied the kontrabassisten , and his promising career was karriere by his paranoide .
nathaniel kahn , nathaniel juilliard , and 30 years later , he was working as a homeless on the streets of skid row in the middle of los angeles .
i recommend you all the way that they were just read or looking at the video of the wunderbare , but also , how do you get the wonderful connectedness of the wonderful men , but also , how do you finally get the wonderful connectedness of this , the mithalf , the mithalf , the nathaniel journey from the road .
i met mr. ayers in 2008 , two years ago , in walt disney disney .
he had just a demo of the first vorführung of the first time , and i came backstage and she was sitting behind the stage .
he was talking about the dodgers and hillary and hillary , and that would be the dodgers rise of the baseball world , and that &apos;s all because of the tückischen of the first violin passage in the last sentence of the last sentence of the last sentence .
we came to talk about the subject of music , and a few days later , i got a email in the status of the nathaniel that i was interested in the status .
i have to say that nathaniel treatment is a medical treatment , because he was already with elektroschocks and treated , and they provide the whole life of it .
as a result , it &apos;s now vulnerable to this planet phases , and they &apos;re sometimes the straßen of skid row in the streets of skid row , and that &apos;s the streets of skid , always and the folterqualen of his own minds .
and in the same way , a reizstadium , nathaniel unterrichtsstunde was nathaniel at our first lecture in the walt disney disney hall hall , and he had this irre flackern hall hall hall , and i was raised completely lost .
he spoke about invisible and smoke and about how him they wanted to poison .
i was scared of , not meinetwegen , but i was afraid i could lose his relationship with the course that he could destroy him and i would destroy him to the violin , if i started to focus on the whole and arpeggios and other exciting forms of didaktischen .
so i just started to play .
i played the first sentence of beethoven .
and as i was , i remembered that in nathaniels eyes , a vollkommene change in the middle of the time .
it was like he was underneath the impact of a invisible team , a chemical , whose proper , was my game .
nathaniels manischer zorn zorn sich in understanding , in a very expensive curiosity and then .
and as a miracle he took his violin and began to play some of violinkonzerten , and asked me to play them to be at the end of the ende : mendelssohn , tschaikowski , sibelius .
we started talking about music , from bach , von , bruckner and all the others bs to esa-pekka .
and i realized that he &apos;s not just a enzyklopädisches knowledge about music , but it also starts with her own relationships .
he was talking about her with a passion and a understanding that i &apos;m going to talk about my colleagues in the philharmonie of los angeles .
by talking music , and talking about music was from this paranoiden , the founder of los angeles , the eben eben was pulled out by los angeles , a liebenswerter , gebildeter , ausgezeichneter , in the juilliard , in the juilliard , in the juilliard .
music is medicine . music is changing .
nathaniel is the emotional health .
because music allows him to him , his thoughts and delusions , with help with his imagination and creativity in something about it .
and so he &apos;s seinen his quälenden .
i understand that this is what art is the art .
this is why we do something music : so we &apos;re going to do something that &apos;s going to be in us all in the inner circles , our feelings , our feelings , our feelings , by our own rights owners , through our creativity .
and the reality of the brain is all of us to all , and moves , and it tells us .
so what worries the nathaniel is , so let &apos;s go back to a community of friends .
the erlösende force of music brought back to the family of musicians that him understand him that his talent and he achtete it .
and i &apos;m going to talk about nathaniel whether or even more , whether in walt disney disney hall hall , or in skid row , because he reminds me to the musician why i &apos;m going to go .
thank you .
bruno : thank you . thank you .
robert gupta .
robert gupta : i want to play something i &apos;m wearing the cellisten .
i hope she &apos;s forgive me .
so i &apos;ve been lots of fishes in my life .
i just loved two .
this first thing that was more like a leidenschaftliche affair .
it was a beautiful fish , wohlschmeckend , good konsistenz , gehaltvoll , a little bit of a terror on the menu .
what a fish .
even better , it was in aquakultur after the allegedly world of sustainability .
you could feel it to sell it .
i had this beauty of a relationship with a long time .
one day , the head of the company , asked me , if i could be on a veranstaltung , the sustainability of the farm .
&quot; of course , i said .
here was a company that was trying to solve what this was really concerned about our chefs , how do we keep fish fish on our own ?
in the last 50 years , we &apos;ve doubled the oceans as we were highly functional .
it &apos;s hard to überbewerten destruction destruction .
90 percent of the big fish we love to say , the tuna , the heilbutte , the heilbutte , schwertfisch , they &apos;re collapsed .
it &apos;s almost nothing more .
so , you know , maybe you will be a part of our future .
many arguments , against the environment , fischzuchtanlagen of them are like , and they &apos;re inefficient , we &apos;re inefficient . a big disadvantage .
he has a futterverwertung of 15 .
that means 15 pounds wildfisch , so you &apos;re required to be a pound zucht-thunfisch .
not very hard .
not very good .
so here was a company that was trying to do it right .
i wanted to address them .
the day i called the head of the chef for the company .
let &apos;s call him .
&quot; don &quot; don &quot; don , &quot; i said , &quot; just to have the facts really , you &apos;re famous for that , so far in the ocean , that you don &apos;t have the environment . &quot;
&quot; this is &quot; the true . &quot; we are so far out that the waste of our fish is dominated by our fish , not focused . &quot;
and then he added the way , &quot; we are in the essence of a world .
this futterverwertung von zu to one , he said .
&quot; the best in the industry . &quot;
2.5 zu .
&quot; 2.5 &quot; to one ? &quot; what do you see ? &quot;
&quot; sustainable proteins , &quot; he said .
&quot; great , &quot; i said .
and i was in bed , i was in bed , and i thought , what was hell &apos;s going to be a sustainable protein ?
so i called me the next day , shortly , one of the event , don &apos;t go to the front .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t know what to the example ? &quot;
he said he couldn &apos;t . he &apos;ll just go .
well , i &apos;m going to talk to some people in the company , no one could give me a proper answer , until i finally relate to the senior biologists .
we don &apos;t call him .
&quot; don &quot; don &quot; said , &quot; what is sustainable proteins ? &quot;
well , he mentioned some algae , and some fischmehle , and then he said , &quot; hühnchen-pellets . &quot;
i said , &quot; hühnchen-pellets ? &quot;
he said , &quot; yeah , son , knochenmehl , reste , getrocknet and zu . &quot;
i said , &quot; how much of the most of my favorites is chicken ? &quot;
in the case of the assumption , maybe two percent .
&quot; well , this is about 30 percent , &quot; he said .
i said , &quot; don &apos;t know what is the hühnchen chicken ? &quot;
there was a long pause in the line and he said , &quot; there &apos;s just too much of the chicken on the world . &quot;
i &apos;m going to get me from this fish .
no , not , because i &apos;m a selbstgerechter and gutmensch .
i am .
no , i actually have micht , i actually schwöre this fish because i swear to god , the fish after chicken .
this second fish fish , that &apos;s another kind of thing .
it &apos;s the romantic way that you can do , the better you learn your fish , you can also get the fish .
i first ate it first in a restaurant .
a befreundete journalist had been talking about long long ago .
she has a lot of verkuppelt .
he came to the table with a bright bright , almost schimmernden white color .
the chef had verkocht .
it &apos;s not .
amazingly , he still delicious .
who can make a fish so good after he was verkocht ?
i can &apos;t do it , but this guy can do it .
let &apos;s call him . it &apos;s actually called the miguel .
and no , he &apos;s got the fish , and he &apos;s not a chef , at least on the way that you and i understand .
he &apos;s a biologist in veta la .
this is a fischaufzucht in the südwestlichen corner .
it &apos;s close to the river .
until the 1980s , the farm was the farm in the hands of argentiniern .
they &apos;re züchteten fleischrinder on what was the grunde .
they did this , by making the land .
they built these complicated names of channels , and they &apos;re going to push water from the country , and the river is going into the river .
now , they couldn &apos;t make sure that the power , not economic .
and it was a catastrophe .
it took about 90 percent of birds to live in this place of many birds .
and so this is what we bought with a spanish company with a umweltbewusstsein company .
what did they do ?
they have the flow of water .
they literally have the levers .
instead of the water water water they used the channels of water to rebuild water .
they fluteten the canals .
they created a remarkable hektar -- barsch , garnele , garnele , garnele , garnele , garnele -- and his company , the ecological destruction completely .
the farm is incredible .
i mean , you &apos;ve never seen anything .
they &apos;re not looking at the horizon , the one is a million miles away , and all you see is geflutete channels and these density , lush march .
i was not a long time ago .
it &apos;s an incredible guy , three parts of darwin and a piece of crocodile for the kiss .
okay ? there we were , and we &apos;re going to keuche and ich and schwitze and schwitze , habe up to my knees , and miguel hält hold in silence .
here he lifts a rare gleitaar .
now he &apos;s going to be the mineralbedürfnisse of phytoplankton .
and here he can see a pattern of bundle that makes him feel about the tansanische giraffe .
it turns out that miguel has the largest portion of its career in the mikumi national park in africa .
i asked him how he was too much of a fisch-experten .
he said , &quot; fish ? i don &apos;t know anything about fish .
i &apos;m a experte for a living . &quot;
and then it goes and then basically , basically , and then , it &apos;s more central birds and seltsamen .
and don &apos;t , they don &apos;t realize me wrong , you know , the biotische community , the way the biotische community , like that , in the way that i think .
it &apos;s great , but i was in love .
and my head has been given to this verkochte piece of köstlichen , which i had to do at the time .
so i &apos;ve got him cut him . i said , &quot; miguel , how does it come that your fish should be so good ? &quot;
he showed up the algae .
&quot; i know , boy , the most of the relationships , the relationships , that &apos;s unbelievable .
but what are your fish ?
like the futterverwertung ? &quot;
now , he goes to tell me that it &apos;s such a rich system , that the fish eat the food chain , which they would eat in the wild .
the pflanzliche biomass , the phytoplankton , the zooplankton , the zooplankton , that &apos;s what the fish run .
the system is so healthy , it &apos;s totally selbsterneuernd .
there is no food .
the first ever heard of a farm that doesn &apos;t make your animals ?
i was going to go on this site with owl , and i said , &quot; for a place that seems to be as natural as a place i ever had ever been , &quot; how do you seek to success ? &quot;
in the moment , it was like a director to have a bühnenwechsel .
and we bow around the corner and the uns of the most stunning , thousands and thousands of thousands of pinker , a buchstäblich settlement was so far as far as the eye .
&quot; this is success , &quot; he said .
&quot; look at their bäuche , pink .
they schlemmen . &quot;
schlemmen ? i was completely confused .
i said , &quot; miguel , &quot; you don &apos;t get your fish ? &quot;
&quot; yeah , he said .
&quot; we lose 20 percent of our fish and fischeiern in the birds .
now , last year , there were more than 250 different species .
it &apos;s today the largest one and one of the most important private sector in europe .
i said , &quot; miguel , is a good gedeihender vogelbestand vogelbestand , not the last thing you want to have a fischaufzucht ? &quot;
he would go his head .
he said , &quot; we &apos;re not going to build a extensiv , not excel .
this is a ökologisches network .
the flamingos eat shrimp .
the shrimp eat the phytoplankton .
so the total point of the belly , the better the system .
okay , let &apos;s take the pattern . a farm that doesn &apos;t feed their animals and a farm that will allow their success to the health of your own .
a fischaufzucht , but also a vogelreservat .
oh , and by the way , by the way , the nebenbei of the world should not be there .
they &apos;re going to drop in a city hall , where the bodenbeschaffenheit are better for the nestbau .
every morning they fly down to the farm .
and every night night they go back to 240 .
they &apos;re doing this because they follow the gestrichelten line line on the landstraße .
seriously .
i had a kind of journey of penguins , so i looked at miguel .
i said , &quot; miguel , fly , fly , fly miles away , and fly them back to the night ?
do you make the kids ? &quot;
he looked at me , when i was a grooming of the whitney writing
he said , &quot; no . they do it because that &apos;s better . &quot;
i didn &apos;t mention my skin my son , and i don &apos;t like a fischhaut , and i don &apos;t like fischhaut . i don &apos;t like it .
it &apos;s this beißende , verkohlte flavor .
i never do it almost .
and yet , when i was in this restaurant in südspanien , they didn &apos;t have to be geschmeckt at all .
they liked sweet and pure , as if you take a bite of the ocean .
i mentioned this to be gegenüber and he nickte .
he said , &quot; the skin seems like a sponge .
it &apos;s the last thing before it &apos;s going to happen .
she has evolved in the course of the evolution to unreinheiten aufzusaugen . &quot;
and then he added the way , &quot; but our water has no unreinheiten . &quot;
okay . one of the things that feed their fish isn &apos;t going to take the fish , a farm that will explain success .
and then , it became me when he says he says a farm that has no unreinheiten , er , because the water that was coming through this farm in the river .
it &apos;s a river that &apos;s all the things that rivers are rivers with these days today , they &apos;re going to lead them together , chemical , abfluss .
and when it &apos;s made by the system that &apos;s been made and this is the water is clean than as it is .
the system is so healthy , it cleans the water .
so not only one farm , the beasts isn &apos;t just a farm that literally has a strong thing that literally will to be a farm that literally has a wasser-aufbereitungsanlage , and not just for those fish , but it &apos;s also for you and me .
because the water goes , versinkt it in the atlantic .
a drop in the ocean , i suppose , but i suppose you , and they should do it because these are , as romantic always , always , also , it &apos;s also being .
you might say that they &apos;re a recipe for the future of the future , whether we &apos;re talking about barsch or fleischrindern .
what we need now is a radical new concept of agriculture , one where food is actually good .
but for many people , it &apos;s a little bit too radical .
we &apos;re not realisten , we &apos;re lover .
we love wochenmärkte . we love little familienbetriebe , we talk about food food . we &apos;re eating food .
and if you argue that these things are good for somebody who are good in the future of someone who &apos;s good at the future , &quot; hey guys , i love pinke , but how are they feed the world ?
how are they feed the world ? &quot;
may i be honest ?
i don &apos;t like this question .
no , not , because we already produce enough calories to feed the world more than just screwing .
one billion people are going to be today .
one billion -- this is more than ever before -- because of the ungleichheiten in the distribution , not the gesamtproduktion .
now , i don &apos;t like this question because they &apos;ve been the logic of our nahrungssystems relations for the last 50 years .
füttere getreide an , schädlingsbekämpfungsmittel an , chemicals on earth , and the whole time we &apos;ve asked more people to feed how terrible can be that ?
it was the cause . it was the world . it was the business of american agriculture .
we should call them what she &apos;s like , a gewerbe in abwicklung , a bird , the schnell capital system that makes exactly these manufacturing .
this is not a craft , and it &apos;s not agriculture .
our kornkammer is not because of abnehmender zufuhr , but because of abnehmender resources .
not by the latest mähdrescher- and blues , but by fresh land , not by fresh water , but by fresh , not by fresh water , but not by water , and not by fischerboote and nets , but by fishes in the ocean .
you want to feed the world ?
let &apos;s start with the question : how are we feed ourselves ?
or better , how can we create conditions that can feed each other community to feed themselves ?
to do that , look at the agrarindustrie-modell for the future .
it &apos;s really old , and it &apos;s done .
capital , chemistry and machines are actually never producing good at the food .
let &apos;s look at the ecological model .
this is the one that &apos;s going to be on two billion years .
look at miguel , farmers as a miguel .
and , the ones who are not welten , about , the wiederherstellen , of the wiederherstellen , rather than just a physical farmers , the only way to farmers , not only are experts , but experts &apos;s experts for relationships .
because they are those who are also concerned about experts .
and if i really do , you &apos;re a better chef than i would ever be .
you know , this is right , because if the future is good foods , it &apos;s going to be delicious .
thank you .
if i want to show you today is that the coverage of the data we consume , that they are thinking about how we consume that they are so much that they can use to be patterns and we see the trends that would otherwise be visible .
so , what we see here is a typical sterbediagramm sterbediagramm .
the program i &apos;m using here is a little experiment .
it &apos;s called pivot and what i can do with pivot is that i can &apos;t get a certain cause of how i can say , say , accidents .
and i see immediately , i see another pattern that makes it .
and that &apos;s because in the mittelbereich people here are at stake , and they &apos;re over here at the gebrechlichsten .
we can move a step further and the ordnen and see that the data and see that kreislauferkrankungen and cancer is the usual suspects suspects , but they &apos;re not for everybody .
now , if we go to move , and for age age , we can see that accidents even educate people should worry about people .
and who &apos;s really seeing that this is particularly about men .
so , you know , that &apos;s actually starting to information and data in this sense , in a lively informationsgrafik .
and if we can do this for you , why not do you look for content ?
what we &apos;ve got here is the smartest jeder every single day , which has ever been printed .
it &apos;s all right here . it &apos;s all right now .
you can actually put it on my hang on my hang .
you can put it in a decade .
you can put it in a particular year .
you can jump right to a particular copy .
now , if i look here , i see the athlete that are in this issue , and the sportarten .
i &apos;m a lance armstrong , so i &apos;m going to show you that i &apos;ve been looking at all the other parts of the other parts of the other .
now , if i want to get a little bit of a car , i could think , &quot; ok , what if i do anything with the subject of fahrradfahren . &quot;
so i go back to the back and erweitere the wheel .
now i &apos;m greg lemond .
and so , you get an idea that if you look at this kind of information , gezielter , breiter , reinzoomen , reinzoomen , dann , you don &apos;t have to just not just surft .
you do something that actually actually is a little bit different .
it &apos;s something between , and we think it changes the way that can be used .
i want to make this idea of a little bit more and a little crazy .
what we did here is we &apos;ve got every single sketch of the genommen , and they &apos;re reduced to a small summary .
the summary contains a quick , and a symbol of a symbol of the domain you get .
i &apos;ll just show the top 500 of the populärsten .
but even in this process , we can do a lot of things .
immediately , we get a glimpse of the issues that are in wikipedia .
i will do the issue of the subject .
well after i know after the government , i realize the wikipediakategorien , which is most likely to the most part of the year .
this is really important , because this is a insight that doesn &apos;t happen in a single position of it .
that &apos;s just too recognize if you go to the first one , and it &apos;s a look at it .
it &apos;s a certain of that , six-word , six-word , i can go to the subject in the morning , &quot; people in the year &quot; and all together .
now , if i &apos;m going to realize all these people are realizing that the majority of them are regierungsbeamte , some of the science , some of you , get less , coming out of the economy , here &apos;s my boss . and one is coming out of the musikbereich .
and interestingly , is a ted prize winner .
so we can jump up and look at all ted to all ted .
you see , we &apos;re going to be able to do the first time , we &apos;re also going to be a network , not just by the side , but a lot of it .
and so i want to show you what a little bit of a surprise .
i &apos;m going to show you the new york times .
this application -- i don &apos;t call it a browser , it &apos;s not really a browser , but you can just look at websites -- and we bring them together a whole website like this .
so i can go back to step back , and you put directly into a specific sektion .
that &apos;s why we &apos;re important because you just can only look at websites in this way , the whole way to look at the same way .
so i can put in my course , in a particular way .
here &apos;s the state of the entire demonstration that i &apos;ve been writing .
and i can do anything i looked at it today , again , zurückholen .
and if i look at all , i can see my life -- i can my course , i have a little bit of my such-vergangenheit , and here i &apos;ve been looking for &apos; nepotistisch , here after bing , here after live pivot .
and then , in this side , and she &apos;s back again .
it &apos;s a metaphor that &apos;s dipping that &apos;s dipping over and every time it makes it bigger than the sum of the datenteile .
in the moment , we think that data is a curse .
we &apos;re talking about the fluch of the informationsüberflusses .
we &apos;re talking about &quot; drowning in information . &quot;
what if we could turn this situation and the internet on the head , so that we can take advantage of one another to the other things , so that we can go to the same amount of patterns , and they realize what otherwise would be geblieben ?
if we can do that , then this is going to be a big source of information , maybe a new source of information .
and instead , instead of just moving in information , we can get it out .
and if we learn to learn , then we can even pull out of the weisheiten .
so i hear that , thank you .
i grew up with a gehörigen portion science .
in my classroom , i went to school every day a day .
and my nose was always a book in a book , a science-fiction-buch , which my thoughts in other worlds , and in erzählerische , my deep weise in my sitzende , unersättliche befriedigte .
this curiosity , too , too , that i always was always , when i was in school , by the forests , walked around , frogs and snakes and schlangen and käfer and käfer and käfer and käfer and käfer and unter .
i was completely wissenschaftsbegeistert .
it &apos;s always the trying to understand the world and the limitations of the possible level .
and my love science fiction in my environment , because back then , in the late &apos; 60s , we flew down to the moon and the deep sea .
jacques cousteau came to our living rooms with his fascinating shows that we were animals and places and a world of wonder , we never imagined before .
this is probably a very good deal of jener .
and i was an artist .
i could draw . i could paint .
and since videospiele videospiele still had these übersättigung noch , which was all the whole bildsprache in the media landscape , i had to build the pictures in my head .
we had to do all , and when we read as a book , we took the description of the autors and projected it on the screen in our minds .
my response was going to be able to draw and paint , wireless worlds , robots , raumschiffen and all of that .
i was constantly constantly at the teacher &apos;s teacher , i was going to put in the hinterm textbook .
creativity had to be kind of out .
and this is something interesting . what worries me was about jacques cousteau &apos;s physicist , was the idea of a whole unknown world on our earth .
i would never ever give you a prediction of a quick world . i seemed to do it .
but here was a world that i could actually walk in the way that i could actually walk , and she was just fascinating and exotic as all of that i always thought i was when i was doing this books .
so i decided to be becoming a little 15 .
the only problem that was that i lived in a little village in canada , 1,000 kilometers away from the next ocean .
i don &apos;t let me tell you .
i nervte my father until he finally finally got a tauchschule in buffalo , new york , at the other side of the border , where we lived .
i made my tauchschein in a pool in a pool in a pool in the winter of the winter , new york .
but the ocean , a real ocean , i just got two years later , when we moved to california .
since then , in the 40 years , the record of the sind are , i spent three hours of water , 500 hours of it in tauchbooten .
and i &apos;ve learned to realize that the world &apos;s the world of deep , even in the flacheren oceans , so rich lives in life , how we really can imagine .
the scientists of nature knows not limit , quite a limit , unlike our own , kläglichen human imagination .
and to the days , i got a bunch of awe for what i see on my own .
and my love of the ocean , with the same intensity as it is .
when i was looking at as a grown-up aussuchte , it was the filmmaking .
the best way to tell my inner inneren , to be able to tell stories , to unite with my need to be able to build .
as a kid , i drew the comicbücher and so forth .
so , movies were the way , images and stories .
of course , the stories i was told to me , from the science-fiction-bereich , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot; aliens , &quot;
i could mean &quot; abyss &quot; i could make my work for the unterwasserwelt and the diving and dive to the diving .
so they come back , they come back .
something interesting happened to be a erzählerisches problem in this film -- and that was a problem of liquid problem -- and that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing , we &apos;re going to create a kind of liquid wasserwesen , we &apos;re going back to computergenerierte animation , griffen .
what was the first computergenerierte soft-surface-figur that was ever in a movie .
the movie made a money , he said , he was playing a cash , but i realized , but i realized , the audience in the audience was like hypnotisiert , the magic , the davon .
according to arthur clarke &apos;s law are very much more likely to distinguish apart from others .
so she saw something .
and i found that .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s got to be the filmkunst . &quot;
so we went to &quot; terminator , &quot; my next film , even more .
together with ilm erschufen , we created the guy from liquid metal , the success of the hing , the success of the effect , the success of the world would be .
and it worked . and again , we &apos;ve got something magical . and the effect in the audience was the same . however we &apos;ve had the film a little bit more money .
from these two experiences , a whole new world is accomplished , a whole new world of creativity .
so i started a company , i started to visit my good friend of a book , who was the best of the best make-up- and creature-designer , she was called &quot; digital domain . &quot;
the idea of this company , it was , the phase of the phase of the processes with visual printers and then start to start with digital produktionen .
so we did that , and also give us a while a half fact .
but the &apos; 90s we realized that we creature- and character-design -- we actually did the company , actually , to slow vorankamen .
i had this piece of &quot; avatar &quot; avatar that the most popular effects should be made in the most amazing and computergenerierter effects in the whole new world , were made of the cg effects , and the hauptfiguren should be cg , and the hauptfiguren should be cg , and the world should be .
but the lower one is pretty back . and people in my company told me that we don &apos;t have to be able to do this .
so i took this and took this other film about big ship , the french ship .
i sold this as an &quot; romeo and julia , &quot; it was sold on a ship , it was called a liebesfilm epischen , a physical movie .
but i wanted to take the real wrack of the titanic .
so i did the film .
this is the truth . the studio was not the time .
i &apos;ve convinced you , i said , &quot; we &apos;re going to go through the wrack . we &apos;re going to take the real puzzle .
we &apos;re going to show it in the eröffnungssequenz .
that &apos;s tremendously important . it &apos;s a good aufhänger of marketing marketing . &quot;
and i persuaded them to finance .
sounds crazy . but it &apos;s back to me that the reputation can create an reality .
we created six months later , a reality where i was in a russian tauchboot wiederfand , four miles below the surface of the atlantic , and i gave the actual echte by a bullauge .
it wasn &apos;t a movie , no hd , that was really .
so that &apos;s really what my work has really work .
and the preparedness tend to be enormous , and we had to build cameras and more and more and all sorts of things .
and i thought , like a very tiefseetauchgänge , a weltraummission .
well , they were also selfish and bedurften umfangreicher .
you start to get up into these capsule , you get into these dark , feindselige environment , where a hope of rettung is not a hope to talk about it .
and i thought , &quot; wow , that &apos;s exactly as if i was in a science-fiction-film .
that &apos;s really cool . &quot;
i was obsessed with the deep sea of the deep sea .
anyway , the part of the curiosity , and it was all done . it was all . it was a adventure , it was . it was a imagination .
and it was a experience that could not be a hollywood .
because , you know , i could think , i could imagine a creature for that we could make a visual effect , but i couldn &apos;t imagine what i was going to see outside of the fensters .
i &apos;ve never seen the wesen in thermalquellen , and sometimes things that i &apos;ve never seen before , even things that i had never seen before , nor no one had ever seen before the science , when we saw them , nor had no words before .
so this has me really umgeworfen , and i wanted to do .
and so i ran a little unusual decision .
after the success , i said to me , &quot; okay , i want to put my hauptberuf as a filmmaker in hollywood , and then i &apos;m going to put on a little bit . &quot;
and then we started to go back to &quot; bismarck , &quot; and they explored with roboterfahrzeugen .
we &apos;re going to return to the roaring .
we took little robots that we built a fiberglaskabel .
our intention was , hineinzutauchen and complaining of the ship , what was never done before .
no one had ever supported the insides of the wracks , you couldn &apos;t have any means of that . so we evolved the world .
and i &apos;m sitting here today , in a tauchboot , and see planken , who are pretty much of these brettern here , and i know that once there was a tape that was played down there .
and i &apos;m going to fly with a little roboterfahrzeug through the ship .
i just bediene it , but my consciousness is within the vehicle .
it felt like i was living in the schiffswracks of the titanic .
this was the surrealste shape of a déjà-vu , which i ever experienced . because before i &apos;ve always been doing a corner of the vehicle , because before i was going on the lichtkegel of the earth , because i was in a lot of filmset when we were the film .
so the set was a very detailed copy of the ship .
so that was a highly strange thing .
she made this telepräsenz-erlebnis piece that you use such roboterhafte avatare , and so that your conscious conscious is able to be able to capture this other shape .
so really really hard to be really hard to think of it really profound .
and perhaps a small thing that might be able to happen in some decades , if you could be cyborg-körper to explore something or other things , in all kinds of post-humanen , zukunftszenarios , that i can imagine as a science-fiction-fan .
and after that , we started this , like what we &apos;ve seen , for example , to learn , for example , to learn , for example , that incredibly amazing animals saw , and that &apos;s sort of big , but here on earth .
they live with hilfe .
they don &apos;t exist in the sunlight , we know how we do that .
and so you can see that you can survive right next to a 500 degrees fahrenheit that they can survive .
at the same time , i was also interested in weltraumwissenschaft , which was the most successful part of my childhood .
and so i ended up with the people who are interested in the space and the nasa and the nasa-sachverständigenrat and im and richtige and richtige , and they &apos;re sitting on the nasa-sachverständigenrat and richtige and richtige , and they &apos;re driving , fly to international and the dran , and then take our 3d-kamerasysteme plan .
so fascinating .
but the end of that , it was showing that i took the deep around .
i took them with and verschaftte them around the world , astrobiologen , planetenwissenschaftler , people who are interested in such extremes , planetenwissenschaftler , people who are interested in such a wild situations so that they could take samples and instruments and instruments and so on .
we were drehten , but actually science , more things .
so the circle of the circle in my existence as a science-fiction-fan , as a child , and the execution in reality .
i &apos;ve learned a lot of learning .
i &apos;ve been learning a lot of science , but i &apos;m thinking you certainly understand a funny , a funny , a leader has to be a leader like a schiffskapitän or a leader .
but i didn &apos;t understand much of leadership before i was going to solve this expeditions .
because at a certain point , i had to say , &quot; what do i do here ? &quot;
why do i do this ? what does it happen ? &quot;
these blöden movies don &apos;t take any money .
we just play a trillion . and by ruhm .
all of you think i &apos;m going to go back to the titanic , and i would have been able to get the nails on a beach on the beach .
i &apos;ve got all these films , this kind of very small audience .
no fame , no money , no money . what do you do ?
you are doing it to the task -- and the ocean is the herausforderndste environment that are , you are the herausforderndste environment that are . you are the ocean for the entdeckerrausches , and because of the seltsamen connection , the imf , if a little group of people a team of people .
because we &apos;ve made all of this with people 10 to 12 people who have been given years old , sometimes we were two to three months on lake .
and in this community , you realize that the most important thing you have each one , because you have a job , because you have a job that you can &apos;t explain any other thing .
if you land on land , and it says , &quot; we had to do it , the fiberglas , the schallschwächung , and the difficulty , if you &apos;re going to explain the other . that &apos;s how honest officers , and the difficulty , if you &apos;re going to explain something in the polizisten , and you know , and you know , you know , you know
there &apos;s a connection , a healthy .
so i &apos;m going to go back to the next film , &quot; avatar &quot; avatar &quot; avatar &quot; avatar , &quot; i tried to use the same as the same team and it relates to the very much respect .
it became dynamic .
so i was back to a little team on the unbekanntem terrain , we were drehten , &quot; avatar &quot; avatar &quot; avatar &quot; avatar you haven &apos;t even existed .
now , personally .
a handle of a challenge .
and we &apos;ve been rejected for a period of four family .
it changed my way to do movies .
there were people who were going to have this ozeanwesen really maneuverable nachgemacht and on the planet .
i was there more prinzipielle way , my job process that was changed in the outcome .
so what can we do from all of this ?
which lessons have been taught us ?
i think , the curiosity is curiosity .
it &apos;s the most powerful feature .
our imagination is a force that even create a reality .
and the other one of the people &apos;s more teams is more important than all the lorbeer of this world .
i want to come to come to me young filmmakers saying , &quot; give me a advice , how i can do that . &quot;
and i say , &quot; don &apos;t you even know .
that &apos;s another one of the things for you . don &apos;t you know , don &apos;t touch yourself .
nasa has such a lieblingssatz , &quot; fail , &quot; fail . &quot;
but in art , and it has to be an alternative to get a choice , because there is an oxygen system .
no , no , the innovation , the innovation was ever risk .
you have to be ready to take action .
this is the idea that i want to leave you with your way , and it &apos;s a big , fear , but it &apos;s not . thank you .
today i speak to you .
and that &apos;s not surprising to something , because my favorite vollzeitbeschäftigung is about vaccines and freedom to make the poorest of the poorest 2 in the poorest 2 is worth a better life .
but energy and climate change is extremely important for these people , actually more than for everybody else on the planet .
klimaverschlechterung means that the saaten over many years not grow over many years , we &apos;re too much more complex , and the things that are going to change their savings environment .
it leads to hungersterben . it leads to the uncertainty . it leads .
so , it &apos;s going to be a very appropriate problem .
and then , the most fundamental thing is you very important .
the fact is that if you could just choose by a thing that would reduce the price of the price , to the most effective , we were going to get on the most effective .
now , the energiepreis is over time .
actually , the fortschrittsgesellschaft in energiefortschritten .
the kohlerevolution the kohlerevolution was the industrial revolution and even in the 20th century , there was a dance starting in the elektrizitätspreis and so we &apos;ve been able to do modern materials and so many things .
so we &apos;re in a wonderful situation in a wonderful situation in the rich .
but if we cut the prize , let &apos;s make the cost of the cost of the cost of the cost of the cost of the -- and this barrier depends with co2 .
co2 pollution warms the planet and the equation is actually quite clear .
they summieren the ausgestoßene co2 , and maybe worse , the indirekte of the natural ecosystems , and maybe worse , the natural ecosystems will not adapt to be such as possible as they can &apos;t adapt to change .
now , the exact relationship between a co2-anstieg and the dadurch temperaturveränderung temperaturveränderung and where else are following , there &apos;s some of some of them , but not a lot of it .
and there &apos;s definitely about ambiguity about how bad this are going to be , but they will be extremely bad .
i &apos;ve got the top-wissenschaftler several times , &quot; have to come down to close zero ?
no half or a quarter ? &quot;
the answer is : we &apos;re going to get zero , the temperature will move temperature .
that &apos;s a big deal .
it &apos;s quite different than to say , we have a 3.5 foot in a three of a three high seas , under a three foot . you can go on one of the time you can draw .
this is a way to bottom , it &apos;s going to zero .
well , we found a lot of kohlenstoffdioxid out of all over 26 billion tons .
every americans about 20 tons , people from poor countries , less than one .
the average is about five tons of every single planet .
and somehow we have to make changes that will give up zero .
it &apos;s been restricted to it .
just to be different economic development , it &apos;s actually affected even less than to go to reducing and lead to zero .
this equation has four factors . you have this thing on , you have this thing on the ground -- co2 -- co2 -- co2 -- co2 -- co2 -- co2 -- co2 -- co2 -- co2 -- co2 -- co2 -- co2 -- co2 -- co2 , the average energy for everybody and the co2 emissions that &apos;s going to be a emittiert .
so let &apos;s take every factor of looking at each other , we think we get that on zero .
probably , probably one of these numbers are very close to zero .
now , the problem is fundamental , but let &apos;s go it .
we first have the population .
today today , billions of people today .
and it &apos;s been on nine billion zu. that are going to move nine billion .
if we &apos;re very successful with new vaccines , the gesundheitsvorsorgung and reproduktionsmedizin are we may be doing 10 percent to 15 percent , but at the time we see a slope around .
the second factor is the services that we use .
that includes everything that food we eat , clothing , television , heating .
these are very good things and armutsverringerung , this focuses almost has to make any kind of planet .
it &apos;s great that this number is going to be .
in the rich world , in which the way , we could do it abstriche and less use , but in the average will get more than doubles that are the number of the services of the services will be used .
this is a very basic service . there &apos;s a way to home , so that you can read the homework ?
and those of those countries aren &apos;t going to go and read their schulaufgaben , underneath the straßenlicht .
now , in efficiency , the e , the energy , there &apos;s a good news .
we have something that doesn &apos;t happen .
because of a different successes in the lichtsektor , by other forms of autotypen , through new methods , in new ways , in new ways of dienste , their energieaufwand services , to reduce 90 percent .
in other people , as the herstellung of düngemitteln , brown : 56,000 , 05 , 58,000 or luftverkehr , 00 or luftverkehr , is the most important thing very much smaller .
in the way we &apos;re optimistic , maybe we might get a reduction to take a factor or maybe even a factor of time to make a factor of time .
but at the first three , we &apos;re now from 26 billion tons on maybe 13 billion tons 13 billion tons , and that &apos;s not enough for the first time .
so let &apos;s see the fourth factor -- and this will be a key thing -- that &apos;s the amount of co2 that &apos;s going to be a energieeinheit .
it turns out the question , if you can get that on the scratch .
if you burn your attention .
if you burn : no .
almost every unit of energy consumption for current hundred thousand days today , except renewables and nuklearenergie .
so what we need to do in a global scale , is to create a new system .
we need energiewunder .
now , if i use the term &quot; miracle &quot; i use , i don &apos;t mean the impossible .
the microprocessor is a miracle . the edge is a miracle .
the internet and the service is a miracle .
the people here have contributed to the development of many of these wonders .
usually there &apos;s no way that you need to be a miracle to a specific date .
you &apos;re usually only going to get more and some of them , others .
in this case , we need to give them a miracle in very short run .
now , i wondered how can i really do this ?
there &apos;s natural illustration , a demonstration that &apos;s how to get this idea of people here ?
i remembered the last year when i was playing and i was doing it , and sort of people have this .
the idea was being really , you know , there &apos;s people living with purpose .
for energy , i fell this .
i decided that this was my diesjähriger contributor to the environment .
so here are some natural fireflies .
you &apos;ve got to realize that they &apos;re not bite . actually , you won &apos;t even realize that you won &apos;t even realize .
now , there &apos;s all kinds of spielereilösungen like this , but they don &apos;t get much .
we need solutions either one or a couple of a bunch of a cutting-edge and unimaginable , and even though there are many ways that people are searching for that people are searching to see five , which can afford to be the big demands .
i &apos;m focusing on , geothermal , fusion and biofuels .
this may be a moderaten contribution , and if you &apos;re better here , if i expect here , if we have to work on all of the five five , and we can &apos;t give us any of them because they &apos;re very hard to be aware of .
if we &apos;re first looking at the burning fossil fuel , burning of either coal or gas .
what you have to do there , just but it &apos;s not . you have to get all the co2 that comes from the schornstein , and then you have to sit under pressure and then sit back and then hoping that there is there .
there are some pilotprojekte that will produce a 60 percent , but it &apos;s going to be very difficult to get very difficult to get them . and a moment for the rule of the co2 is a big challenge , but the most problem here is the lagerzeitfrage .
who will make sure ?
who can make a difference in which literally many of the time , a lot of waste , which you can do and other things can happen ?
that &apos;s a lot of volume .
so that &apos;s a tough thing .
next , nuklearenergie .
it has also three big problems . the cost of all , especially in hochregulierten countries , the question for sure that you really feel that nothing wrong is going wrong , despite the human brain , the fuel isn &apos;t used for weapons .
and what do you do ?
because even though it &apos;s not big , there &apos;s lots of concerns .
so three very hard problems that might be solvable , and they should work .
the last three of the five i &apos;ve got .
it &apos;s the renewables of renewables as they are .
and also , even the ones -- although it &apos;s great that they have no fuel -- they have some drawbacks .
and then , for one thing , the current thing that these technologies are dramatic dramatically than the kraftwerken .
these are energiefarmen , you &apos;re talking about many quadratkilometern , more than a regular power plant .
and also , these vent that drug unterbrechungen : these vent drugs : also , these vent that mediate unterbrechungen : these vent drugs : also , these vent drugs , this vent disruption .
the sun doesn &apos;t seem to all day , they don &apos;t seem every day and just as much as the wind is not all the time .
so you have to depend on the ground , you have to depend on these sources , which is also in time they &apos;re not available , you get to get .
so there &apos;s big preisherausforderungen . there are challenges at the transmission of the country , so if we say that the energy is outside of the country , they have to do with the risk of where the energy of where else came from .
and there &apos;s the lagerungsproblem .
and to show the dimension i &apos;ve been made with all sorts of batteries that are made for cars , computers , cell phones , handys , handys , taschenlampen , taschenlampen , taschenlampen , taschenlampen , taschenlampen , taschenlampen , taschenlampen , taschenlampen , taschenlampen , taschenlampen , taschenlampen , taschenlampen , taschenlampen , taschenlampen , that all batteries we now expect to be less than 10 minutes of
so we need a big breakthrough , something that would be a factor of 100 times better than the time of time .
that &apos;s not impossible , but it &apos;s not that easy .
this happens when you try to get these unterbrochenen sources of quellen , we &apos;ll say about 20 percent of the way we have 20 percent .
if you want to get 100 percent to you , they need an unbelievable wunderbatterie .
now where we shall say , what is the right approach ?
&quot; manhattan project &quot; ? how do we get to the target ?
what we need are many companies working on it .
in every one of these five areas , we need at least 100 people .
you &apos;re going to say , they &apos;re crazy ! that &apos;s good .
i think there &apos;s lots of that , in ted group , there are many who are comfortable there .
bill has several companies , including a namens that has great solarthermaltechnologien .
vinod investiert in dozens of dozens of companies , and i &apos;m trying to support that .
nathan myhrvold and i have a company that may , maybe that &apos;s what i was doing , maybe the nuclear approach .
there &apos;s some of the innovations in the nuklearbereich ; modular , nuclear .
so , the evolution has a time in this industry sometime , so it &apos;s not a great surprise that some of these ideas have concepts .
the terrapower-konzept means that you are instead of one of the urans that &apos;s going to burn and we decided to burn percent , the u238 percent .
that &apos;s a pretty idea idea .
but in fact , you &apos;ve got a long time on thinking , but you could never see whether it would work , whether it &apos;s modern current , you can see it and see that , yes ! that &apos;s the right materialienherangehensweise , it looks like it &apos;s funktioniere .
and because you &apos;re now % percent , the most fundamental thing is very much better .
in fact , you &apos;re actually going to put the waste , and you can actually see the waste of the reactors as a antriebsstoff .
instead of thinking about it , they just burn it . it &apos;s a fabulous thing .
the uranium is consuming to be able to make a bit like a candle .
you see that it &apos;s a kind of an column , often , as &quot; the welle of the reactor . &quot;
this is actually the treibstoffproblem .
here &apos;s a picture of a whole area in kentucky .
this is the waste , the 99 percent , you have the part that is burned , so it &apos;s uran .
the u.s. taxpayer for hundreds of years .
and if you take a little cheap and just filtriert , you get enough fuel for the rest of the planet .
you know , there &apos;s still a lot of challenges , but it &apos;s an example of many hundreds of concepts that we need to come forward .
let &apos;s think about how we should measure our success .
how should we look for our world ?
now , let &apos;s go up to the target we have to reach and we talk about the zwischenschritt .
many of a lot of the 80 percent reduction in 2050 .
it &apos;s really important that we get there .
the rest of 20 percent are being produced , and still a bit more agriculture , and hopefully , it &apos;s going to be waldrohdung and cement , and then cement , it &apos;s going to be clean until the end of the clean .
so , to reach that 80 percent , the industrialized nations , including the industrialized , including countries like china , their elektrizitätsgeneration completely .
the other note says we &apos;re using the most effective technology , whether they &apos;ve developed in all the developed countries , and we &apos;re on the way to get them to the rest .
that &apos;s great important .
this is going to be a schlüsselelement that protein will .
if we go back from where should we look at the end of the world ?
it should work over again .
we should use the effektivitätsmaßnahmen to bring it on the way , the less we &apos;re going to do is to get the less way , the lower is the co2-summe and also that includes the temperature .
but actually , this note for the things that we do is not fully reduktionen , or even something less like the other of innovation for this breakthroughs .
and this is what we need to compute the breakthroughs , we can measure measure , in firmenzahlen and regulierungsänderungen .
there &apos;s lots of great books to this subject .
al gore book &quot; we have the choice &quot; and david mckays , &quot; sustainable &quot; energy &quot; to the air . &quot;
they &apos;re really going to go through and create a framework that can be used to be able to take this wide , because we need support for support of all sides .
there &apos;s a few that , that &apos;s a few .
that &apos;s a wish .
so a very first wish we invent this technology .
if you just give me a wish for the next 50 years , i could pick the president , and i could choose the president , the lautet , and i could choose this wish , halbierter energiepreis , without co2 , is going to take the wish without the co2 .
this has the largest impact .
if we don &apos;t get to the desire , the immediate growth is going to be more frequently between long and more people , between poor and rich and the rich and rich and rich and all the lives of these two billion of two billion of these two billion .
so what do we have to do ?
i &apos;m going to go back to that ?
we have to use more efficient .
if countries are going to meet in places like koppenhagen , they should not just talk about co2 .
they should talk about these innovationsstrategie and they were shocked by the lächerlich of our own living costs .
we need marktanreize , co2 taxes , cap &amp; amp ; es salaam , something that creates a preissignal .
we have to spread the message .
we need to live dialogue and expands and also the things that are being cut by the government .
it &apos;s a very important desire , but i think we can do it .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you . thank you .
thank you very much . just to understand what &apos;s going to understand more important , what can you give us a vision of the order of magnitude ?
bill gates : to make the simulation of a supercomputer in a deep reactor , we need some 10 million , and even if we were just to get our materials in a deep reactor , to make sure that it works , you &apos;re just a few million people in the 100en .
the hard step is to build the first reaktors , another billion , the regularien and the place of the first place in the first of the time .
as the first one is done , when it &apos;s promised , it &apos;s very clear , because the ones that &apos;s really , because of the ones that &apos;s really unlike how we know it .
to understand the right thing : this means deep in the ground is going to take deep into the ground as a vertical , nuklearen , this car drivers and then start down the right up and continue to continue down to the bottom .
bg : yeah . today you have to push the reactor , so there are many people , and many of them , the way they can go wrong . this thing where you open it and make things out or herausbringt . it &apos;s not good .
but if you have very cheap , you can get it for 60 years -- think of a pillar -- that they buried without the whole .
and it &apos;s sitting there and there &apos;s 60 years , and then it gets done .
a nuklearreaktor , the self that &apos;s been a solution to the garbage .
bg : yeah . now , what happens to what happens to what happens to the way , there &apos;s much less waste with this method -- then take it and put it into the next reactor and burn it .
and we start to start the waste , which is already , that means that we &apos;re going to have the reactors that &apos;s been on this kühlbecken or trockenbehältern , which is our startbrennstoff .
so what that means was a problem for this , what we &apos;ve been in our own proportions and that will be dramatic dramatic dramatically into the müllvolumen dramatic dramatic dramatic dramatic dramatic dramatic dramatic .
but as you talk to different people about this opportunity , they &apos;ve talked about these options .
where is the most popular interest , so what really ?
so , in fact , we don &apos;t have a place to go through a place where there &apos;s big offenlegungsregeln for everything that was called &quot; nuclear &quot; in russia , india , china -- there &apos;s big interest in the company , india , and i was here , and i &apos;ve been speaking at the energieminister and talk about how this is passt .
i &apos;m optimistic . you know , the french and japanese , something that &apos;s done .
this is a nuance of a kind of thing that was done .
this is a very important step forward , but it &apos;s like a faster , and some countries have built this constructed , and that &apos;s why every fast has a schnellen , a kandidatat for our first time .
in your mind , the way that &apos;s really going to be in the life ?
bg : now one of these skalierbaren , stromgenerierenden things , that &apos;s very cheap , we spent 20 years to the erfinden and then 20 years .
this is sort of the creation that tells us the umweltmodelle that we have to address .
and you know , terrapower , if everything comes well , and that &apos;s a big wish , it might easily .
and fortunately , there &apos;s dozens of companies , and we need hundreds of them , the same time , the ansätze for your community , the order for their pilots , for you can .
and it would be the best if it can do , because it could be a blend .
anyway , we need a solution .
and that great source of breakthroughs is that this is the largest that you know ?
bg : a energiedurchbruch is the most important .
it would also be without the umweltherausforderung , but it does make more important .
in the dinosaurs , there are other innovative companies .
you know , we know what &apos;s been about their work is not as good as this , but there &apos;s the modular method that is to be a different approach .
there &apos;s a liquid reaktortyp , which is something that seems to be difficult , but maybe they &apos;re going to say that .
and so it &apos;s different , but the beauty of this is that a uranmolekül has a lot of energy as a result , the fußabdruck and the costs are the potential , the impact on the country and other things , and other things , almost in a noisy league .
it doesn &apos;t work .
let &apos;s have to make a notfallmaßnahmen to keep trying to keep the erdtemperatur stable .
bg : if you get too much of the situation , it &apos;s as if you eat too much , and you &apos;re just sitting on a heart attack , what do you do ? you need a herzoperation or something .
there &apos;s a forschungsrichtung called geoengineering , which is called different techniques to try to produce the warming to produce the warming , so we &apos;re 20 or 30 years longer to us .
that &apos;s just a versicherungsmethode .
you &apos;re not going to be able to do that .
some people say , you should not just insurance because you should go through insurance because a lot of your power , so you &apos;re going to continue to eat , because you know that a breast cancer will save .
i don &apos;t know if the smart thing is , if you look at the importance of this problem , but there &apos;s a discourse of discourse in a geoengineering about whether you should have the available , or even worse longer , when we expect .
klimaskeptiker : you have a or two sentences for the ones to get them ?
bg : now , sadly , the skeptics is in very different ways .
those of the scientific arguments are doing scientific arguments , are very little .
say that there &apos;s negative impacts to do with the clouds that are driving ?
there &apos;s very , very few things that they can say to a group of whom you can say .
the ideograph here is so similar to aids .
you make the mistake , and you get a lot of time for it .
and that &apos;s why the current thing now is , now , if you &apos;re all kinds of problems that you have problems that you have just later what &apos;s going to happen , and indeed , it &apos;s not so much later what you &apos;ve got to do -- and to get people in the rich world that look at the time , okay , okay , that &apos;s
the fact is that this uncertainty should be worried .
but my dream here is that if you can do it , and then the co2 would happen , then the co2 would happen , then the co2 would happen , then the co2 would happen , then the co2 would happen , and i &apos;m going to accept it , because it &apos;s cheaper than the previous method . &quot;
and that would be their answer to the björn lomborg , all of these other objectives , all of the time , to invest money , all the other objectives of resources , all the other objectives of resources , money to invest money , and they &apos;re trying to invest money , whereas there are things that we can do .
bg : now , the actual spending for research -- say we should spend 10 billion dollars a year more than they do today -- this is not that dramatic .
now , shouldn &apos;t suffer .
you get to get too big geldsummen , and here , people disagree with reasonable people , if you have something that is not worthwhile , and tries to finance it , and for me , the most waste .
it &apos;s very short in a very short front page , and funded only the same thing , and i think we should try to do more things that have the potential to be much cheaper .
if the abstrich , you get a very high energiepreis , you can only keep the basics .
i mean , every one of us could have to do this , every time you could spend five times without your lifestyle .
for the lower two billion , but it &apos;s a disaster .
and even more lomborg .
his new horizons is now , &quot; why is the research research ? &quot;
he &apos;s still becoming a lot of the former stories , with the skeptiker-camp , but he has understood that this was a very lonely group group , and so he &apos;s now the forschungsargument .
and this is a case that i &apos;m appropriate for appropriate .
the research , it &apos;s just crazy , it &apos;s crazy .
bill , i think , for almost all of people here , when i say , i &apos;m hoping that your wish is true . thank you very much .
thank you .
some years ago , here at ted , peter skillman skillman namens called &quot; the marshmallow-herausforderung . &quot;
the idea is pretty simple . vierer-teams , the größtmögliche freistehende structure of 20 spaghetti , about 50,000 , and a marshmallow is going to build a marshmallow .
the marshmallow has to be on top .
and even though it &apos;s really easy , it &apos;s actually really hard to look very quickly , so people are going to work quickly .
and so i thought this is a interesting idea , and i put it into a design-workshop .
it was a huge success .
since then , i &apos;ve been around the world &apos;s 70 worldwide , with students , innovators and architects , even with ctos and architects , even with ctos and architects , even with ctos impressions in nature of collaboration , and i want to share some of them with them .
usually , most people can do that even on the task .
you talk about it , you think , what it &apos;s like , they &apos;re rangeln to power it .
and then they invest a little bit of a time in planning and organization . they &apos;re like , and they &apos;re going to go down .
they invest a lot of their time in the zusammenbau , and they &apos;re constantly making structures in the zusammenbau , and they &apos;re constantly making structures in the zusammenbau , and they &apos;re constantly making structures in the zusammenbau , and they &apos;re constantly making structures in the zusammenbau , and they &apos;re constantly making structures in the zusammenbau , and they &apos;re constantly making structures in the zusammenbau
and finally , they don &apos;t have time to have more time before someone would pass the marshmallow and they pat him on top , step up a step back and &quot; , &quot; admire her jobs .
but what happens is , almost always , that &apos;s the &quot; ta-da &quot; is going to be a &quot; uh-oh &quot; because the weight of the marshmallows is that the whole thing is looking at it and einstürzt .
there &apos;s a series of people who have a lot more like more affirmative than others , and under fresh water .
they lie , they were cheating , they &apos;re confused and really dürftige .
and of course , there &apos;s also teams that have teams who have a lot more , &quot; ta-da &quot; and you have the best position of the kindergartens .
and that &apos;s pretty amazing .
like peter told us , we don &apos;t produce the highest towers , but also the most interesting structures of all .
what you might ask is : how does this happen ? why ? what is that ?
and peter erzählt tells me , &quot; don &apos;t have the spaghetti sauce gmbh . &quot;
they don &apos;t have time in machtkämpfe .
but there &apos;s another reason .
and that &apos;s that bwl-studenten is actually trained to find the einen plan , ok !
and then it gets to .
what happens when you look at the marshmallow , the top , they don &apos;t have time and what happens ?
it &apos;s a crisis .
sounds , what ?
what &apos;s different is that they start with the marshmallow and prototypes , and prototypes , always , always , with the marshmallow that they put together into the way that they have baufällige prototypes .
konstrukteure recognize this kind of collaboration as a kern vorgangs .
and every trial , the kids get feedback what works and what &apos;s not .
so the performance is to work with prototypes , but we see , as seductive .
the average for most of you , bwl-studenten is the hälfte of that , lawyers , lawyers , lawyers , more , more , more than the adults .
who &apos;s most successful ? &quot;
architects and engineers , fortunately .
it &apos;s a highest thing i saw .
and why ? because they are understanding and sich-selbst-verstärkende the key patterns to build on building structure .
and then , there &apos;s something about average , but here &apos;s going to be interesting .
you put a exekutive administrator at the team , they will make more likely .
it &apos;s unbelievable . you see , &quot; this team will win . &quot;
you can predict the predictions . why is this ?
because they have special skills of the prozessbegleitung .
they also understand the process , you understand .
and this is what the team and the work will improve the performance of the team .
more specialized skills and prozessfähigkeiten and their combination .
if you have 10 teams , you get the typical , they get about six , the ultimate structures .
i tried to do something .
i thought , we &apos;re going to bring the pokereinsatz .
so i offered a $ 10000 dollar prize for the winner .
what do you think about these design-studenten ?
what was the outcome ?
this is happened . not a team had a very stable structure .
if you had a 2,5cm , a hohe , the only would have been going home .
so it &apos;s not interesting that high levels of effect have a strong effect ?
we &apos;ve observed this practice with the same students .
what do you think about ?
now , they got the benefit of the &quot; prototyping . &quot;
so , from the same team , bad team of one of the best .
it &apos;s also the highest construction flows of time .
there &apos;s so much tief-greifende lessons for us , about nature and success .
they like to ask : why would somebody actually make a marshmallow-challenge machine ?
the reason i &apos;m going to help digital digital tools and to help teams to help teams , and &quot; visual effects . &quot;
and what the marshmallow-challenge is , you &apos;re going to identify from the brain .
because , frankly , every project has its own marshmallow .
the challenge provides a common experience , a common language , the right prototype .
and this is the score of this experience , this is how simple things .
and those of you who are interested in which it &apos;s interested in besuchen .
it &apos;s a blog where you see , you can see the marshmallows .
there &apos;s a schritt-für-schritt-anleitung there .
they find this crazy examples from all the world , like people do the system and raffinieren .
there &apos;s also weltrekorde .
and the basale , i think that &apos;s actually a verbindender sport .
it requires all our senses to task and we think that we use our own sense of how our emotions and our own do our emotions , and our own work that we &apos;re going to do .
and sometimes a small prototype that &apos;s all going to take us from a &quot; uh-oh &quot; -- &quot; a &quot; ta-da &quot; moment . &quot;
and that can make a big difference .
thank you .
so we have a machine that we would like to have a machine that we would like here .
a big machine , a cool , ted-artige machine , and that &apos;s a time .
and everybody has to be in this room .
and you can go into the past , you can go to the future , you can &apos;t go in here and now , now , you know , now .
and i ask myself what they would choose because i promised my friends in my last time , so i &apos;ve wanted to go and wanted to go all the past .
i don &apos;t know . they didn &apos;t want to go back before there was a car or twitter or twitter .
i don &apos;t know .
i &apos;m convinced that you &apos;re sort of nostalgie , zu hingezogen .
and i understand .
i &apos;m not part of this group , i have to say .
i don &apos;t want to go into the past , and it &apos;s not because i &apos;m an ecologist .
it &apos;s because that means that opportunity is not going to go back to you .
so i want to go into this machine , and i want to go into the future .
this is the greatest time that it ever ever had ever on this planet , no matter , the scale they , wealth , wealth , gelegenheiten .
there was no time to this .
my favorite day all of the time they were 60 .
my grandparents , this number on 70. .
my parents are the 80 to the fersen .
so , there &apos;s better a nine at the beginning of my todeszahl .
but it &apos;s not even about people like us , because this is a bigger thing than that .
a child who is born in the exact same now , as long as the richest american man in the world .
think about it . this is an unbelievable fact .
and why is that ?
smallpox . smallpox got billions of this planet on this planet .
they &apos;ve got the demographics of the world &apos;s demographics in a way , as it doesn &apos;t happen to war .
they are gone . they are gone .
we have bezwungen .
in the rich world , there &apos;s millions of us from a generation of a generation of what &apos;s even more yet .
röteln , röteln , kinderlähmung , kinderlähmung .
anyone else has to know what that is ?
vaccines , modern medicine , our ability to feed the people that are the scientific method .
and from my view , the scientific method , things , if it works , look , whether it &apos;s going to change if it doesn &apos;t do it , one of the greatest achievements of humanity .
so that &apos;s the good news .
sadly , this is already the good news , because there are some other problems , and they were often in the same way .
and one of them is that despite all of our world &apos;s worth of our achievements is one billion people to bed every day .
this is a number , and they &apos;re very quickly , and that &apos;s worth .
and not only that , we have our imagination to be able to lift this world .
drinking , urbares country , rainforests , oil , gas , and if we don &apos;t look at this chaos we disappear .
so the question is : can we do that ? i think .
i think it &apos;s clear that we can produce food , the billions of people will feed each other without the land , which they live .
i think we can do this world with energy , they don &apos;t even have it .
i really think that &apos;s really , and no , that &apos;s not a wunschdenken .
but this is the case of the wach -- one of the things that makes me just as severe the final wach , as i &apos;ve never been as severe as wise as now as now as i would never say , yet .
and we also had never been able to push him down , as we can now .
we are in the cusp , amazing events on many of the population , and yet , i really think that we &apos;re spending hundreds of years before we have to find a time where we &apos;ve been doing in this kind of things that we &apos;ve seen in this kind of things that we &apos;ve seen over this stuff of time , more than now .
people are in their faith , and that &apos;s so closely that you can &apos;t get them .
not even the truth is to free .
and listen , everybody has a fairly close to its opinion ; even a right on its own mind .
but you know what you &apos;re right ?
they don &apos;t have a right on your own facts . &apos; tschuldigung , they don &apos;t have .
and i &apos;ve got a while , to find this .
about a decade ago , i got a paper about a decade ago , &quot; the new yorker &quot; wrote &quot;
and i was amazed to come up on resistance , in the end of what the end of the most effective in public health care is .
i didn &apos;t know what i should do , so i was always doing what i was always going to do , i was writing a paper .
and soon i wrote a paper about genetically paper .
the same thing is , just bigger .
they were playing .
so i &apos;ve been written about to a paper , and i couldn &apos;t understand why people thought that would be &quot; frankenfood &quot; why they thought that molecules was a random kind of herumzuschieben in the field of nature .
but you know , i &apos;m doing what i do . i wrote the article i was going to go .
i &apos;m a journalist , i &apos;m a journalist .
we &apos;re going to do the same , we &apos;re going to eat food , that &apos;s okay .
but these papers i took me , and i couldn &apos;t figure out why , and eventually i found it .
and that &apos;s because these are the same thing that made me crazy .
these were well-meaning people , educated people , educated people , people .
they were just like the people in this room .
and that &apos;s what i got to do so confused .
but then i thought , you know what , we &apos;re honest , &quot; we &apos;re honest , &quot; we &apos;re honest , &quot; we &apos;re honest , &quot; we &apos;re honest , &quot; we &apos;re honest .
we &apos;re at a point where we don &apos;t have the same relationship with progress .
we talk about it .
we &apos;re talking specifically about this , with little twist , &quot; progress . &quot;
okay , there &apos;s reasons , and i think we know what causes that .
we have trust in institutions , in the authority , and sometimes in the science of itself , and there &apos;s no reason why not that .
you can just have some names and people understand .
chernobyl , bhopal , the challenger , vioxx , weapons , the us-präsidentschaftswahl 2000 .
i mean , you know , you can choose your own list .
there are questions and problems with the people that we always have to be right , so they were to be skeptical .
ask questions , demand you &apos;ve got to have a force .
take nothing .
but now it &apos;s : if you &apos;re going to get a chance to accept that evidence , and we &apos;re not good at all .
and i can say that out of the reason that we &apos;re now in an epidemic of fear , as i &apos;ve never seen before i &apos;ve never seen again .
about 12 years ago , a terrible history , the schreckliche of the masern , mumps , and röteln impfstoff in conjunction .
very scary .
and in particular study , we did not see if this is the true .
and the very studies studies are being done ; that &apos;s a serious issue .
the data came in .
the data came from the united states , from england , from canada , from canada , from canada , from canada , from canada , no correlation , no connection , no connection .
it doesn &apos;t make a difference . it doesn &apos;t make any difference , because we believe in anecdotes , what we think we can see is that we feel really comfortable .
we don &apos;t believe in a bunch of a regierungsangstellten colony , which is available data , and i understand that , i think we all of that .
but you know what ?
and the result of it was the result of that .
so , because of this fact , the united states is one of the only countries in the world , where the impfrate is sinkt .
this is skandalös and we should be ashamed .
it &apos;s awful .
what happens is that we could do that .
well , i understand that . i do .
because this is an error ?
this is a single one in the audience ever die of evil ?
not very often very often .
now , in this country , in this country , in this country , &quot; not in the last year .
these are lots of deaths from t.b. through commitment , 20 miles .
but because this isn &apos;t happening here , we can &apos;t do it , and people like grey mccarthy and botschaften of fear as the oprah and larry king live .
and that can you do , because they don &apos;t want to connect cause and correlation .
they don &apos;t understand that these things are going to seem to be , but almost never the same thing .
and this is something we need to learn , and that &apos;s very quickly .
this guy was a hero , jonas salk .
he &apos;s going to be uns by the worst nightmare of humanity .
no fear , no qualen , kinderlähmung , they &apos;re gone .
the guy in the middle is not so much .
he &apos;s called paul .
he just had just a couple of other people to be developed .
he can save the lives of 400- , 500,000 children per year .
pretty good , isn &apos;t it ?
now , this is good , except that paul and über talks , and he talks about vaccines , and that people are just going to stop getting back to them .
and that &apos;s actually what he does .
paul is a terrorist .
if paul was paul in a public anhörung , he can &apos;t be able to do without any kind of money .
he gets to watch home because people would like to tell where your children go to school .
and why ? because paul has made a vaccine .
i don &apos;t need to say , but vaccines are vaccines .
you take them on , and they provide the disease back , horrible disease , and that &apos;s what happens .
we now have this country in this country now .
and that &apos;s what &apos;s worse , and pretty soon , you get the back of it because this is just one question of numbers .
and they &apos;re not just dying of chocolate die .
what about kinderlähmung ? take this , why not ?
a kommilitonin of me gave me a few weeks ago , and i was going to make it a little bit more schrill .
no one has ever before .
she wouldn &apos;t be your kid against kinderlähmung . no one .
fine .
why ? because we don &apos;t have a kinderlähmung . and you know what ?
we had no kinderlähmung in this country yesterday .
today , i don &apos;t know , maybe that morning someone in lagos in lagos in lagos in lagos in lagos , and you &apos;re going to los angeles , at the moment , he &apos;s about illegal .
and in a few hours , he ends up and mietet a car , and he &apos;s coming for long , and he &apos;s going to end up one of the fantastichen asylum tonight .
and he doesn &apos;t know that he &apos;s infected with a lähmenden disease , and we don &apos;t know , because that &apos;s how it works the world .
this is the planet that we live . don &apos;t you like it &apos;s .
we love to stop ourselves in lie . we love this .
you all have put up all their characters tomorrow .
echinacea , a little antioxidantium , which helps you to go on .
i know that you did this , because half the americans is doing every day .
they take the stuff , and they take away from them to cure , and it doesn &apos;t make a difference , how often we find them .
the data looks the time .
they &apos;re verdunkeln your urine . they never do .
that &apos;s okay , you want to be like 28 billion dollars for dark urine .
i agree .
urin . dark .
why do we do this ? why do we do that ?
now , i think i understand , we hate the pharmaindustrie .
we hate it too much government . we don &apos;t have any trust .
and we should not be . our health care system is .
it &apos;s cruel to millions of people .
it &apos;s absolutely amazing cold and seelentötend ourselves to us .
so we walk out of the road , and where we are going to walk ?
we run running in the poor .
that &apos;s great . i love the placebo-industrie .
but , you know , that &apos;s really a serious issue , because the stuff is crap , and we &apos;ll give billions dollars .
and i &apos;ve got all the little ones here .
where it &apos;s -- gingko , fraud , betrug , fraud , acai , da , i don &apos;t even know what that is , but we give it a billion dollars that is cheating .
and you know what ? when i say this , i &apos;m going to say , &quot; what do you want to say , &quot; what do you want ? let &apos;s do it , people do what they want .
you feel good . &quot;
and you know what ? they have .
because it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s the gesundheitsminister , who says , &quot; hmm , i &apos;m going to talk to mammography , i &apos;m going to not be embracing the evidence of my experts &apos;s patients , who &apos;s going to be his patients with kaffe-einläufen .
if you &apos;re going to be on this path where you believe and magic science and science and science , they &apos;ll get to a place that they won &apos;t want to be .
it &apos;s been zu in south africa .
he brought 400,000 his people to join , because he insisted that red beete , knoblauch and zitronenöl much more effective than a more drugs we know that they can be able to hear the course of aids .
hundreds of thousands of unnötiger deaths in a country that worse than any other person will be geplagt by this disease .
don &apos;t tell me that these things don &apos;t have consequences .
they &apos;ve always been . they always have .
now , the most devastating epidemic , where we are in the right now , this is this proposal fight between the befürwortern expressway to the nahrungsmittel foods and the bio-elite .
this is a idiotische debate . it &apos;s got to stop .
it &apos;s a debate about words , over a metaphor .
that &apos;s not ideology , not science .
all we eat , every reiskorn , every branch of petersilie , everybody was changing by the people .
you know , there were no mandarinen in paradise .
there was no cantaloupe-melonen .
there was no weihnachtsbäume . we did this all .
we did it in the last few years .
and some of them worked , and it &apos;s not .
we &apos;re the final world , which is not working .
now we can do it , and of course , there &apos;s risks , and of course , we can help do something like vitamin , and that &apos;s what we can do , and that can help stuff millions of people , millions of people , their lives .
you want to do it ?
i have to say that this is not .
we &apos;re tuned it on the end of the pyramid .
why do we do that ?
now , what i &apos;m constantly suggesting : too many chemicals , pestizide , hormones , hormone , monokultur , we don &apos;t want to be a big idea with a thing that is wrong .
we don &apos;t want to do it , that companies are going to be traced .
we don &apos;t want to have a lot of seed .
and you know what my answer is ?
yeah , they &apos;re right . we &apos;re going to fix it .
it &apos;s true , we have a huge trademark problem , but that &apos;s not science .
that has nothing to do with science .
it &apos;s right , morality .
you know , the science is not a company .
it &apos;s not a country .
it &apos;s not even a idea ; it &apos;s a process .
it &apos;s a process , and sometimes it works , and the idea that we should not allow the science to do their work , because we &apos;re afraid of them , and you &apos;re afraid of millions of people from flourishing .
you know , in the next 50 years , we will have 70 percent more food than the moment . 70 percent .
this investment in africa in the last 30 years .
shame .
they need that , and we don &apos;t give them .
and why ? genetically changed food .
we don &apos;t want to encourage people to eat this verrottete stuff like the example .
so is something that &apos;s going to eat a half billion people .
it &apos;s about like a potato .
it &apos;s just a slight calories . it &apos;s .
it has no nutrients , it doesn &apos;t have a protein , and scientists are building all this straight .
and then people would eat the food and otherwise .
they would not verhungern , and you know what ?
that would be beautiful . it wouldn &apos;t be chez but it would be beautiful .
and all i can say is : why do we fight this ?
i mean , we &apos;re asking , why do we fight this ?
because we don &apos;t want to be a gene ?
it &apos;s not about , gene herumzuschieben . it &apos;s not about chemicals .
it &apos;s not about our sense of hormones , our impact on food , make food .
it &apos;s not about projecting rice , it &apos;s about getting people alive and it &apos;s going to be able to understand people &apos;s time , to understand what that means .
because you know what ?
if we don &apos;t do that , if we do this as far as we do something about that , which we think about , i think , is not guilty , high-tech things .
there &apos;s no description of what happens here .
it &apos;s selfish , it &apos;s hässlich , it &apos;s not worthy of our own , and we have to really have to do that .
so , after this incredibly , they want to ask you , &quot; do you want to stay in this ridiculous and go into the future ? &quot;
anyway , this is what i want to anyway .
at the moment , they &apos;re in present , but we have an incredible opportunity .
we can put this time on anything we want .
we can make them hinbewegen where we want them to , and we &apos;ll move them where we want to move where we want .
we have to think these conversations , and we need to think , but when we go into the time and go into the future we will be happy to have done that .
i know that we can , and as far as far as it is something that needs the world needs now .
thank you .
thank you .
i &apos;ve been interested in the einiger of the placebo-effekt , and it may seem like , as &quot; a delusion of a täuschung , it &apos;s like i , as &quot; a delusion that belongs to something , if someone &apos;s going to believe someone is just like that . &quot;
in other words , zuckerpillen , have shown in some studies a few of the very different effect , the placebo-effekt , and that &apos;s why , for example , if the patient thinks that you &apos;re interested in , for example , if the patient is , what is happening with her , is just a measurable effect of the body , an measurable effect on the placebo-effekt .
it turns out to something , because somebody makes it .
so we also understand each other , i want to show you now , you know , you know , simple magic .
and i &apos;m going to show you how it works . this is a trick that &apos;s at least for the 1950s of the 1950s since the 1950s of the 1950s .
i even photographed him from the cub magic in the 1970s .
i will explain it for you and then it then .
and then i &apos;ll explain why i &apos;m going to go .
so , you see what happens .
the knife knife you can investigate , and my hand , they can study .
i &apos;ll hold the knife in my tracks .
i &apos;m going to return my arts .
and to make sure that nothing in my sleeve , or out of him , i &apos;ll just put my wrist right here .
so , you can see that you &apos;re not going to move your time , so long as i &apos;m standing here , can be nothing in my sleeve , or something .
and the goal is just simply simple .
i &apos;m going to open my hand , and hopefully , if all comes well is good , the knife through my suitcase .
it actually stuck so stuck in its place that i can shake it without the knife .
nothing like this , in my sleeve , or it comes out , no trickserei . and you can do anything .
! !
now , this is a trick i often often walk little kids to be interested in the magic , because you can learn much about deception when you &apos;re actually closer , it &apos;s a very simple trick trick .
probably , many of you here in the room that trick here .
he works , &quot; it &apos;s : &quot; this is what we work .
i think the knife in my hand hand .
i say i &apos;m my wrist umschließe to make sure that nothing in my sleeve , or the end , and that &apos;s a lie .
the reason i &apos;m my wrist , is that there is the actual secret of the illusion .
and then , what i &apos;m looking at my hand of you , so you can see this one of the back here , my favorite , just wandered there , where he was , in a position where he was so removed .
so hard ?
the back of somebody who had no childhood childhood .
so he &apos;s just sitting here . right .
and if i &apos;m looking at umdrehe , changes his position .
and now , you could talk about why this is a deception , why not realize that there &apos;s only three fingers , and the way it &apos;s only three fingers , they &apos;re not count , one , two , three , two , three , but they &apos;re as a group .
but it &apos;s not now , it &apos;s not even though . and then i get my hand .
of course , it &apos;s going to be there , but not by the magnetism of my body , but by a trick , by my zeigefinger , who &apos;s now there .
and if i &apos;m going to pick up my hand , i &apos;m going to take my hand , by watching this movement through this movement , that the fingers will come back .
i take this hand away . and here &apos;s the knife .
this trick , you can put your friends and neighbors . thank you .
now , what do you have to do with the placebo-effekt ?
a year or this , i read a study that was really going to have really taken me .
i &apos;m not a doctor or a researcher , and that &apos;s why i was this remarkable thing .
it turns out , if you &apos;re a dummy pill in a white pill , in a white pill , is just a round of a round of white pill that has a particular set of effect .
but if you look at the shape , you know , for example , in a smaller pill , for example , and this blue color is going to be a letter to the fact that they &apos;re actually measurable .
and that , although not any of it -- it &apos;s just like zuckerpillen .
but one of the white rule is not as good as a blue pill .
what ? that &apos;s really striking me .
but it turns out , that it wasn &apos;t all .
if you take action , the other is more effective than the other shape .
capsule , the key , which is at a end of the other red , is better than a white kapsel .
there &apos;s also the dosierung plays a role .
a pill is not as good as three , like three pillen -- i can &apos;t help you the exact statistics of the very first , sorry . sorry .
but the key thing , there &apos;s ...
that includes the dosierungen games .
and the shape plays a role .
and if you want to have the ultimate placebo-effekt , you have to move on the needle .
right ? there &apos;s a syringe with a wirkungslosen -- a few milliliter substance to exploit a patient .
this creates a very strong picture in your head , and that &apos;s a lot more powerful than a white .
this chart is really , i &apos;ll actually show you another different when we have a waste .
so the fact is that the white is not really good enough , as the blue pill isn &apos;t as good as a kind of simple that isn &apos;t as good as the needle .
and nothing has a really pharmazeutische property , it &apos;s only our belief in creating a stronger effect .
i wanted to know if i could use this idea for a magic .
i &apos;m going to take something that &apos;s obvious , and it &apos;s really , it &apos;s really .
we know from the study that you have to grab on your side if it &apos;s supposed to go to the point .
this is a 18 inches long hutnadel . she &apos;s very , very spitz , and i &apos;ll just pass it a little bit .
this is really my meat . it &apos;s not damians spezielles .
this is my skin . this is not a spezialeffekt out of hollywood .
i &apos;m going to go to this needle into my skin and knock through them , until it goes to the other side .
if you drop it in the hotel -- if you drop easy to them -- i &apos;ve got a few friends last night , and some people i didn &apos;t know , and it &apos;s almost a woman .
so i propose to you quickly , you &apos;ll find your next 30 seconds , or you know what i &apos;m going to do is , i &apos;m going to make the first sketch in front of the first .
you can see it right , you can see , wegsehen , if you want them .
so , it &apos;s so right here where my meat starts to be on my arm , i &apos;ll just make a little einstich .
i &apos;m really sorry . do you crazy ?
and now , just a little bit of my skin and on the other side , on the other side .
now we &apos;re actually in the same situation that we had .
about it .
but now you can &apos;t count my fingers , right ?
so i &apos;m going to show you . this is one , two , three , four , five .
well , yeah , you know , yeah .
i know what people think of when you see that .
they say , &quot; okay , that &apos;s not so stupid and durchsticht themselves , the skin , just to talk about us . &quot;
well , i &apos;ll show you .
what does this work like ? pretty good .
yeah , i know .
and people say , &quot; okay . i haven &apos;t really seen this . &quot;
people in the nebenräumen are now going to come in the back .
let me show you .
this is really my skin . this is not a spezialeffekt out of hollywood .
that &apos;s my meat , and i can browse the herumdrehen .
i &apos;m sorry . if you &apos;re being a bad , look away , look away .
people back the back or the ones that later at all day , you know , here &apos;s a hole , but if it was really , here , here , here , here , here , here , here &apos;s really , it would really really really , it would really really , it would really really , it would really really , it would really really , it
okay , let me give you a little blood for them .
yeah , here it is .
usually i would juggle the nadel .
i would have my arm , and they show you that there are no shortage .
but i think , in this context , and with the purpose , from a deception slightly real , i will just leave the needle in there and so on stage .
we &apos;ll go back to the next few days .
i hope you &apos;re looking at . thank you .
everybody &apos;s talking about happiness .
i &apos;ve been put some people the number of books that are just published with &quot; the &quot; happiness &quot; in the past five years , and they gave us around 40 , and there were many more .
there &apos;s a tremendous wave of interest to happiness .
there &apos;s lots of glücks-coaching .
everybody would like to do people happier .
but despite all of these tide tide , there are several cognitive trappings , which is , sort of , very lucky to think about happiness .
and my talk is mainly going to be mainly about these cognitive ones .
now , this applies to laien that are thinking about their own happiness , and it &apos;s very scientists that happiness is about happiness , because it turns out that we are as likely as everybody else .
the first of this one is a widerstreben , complexity .
it turns out , that the word is not a useful word is more than a useful word , because we &apos;re trying to do a lot of different things .
i think there &apos;s a particular meaning that we could be able to be able to do , but in the large and all of that , that &apos;s what we &apos;re going to do , and we will embrace the complicated perspective on what is called well-being .
the second one is an immensely trap of experience and memory : it &apos;s basically being in his life and happy live in his life or happy with his life .
and these are two very different concepts , and they &apos;re both zusammengeworfen in the idea of happiness .
and the third is the konzentrations-illusion , and that &apos;s the unfortunate fact that we can &apos;t talk about a situation without well-being without calling meaning .
i mean , this is a real cognitive trap .
there &apos;s just no way to get rid of them .
now i would like to start with an example , one of someone who had a frage-und-antwort-sitzung had a sinfonie one of my lectures , who said a time , and it was perfectly glorious music , and there was the end of the recording shot , it was a fürchterliches kreischendes .
and then he added a really big , really quite emotionally , that has the whole experience .
but that didn &apos;t .
it ruined memories of the experience .
he had the experience .
he had 20 minutes of music .
they don &apos;t , they don &apos;t have a memory of verblieben , and the memory was ruined , and the memory was all , and the memory was all that he had to get out .
what &apos;s really saying is that we could think about ourselves and other people think about other kinds of the self might be in the sense of two types of the self .
there &apos;s a erlebendes self that &apos;s in the present , and the present , can be able to experience the past , but essentially the present has the present .
it &apos;s the erlebende itself , the doctor &apos;s office anpricht -- you know , when the doctor says , &quot; hey , it hurts , if i &apos;m going to show you ? &quot;
and then there &apos;s a erinnerndes self , and the erinnernde itself is that the doctor &apos;s history is going to get to the question , and it &apos;s the doctor &apos;s the doctor &apos;s office , and it &apos;s the doctor &apos;s the doctor &apos;s office , &quot; how did you get sick in the last time ? &quot;
or &quot; how did i get to albania ? &quot; or so on .
these are two very different units that are erlebende and the erinnernde itself , and the two , the two is part of the consumer sensibility of the happiness .
well , the erinnernde itself is a storyteller .
and this is really a fundamental response to our memories -- it starts immediately .
we don &apos;t just tell stories if we &apos;re trying to tell stories .
our memory told us stories that means what we &apos;re allowed to retain from our species .
and let &apos;s start with an example .
there &apos;s an old study .
these are actual patients who are a coherent .
i won &apos;t go into the details . it &apos;s not more painful , but she was painful , but when they were in the 1990s .
they were asked to report all 60 seconds about their pain .
and here are two patients . these are your records .
and they &apos;ll ask , &quot; who was to do more ? &quot;
and this is a very simple question .
patient b has been told . his darmspiegelung was longer , and every minute of pain had patient a had patient , and more .
but now there &apos;s another question : &quot; how do they have to do that ? &quot;
and here &apos;s a surprise , is , is , is , is that a surprise , is , is that a surprise , is , is that a surprise , is , is that a surprise , is , is that a surprise , is that a surprise , is that a surprise .
and the surprise is that patient a much worse even worse to the darmspiegelung had to be able to deliver a much worse , and patient b , as a patient , as patient , as a patient .
the stories of the darmspiegelungen were different , and because a very critical part of the history is like you like to end up .
and none of this stories is very erbaulich or great -- but one of them is to be -- but one of them is that i &apos;m talking about ...
but one of them is clear worse than others .
and the ones that &apos;s worse is the schmerz of the pain that was at the end of its climax , it &apos;s a bad story .
how do we know ?
because we have these people to have asked them , and also a lot of later , &quot; how bad was the whole thing ? &quot;
and she was much worse for a b in the erinnrung .
well , this is a direct conflict between the erlebenden itself and the erinnernden themselves .
so b was out of the erlebenden itself , b was a very bad time .
now , what you could do with a patient , and we actually put in clinical trials , and it works , you could have been done , you could just get the darmspiegelung of your patient to a schlauch to try to shake the hose right now without to try to do it without to try to do it without to try to do it without to try to
that &apos;s going to be a patient , but just a little bit less and much less than before .
and if you take that a few minutes , you &apos;ve got to make sure that the erlebende itself is a bad thing to be a bad thing , and you &apos;ve got to realize that the erinnernde itself has a much better than to be a much better story , because now you &apos;re going to have a better story about his experience .
what draws is a story ?
and this is true for the stories that makes it memory us , and it &apos;s also the stories that we invent .
and then a story is umbrüche , and end end , end , end .
end result , very important and in this case , it &apos;s the end .
now , the erlebende itself lives .
it &apos;s got the augenblicke of the erlebens , one of the others .
and they ask : what happens to these moments ?
and the answer is really easy . they &apos;re lost forever .
i mean , most of our lives -- and i &apos;ve got this stuff -- you know , that there &apos;s a whole bunch of 600.000 , which means you know that there &apos;s a whole bunch of 600,000 , and there &apos;s about 600,000 . most of you don &apos;t leave your tracks .
most of you are completely ignored by the erinnernden themselves .
and yet , they sort of get the idea that they should count that what happens in this world &apos;s life that &apos;s happening in this world &apos;s life .
it &apos;s the kind of resource that we consume in the world .
and as we might be , it &apos;s not the story that the erinnernde itself for us .
so we have the erinnernde self and the erlebende themselves , and they &apos;re really quite different .
the biggest difference between you is the time .
from the erlebenden itself , if you have a vacation , and the second week is exactly the first one , the most potent vacation is the most beautiful vacation in the most half of the most potent .
that &apos;s not that way that it is not for the erinnernde itself .
for the erinnernde itself , is a zweiwöchiger vacation vacation , almost barely better than the most talented vacation , because there &apos;s no new memories .
they don &apos;t have changed the story .
and this is time actually the critical variable that &apos;s a erinnerndes self itself is dependent upon a erlebenden self , and that &apos;s time has very little impact on this story .
now , the erinnernde itself makes more and more and stories .
it &apos;s actually , the decisions that makes decisions , because if you have a patient , we say two two of surgeons in two different surgeons , and they decide what he should vote is , the most less bad is that the most less bad is that it &apos;s really the less bad , and that &apos;s the surgeon that will be selected .
the erlebende itself has no voice in the election .
we don &apos;t choose between a erlebnissen . we choose between memories .
and even if we think about the future , we think we don &apos;t usually believe .
we think about our future as a result .
and basically , you can basically look at you , as a kind of tyrannei , and you can think of the most fundamental self as one , that &apos;s sort of sozusagen , which is kind of erlebende by experiences that doesn &apos;t need to be the erlebende .
i have the idea that if we do the idea that we are doing things that is , we &apos;re doing vacation in the service of the erinnernden themselves .
and this is a little hard to justify , i think .
i mean , how much we do from our memories ?
this is one of the explanations that is given to the domination of the erinnernden .
and if i think about that , i think , in antarctica , we &apos;ve been in antarctica , who was clearly the best vacation i ever had ever had ever had ever had ever had ever had ever had ever had ever had ever had ever had ever had ever had to be in relation to how much i think about other urlaube .
and i probably probably have to have this journey of this journey of journey , i would say about 25 minutes long in the last four years .
now , if i ever have the ordner open up with the 600 i would have spent a more hour .
now , this is three weeks , and that &apos;s about seven hours of a life .
there seems to be a one-way idea .
now , i may like a little extreme , you know , how little appetit i &apos;ve been on the zehren of memory , but even if you give them more of them so much weight in the weight of the weight that we give you ?
so i want you to think about a thought experiment .
imagine a holiday , you know , at the end of the urlaubs , all of the images they are going to push up and they get a amnestisches drug , so they &apos;re not going to remember anything .
well , would you choose the same thing ?
and if you think you would choose a different one , there &apos;s a conflict between their own , and you have to think about how they &apos;re doing this conflict , and that &apos;s not even obviously , because if you take a response , and if you think of memories , they might think another answer .
why we &apos;re going to announce the urlaube , we &apos;re going to be a problem that is changing us with a choice between the two types of the self .
well , the two kinds of the self is begriffe from happiness .
there &apos;s actually two concepts of happiness that we can use to one of a hanger .
so you can ask : how happy is the erlebende itself ?
and then you would ask , how happy are the heart of the erlebenden themselves in the lives of the erlebenden ?
and they &apos;re all -- happiness is a pretty complicated process .
which is the emotions that are measured ?
and by the way , we &apos;re now able to get a very good idea of the erlebenden itself over time .
if you ask the happiness of the problem , it &apos;s a very different thing .
it &apos;s not that , as happy .
it &apos;s about how happy , how happy is , is the person &apos;s person , if that person is about their lives .
very different .
anybody who &apos;s not so much that the begriffe of happiness , and i &apos;m also involved to a lot of researchers about why that the planetary of happiness are used to have the erforschung of happiness , and i haven &apos;t have this kind of art. on exactly the way that these are the things that &apos;s right now .
the distinction between the erlebenden itself , and the satisfaction of the erinnernden itself is in the last several years , and now , now , you &apos;re now to measure the two separat .
the gallup organization has a worldwide poll , in which more than a half million people ask about their lives , and think about their experiences , and there &apos;s other stores in the direction .
so in the last few years , we &apos;ve begun to learn about happiness in the two ways .
and the main thing that we think is that they really are really different .
you can know how happy someone with his life , and they really don &apos;t really want to talk about how happy he lives and vice versa .
just to give you a sense of correlation , the correlation is about .5 .
what that means is that if you would meet somebody and you would say , oh , his dad is a zwei-meter-mann , how much would you know about his greatness ?
now , you would think about his greatness , but there &apos;s lots of uncertainty .
they have so much uncertainty .
if i tell you that somebody has its life as a large number of 10 , you &apos;ve got much more about much less about how happy he is with his erlebenden .
so the correlation is gering .
we know something about what the satisfaction of the commons is .
we know that money is very important , goals is very important .
we know that happiness is what happiness means to be happy with people that we like to spend time with people we like .
there &apos;s other pleasure , but this is kind of seductive .
so if you want to maximize the other of the two types of the self , they &apos;re going to do very different things .
the implication of what i said here is that we really don &apos;t really think of really what &apos;s really affordable .
it &apos;s a completely different notion .
now , quite a moment , another reason , you know , we can &apos;t realize that we &apos;re not going to be on the same kind of things that we think about life and if we actually live .
so if you ask the simple question , how happy people are not going to get the right answer .
if you ask this question , you can think that people will be in california to be loud if you say , say , in ohio lives .
and what happens is that if you think about life in california , thinking about the difference between the north of california and other places , and that &apos;s the difference , say , we &apos;re in the climate .
well , it turns out , climate is not very important for the erlebende itself , and it &apos;s not even important for the nachdenkliche itself , that &apos;s how happy people are .
now , because the nachdenkliche itself is responsible , you can end up at the end -- some people would go at the end of california .
and it &apos;s kind of interesting to track what happens to people that are getting stuck in hopes .
now , you won &apos;t be happier .
we know that .
but one thing is going to happen . you &apos;ll think they &apos;re happier , because if you think about it , you &apos;re going to think about how awful the weather in ohio was , and they &apos;ll feel that they &apos;ve got to have the right choice .
it &apos;s very difficult to think about arguments , and i hope i &apos;m going to tell you a sense of that , how hard it is .
thank you .
thank you . i have a question .
thank you .
now , when we got a few weeks ago , i gave up to me that there was a pretty interesting conclusion that came from this gallup poll .
is something that you can let us participate , because you &apos;ve got some of a few minutes left .
daniel libeskind : sure .
i think the most interesting thing that we found in the climate found , is a number that we wouldn &apos;t expect .
we found that happiness &apos;s happiness .
if we looked at the same way that &apos;s the income .
and it turns out , in fact , that among a income dollars , 60,000 dollars a year for americans , and that &apos;s a large representative of americans , but it &apos;s a large representative of americans , and that &apos;s a large representative of 600,000 dollars in the year , under the $ 600,000 acre dollars .
60,000 .
dk : 60,000 .
60,000 dollars in the year are the people getting unhappy , and they become increasingly more likely to ever be poorer .
we get a perfectly flat line .
i mean , i have seldom flat bomb bomb .
what happens is obvious , that money is not a religious case , but that lack of money , money is going to take money , and we can measure this misery very , very clear .
in the spirit of the other self , the erinnernden itself , they get another story .
the more money you make it , you have the more money .
that &apos;s not true emotion .
but danny , in all the american health , it &apos;s about life , freedom , freedom , the pursuit of happiness .
if people would take this befund seriously , i mean , it seems to ask everything on your head , all of us , for example , what we believe in terms of steuerpolitik and so on .
there &apos;s a chance to say that politicians generally generally , that country generally would take a befund like the speed would take and insist on politics ?
dk : you know , i think there &apos;s a anerkennung for the role of the glücksforschung in politics .
the tribute is going to be slowly , slowly , in the united states , no question , but in the united kingdom , they &apos;re just going to happen in other countries .
people are also aware of what they think is to think if you think about politics .
it &apos;s going to be a while , and people are discussing whether they want to be erlebnis-glück or whether they want to be , so we have to be pretty soon .
how do you get happiness to depend on how you think and whether you think of the most fundamental self or think of the most fundamental self .
this is going to affect politics , i think , in the next few years .
in the united states , you &apos;re going to measure the erlebnis-glück of the population .
that &apos;s what i think is in the next one or two decades ago , the first one .
now , it may be , or should you be at least the most interesting political debate , the next few years , the next few years .
thank you very much for the invention of behavioral economics .
thank you , danny kahneman .
i &apos;m jane mcgonigal mcgonigal . i was .
i &apos;ve been online-spiele for 10 years , and my goal for the next decade is to save the world in reality , as they can rescue in online-spielen .
i have a plan . i want to convince more people , including you all the time to play and tollerer play games .
currently , we spend three billion a week .
some of you may think , &quot; this is a whole lot of time for games . &quot;
maybe a little bit too time to think about how many problems we have to solve .
in fact , my research at the institute of the future , is precisely the opposite .
three billion hours a week , don &apos;t have enough to solve the world &apos;s disease .
in fact , i &apos;m convinced that if we want to survive the next century , we need to increase this time .
i calculated that the amount of time is at 21 hours of time a week .
so this seems first perhaps something that might be something more , so i can make it , to be able to do problems like hunger , poverty , climate change , global warming , to play , global warming online , for at least 21 hours to play , to play games for at least 21 hours to play a decade .
no , i mean it really serious .
why ? this picture is pretty much that games , i think that games is so vital for survival of human species in the future .
this is a tudor portrait of photographers .
he wanted to play the feelings to play , so he did the players .
this is one of the classic demographic playing .
if you don &apos;t have any player , you may have some of the nuances in this picture .
you can probably see this sense of urgency , frightening , but also , on also , is a really hard problem in the whole brain problem .
if you &apos;re playing , you see some of these concepts here , the lowest way to the oben , and the mouth are a sign of optimism . the eyebrows show you .
this is a player who &apos;s on the outskirts of a so-called sogenannten .
oh , you know , fine . so , it &apos;s fine . so we have some kind of players here .
a epischer victory is a result that &apos;s so positive that they didn &apos;t know that it was possible at all .
it was almost beyond the imagination .
and if you do it , they &apos;re shocked to be able to do something that they &apos;re actually capable of . that &apos;s a epischer victory .
this one is a moment ago , a epischen victory .
and this is what we need to see on millions of people around the world , if we take the barriers of the next century , the face of all the widrigkeiten am on the outskirts of a epischen .
well , unfortunately , we see that face in real life , if we were tough problems .
i &apos;m like to say it as the &quot; life , &quot; i &apos;m bad . &quot; and it &apos;s actually my face , see ? ok .
i am , as i am , &quot; i am bad , &quot; i &apos;m bad . &quot;
this is a graffiti in my former former soviet research in berkeley , california , where i was in a ph.d. in games , than that &apos;s true .
that &apos;s a problem that many players have .
we think we &apos;re not as good as in reality .
and i don &apos;t just succeed even though that &apos;s been .
we get to get more . i mean , well , in relation to the motivation , to do something more convenient , inspired to the partnerships .
if we &apos;re in a spielwelt , i think that many of us will turn into our minds , anytime and more pleasant , intractable to solve the problem , and generally , are communicating to solve the problem , to solve the problem , it &apos;s like that , it &apos;s like a fehlschlag .
and in reality , when we fail when we go on obstacles , we feel often different .
we feel overwhelmed . we feel miserable , we feel threatened . we feel threatened , perhaps depressed , frustrated or zynisch .
these feelings have never , if we don &apos;t play games .
and that &apos;s what i was going to look like .
why is it in play , to think , you could not just get anything else ?
how can we do these feelings from the reality ?
so i looked like the world &apos;s of of warcraft that exceeds the ideals of collaborative solving solving .
and i have some things that epic bodies grow in online-welten .
so , first , if you &apos;re in one of these online-spiele , especially in the world of warcraft , there &apos;s a lot of different characters that are willing to be ready to give you a weltrettende mission , and it immediately immediately .
but not just a mission , but one mission to your present , which is perfectly to play , right ?
so they do it .
they never get a job that you can &apos;t solve .
but always on the edge of their skills , so they have to do it , but there &apos;s no unemployment in the world of warcraft .
you &apos;re not around , and you &apos;re däumchen , there &apos;s always quite a little bit more serious to do .
and there &apos;s plenty of staff .
where they go , hundreds of people who work with them to raise their epische mission .
we don &apos;t have that in the true life , not just that sense that you have a fingerschnipsen in a fingerschnipsen cost .
and there &apos;s this epic story , this inspiring story , why we are , and what we do .
then we get this whole positive feedback .
they &apos;ve got to say &quot; level tall , &quot; and &quot; + one &quot; is &quot; + &quot; + &quot; + &quot; + &quot;
this is , there &apos;s not a true life .
if i get these stage , i don &apos;t have this : + one farmer and a crazy idea , organic 20 .
i don &apos;t get this feedback .
so , the problem of the kooperations-online-welten like the world &apos;s of of warcraft is that it &apos;s so easy to stand at least , at least , on the outskirts of a epischen , to be our entire time in this spielwelten .
they &apos;re just better than the reality .
all today , all the world &apos;s of million years of azeroth million years to solve problems .
this is not necessarily something bad .
it may sound .
but to see it in the context , back to the context , 5,93 million years ago , practically first began to go back to the first primatenvorfahren .
the first artistic thing is hiring .
okay , so if we talk about how much time we spend time talking about how much time we spend time with play , makes meaning , when you think of the order of human development is going to be in front of your eyes , which is extremely common .
but also , too . because it turns out that we &apos;re trying to do this whole time , actually , what we &apos;re going to do as humans .
we &apos;re developing the capacity to be a good set of information .
this is the truth . i think it &apos;s true .
now look at this interesting one statistic , the recently got from a researcher of the carnegie mellon , the average boy of the starker young man in a country with online-spielen verbringt verbringt 10.000 to 21 hours .
so , 10,000 hours a very interesting number number , from two reasons , to address it , to address it , to address it .
first , for kids in the united states , the precise hours , the precise stunden hours of stunden , hours that they spend the genaue at school , from the high school -- if you never miss .
so we have a complete parallelbildungsweg , people &apos;s just learn what it means to be a good player , like everything else you learn in school .
and maybe some of you may have some new book from the ground , &quot; überflieger &quot; .
so , you know , his theory of the quiet , the theory of the quiet war .
it &apos;s based on the great research of the kognitivwissenschaft research in the kognitivwissenschaft , that if we spend 10,000 hours of a process of a game of their own , we will spend a lot of their feet , we will end .
we &apos;re going to be so good at whatever , as the most important people in the world .
so what we have here is a full generation of the human generation of people who are meister-spieler .
so the big question is : &quot; well , what are the big question is , &quot; what are the great players ? &quot;
because if we could figure that , we would have never before much more gewesenes services .
so many people have at least in the world , the at least an hour a day with a online-spielen .
these are our meister-spieler . 500 million people who are doing extraordinarily well in the &quot; button . &quot;
and the next decade we have developed a more billion people who are doing extraordinarily well in whatever .
if you haven &apos;t heard it .
the spieleindustrie developed entwickelt , the power is saving and on mobilfunknetzen , instead of breitband-internet , so that we can use all over the world , especially in india , brazil .
you &apos;d expect a extra billion gamers of the kind of billion dollars .
so we have a total billion player .
so i started thinking about what it &apos;s like to master the games .
here are the four things i found . first of all : dringlichkeits-optimismus .
ok , imagine what about extreme selbstmotivierung .
dringlichkeits-optimismus is the desire to do something , immediately , to master a hürde to do that we have a hope of hope .
so , in fact , the most of the things always believe that is a epischer victory is possible , and that it &apos;s really worth trying to try and try to try and do it right .
not around .
players are a social networks in the spiders of america .
there &apos;s a lot more interesting , which show that we like , after we &apos;ve gone more , even if they gave us an evil bar .
the reason for this is that it &apos;s a lot of trust , to play with someone playing .
we trust that somebody is time to us that somebody is going to be a lot of the same goal , and then to the end result .
so the zusammenspielen is the wachsen of the ties , trust and interconnected .
as a result , we &apos;re going to build some social relationships .
productivity !
you know , there &apos;s a reason why the durchschnitts-word of warcraft-spieler 22 is 22 hours a week , sort of like a teilzeitjob .
the reason is that if we &apos;re playing , we &apos;re actually happier hard to work when we don &apos;t do anything or anything .
we know that we are going to be as human beings , if we &apos;re hard to do that .
and players are always ready to work hard , if you get the right task .
and ultimately , mental .
so , in the players , it was ausmaße to become part of gebietender ehrfurcht .
here &apos;s a hintergrundinformation , to put this into the right light , you know , all wikipedia , the largest wiki of the world .
the second largest in the world , with almost 80,000 80.000 is the world of warcraft .
five million people use it every month .
they have more information about world &apos;s history in the internet , as a over affirmative subject in each other live in the world .
they create a epic story .
they create a bloody source of knowledge over the world of warcraft .
ok , so that &apos;s four superpowers that are led to a single outcome , and player is super-mächtige , hopeful individuals .
it &apos;s people who believe that they can change the world .
and the only problem is that they are , you can change the virtual worlds , but not the real .
this is the problem i &apos;m trying to solve .
edward castronova is a volkswissenschaftler .
his work is great . he meant that people are so much time , energy and money laundering .
and he says , &quot; we &apos;re going to be judged of less than a massenemigration in virtual worlds and online-spielumgebungen . &quot;
and this is a typical economist . so he logically it .
and he says , &quot; he says , &quot; he says , &quot; he says ... &quot;
not as i am , i &apos;m going to play . i &apos;m a little bit .
so he says that makes sense , because players can actually be more than in the physical life .
you can make some social networking , social networking race , when you &apos;re going to get more meaningful and reward in the physical life .
so he says , it &apos;s currently true that player is more time in the virtual world than the real time .
i agree just to be logical .
but it &apos;s definitely not a optimalsituation .
we need to start changing the real world into a game .
my inspiration comes from a event that 2,500 years .
there &apos;s this fat cube , from schafsknöcheln . you know ?
this fantastic spielecontrollern spielecontrollern was schafsknöchel .
and that was sort of the first people developed the first .
and if you talk about the werken of the old griechischen , you know , maybe this story , you might have this history . the story about how and why games were invented .
according to herodotus , spiele , was genauer , in the kingdom of famine was in the kingdom of famine .
there was a such big famine that the king of lydien themselves .
people are going to be .
it was a extreme situation , and you needed a big solution .
so they invented , according to herodotus , the würfelspiel and vereinbarten national strategy . it would be food at a day . i would play .
and they would be so much in the würfelspiel rebellion , there are games so intriguing and us , glückseliger productivity , productivity productivity , productivity , productivity , they would forget that there was nothing to eat .
and then the next day you would play . and then the next day you would eat .
and according to the herodotus surviving überlebten , she was so long to eat the famine , by the day , and they were playing .
just me , let &apos;s take a games .
we sit down to escape the suffering of the real world .
we sit play a game to avoid everything that won &apos;t work in the real world , particularly that won &apos;t be shining , and we &apos;ll take what we need to play .
but that doesn &apos;t have to be the end .
that &apos;s the exciting .
according to 18 years , after 18 years , the famine wasn &apos;t better , so i was beschloss the king , a last würfelspiel .
they divided the kingdom in two .
they were playing a würfelspiel and the sieger to a epischen adventure .
they escaped back and they did look at the remembrance of a new home , and they were so many people to survive , and looked at the rest of the gegend that they could thrive .
it sounds crazy , isn &apos;t it .
but the latest dna-beweise show that the etrusker , the roman empire that would be the roman empire , the same dna as the old lydier .
so , scientists recently learned to realize that the herodotus story was actually true .
and geologists found evidence of a global abkühlung that almost was almost 20 years , which could explain the famine .
so , this crazy story votes .
maybe you actually have saved their people through play , by a way , saved by searching for 18 years , and then they had this eingebung , and then they were able to play that that they have the entire civilization .
so we can also do that .
we &apos;ve been playing with 1994 .
this was the first strategiespiel in the world of the world &apos;s real time . that was 16 years ago .
they were playing for 18 years , we &apos;ve been playing for 16 years .
i &apos;ll argue we &apos;re willing to be ready for our own purposes .
so , they sent half of their civilization to the time , so i would take my 21 billion spielstunden per week .
we should darin that half of us spend a day a day with play , until we have the world of the physical world .
i know you &apos;re going to ask , &quot; how do we solve real-world of the real-world world in play ? &quot; and that &apos;s what i did solve my work in the last several years of the future .
we have this banner in our office in palo alto , it expresses almost like we should understand the future .
we don &apos;t want to say the future .
what we want to do is to create the future .
we want to introduce the best outcome , and then people get to get this idea into the reality .
we put ourselves together and give people a way to achieve .
i &apos;ll show you a quick line , i designed to try to do people , to even find the elderly in their own future .
this is &quot; world without oil . &quot;
the game is from 2007 .
it &apos;s a online-spiel that they need to overcome a ölknappheit .
the ölknappheit is invented , but we &apos;ve inherited enough online-inhalte , so it &apos;s available , and you can actually get enough life without oil , and you &apos;re actually going to figure out how to be realistic , and you actually get enough life without oil , and you &apos;re actually going to figure out how to be realistic , and you actually get enough life without oil
we &apos;ve got this game with mammals in 2007 , and we &apos;ve got it since over the last three years .
and i can tell you , it was a really serious experience .
no one wants to change because it &apos;s good for the environment or because we should .
but if you &apos;re in a epischen adventure , and they said , &quot; we &apos;re going to go beyond oil . &quot;
this is an amazing adventure that you &apos;re about .
if you find it , as they were , most of our players have established the game .
so we &apos;ve got to play for the next century , so we &apos;re bigger goal than just screwing .
we have the game &quot; at the center of the future . &quot;
so , the calculation of a supercomputers that is only only 23 years on the planet .
this supercomputer is called the global aussterbungs- sensibilisierungs-system , of course .
the call of gamers , it &apos;s almost like a &quot; jerry-bruckheimer &quot; -film .
you know jerry bruckheimer-filme , where there &apos;s called &quot; dream-team &quot; -- you have the astronauts , the scientists , the ex-sträfling and just put the world .
but in our game , instead of 5 people , say , everybody is in the dream-team , and it &apos;s our job , the future of energy , food , safety , safety and the future of social justice .
8,000 player were playing the game for eight weeks .
they found 500 of creativity , they can read if they were called &quot; superstruct . &quot;
and the last game we put on the third of march . it &apos;s a game in collaboration with the world bank .
if you finish the game , you get the world bank award , &quot; they made active .
we work with universities in a whole way of sub-saharan africa and shop , social learning .
we have a comic book . we &apos;ve got &quot; level to &quot; for regionales understanding , &quot; sustainability , sustainability , sustainability , vision and ingenuity .
i want to invite you to all of them , all the way , all over the world , especially in entwicklungsgebieten , who are doing , and they benefit together to save their own social enterprise to rescue the world .
now i &apos;m going to finish up .
i want to ask you .
what do you think is going to happen next ?
we have all these fantastic player , we &apos;ve games that show us what we can do , but we don &apos;t have the actual real world .
well , i hope you told me that players players are human resources that we have to work in the real world , and that games have a big meaning for change .
we have this whole superpowers , glückselige productivity , the ability to make social networks , dringlichkeits-optimismus and the desire for epischer .
i really hope that we &apos;re going to play together , to be able to survive on this planet .
and i hope you &apos;ll play with me playing with me .
if i &apos;m going to vorausschaue , i &apos;m going to make sure that we can create each space future , and that we can play all kinds of games .
so i say , let &apos;s start the weltverändernden games .
thank you .
i would like to tell you something about what i thought about a few months ago , a machine for a magazine .
i always used to write my synonym-wörterbuch , but i was at the end of the day , and i was never done in my life , and i was never living in my life , which is the word &quot; disabled &quot; . &quot;
i &apos;ll read the post ahead .
&quot; disabled , &quot; verkrüppelt , zerstört , zerstört , zerstört , zerstört , zerstört , verstümmelt , verstümmelt , geschwächt , geschwächt , altersschwach , altersschwach , altersschwach , altersschwach , altersschwach , altersschwach , altersschwach , altersschwach , altersschwach , kaputt , kaputt , kaputt , kaputt , kaputt , siehe , siehe , siehe , nutzlos , nutzlos and weak .
antonyme : healthy , leistungsfähig .
i &apos;ve got this list in a friend , and i had to read this list , it was like , but i was able to read it , but i was able to read the list , and i had to stop reading about this überfallartigen wortflut and the damit emotionalen .
of course , this was a ausgefranstes , altes synonym-wörterbuch . i just thought that the output was already being quite old .
but in fact , it was a copy of the 1980s when i was playing with the elementary school , when i was caricaturing with the elementary school , and started by my family &apos;s ready to build and shapes , too , too , and to the rest of the world around me .
and god is very much to me .
i would take this post seriously , i would have been born in a world that someone like a person , whose life would be able to perceive , whose life would be able to do , but i &apos;m going to be gefeiert for the opportunities and adventure that i &apos;ve experienced .
so i was going to look at the online-ausgabe of 2009 , and i expect that i think you &apos;re going to find a ansprechenderen .
here &apos;s the most promising version of this eintrags .
and that &apos;s not a lot better .
in particular , i &apos;m going to put the last two words under &quot; near &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot;
but it &apos;s not just about words .
it &apos;s about what we think about people we describe with these words .
it &apos;s about the values that are in these words , and how we construct these values .
our language affect our language affect our language , and how we see around the world and see us .
many of altertümliche societies , including the greek and the transformation , the fact that the pronunciation has a big force , because what you can do is loud , can also manifestieren .
so what do we want to do is manifestieren -- a disabled people or a human person ?
alone , people alone as a kid , they could make the ausreichen , they &apos;ll be supported and they &apos;re going to pass .
wouldn &apos;t it be beautiful , you &apos;re going to open your doors ?
a man who opened up , my pediatrician was at the a.i. dupont institute in wilmington in delaware .
he called dr. pizzutillo . a italo-amerikaner , whose name , whose name is not going to be correctly , so i was called dr. p. .
and dr. p. was always very bright , and was working for work with kids just like it .
i found the time i &apos;ve spent in this hospital , just to my physiotherapie .
i had to do some of the youngsters often repeat with these dicken , elastic bändern -- they know that my favorite bein-muskeln , and i &apos;ve got these heroic more of our minds than anything else , and i hated her , i &apos;m going to put them up . i &apos;m sure you .
and imagine , i &apos;ve been as a fünfjähriges kid with dr. levels of expression and so trying to stop this drills , natürllich without success .
and one day he woke me at one of my studies -- these very heavy were just ermüdend and gnadenlos -- and he said to me , &quot; aimee , aimee , aimee , aimee , aimee , aimee , aimee , you &apos;re going to be as much as a force and young girl , you &apos;re going to be a big deal of one day .
and if you give it , you give you a hundred dollars . &quot;
this was just a simple trick to me so much so i &apos;m going to take the exercises in the second floor , but he actually got me to be able to get my daily übungs-horror with new täglichen with new eyes , so it was so much of a new and vielversprechendes .
and i wonder how much his vision was being strong and powerful and i could imagine , as a symbol of nature , and i could imagine as nature , and atlethischen to see .
that &apos;s just one example of many , like adults can be a child .
but as the examples of the synonym-wörterbüchern , we don &apos;t have our language to imagine what we all would have to do is to make it every single thing to do themselves as a sighted people .
our language hinkt the societal changes that have been produced in many instances by a technological change .
from the medical standpoint , you can say that my legs , the legs , the laser-chirurgie for sehbehinderungen , kniegelenke , kniegelenke for sehbehinderungen , kniegelenke , kniegelenke , to develop a own identity to the shape of titan and artificial hüftgelenke for the world , and they start to gruppen in the world to gruppen , and to the world , they &apos;re going to be able to
perhaps this technological change clearly , because the technological change was ever , that each person &apos;s always quite passionate and highly powerful , that everybody has a very powerful thing to be able to do is to adapt our biggest system .
the human ability -- this is a interesting story , because people always felt me to tell you how i &apos;m going to talk to widrigkeiten and i always wondered with the people who never would have to do to try to answer the questions of people to answer to the question , and i think , i understand why .
this sentence from the idea of communicating with the widrigkeiten of the idea that success is so successful , because i was going to be able to master the potential drop of a prothese of life , because i could have a lebens of life , or whatever people have heard with my disability .
but the truth is that we change . of course , we are obsessed from the challenges whether you &apos;re physically , actually , emotionally or even both of them even , emotionally or even both of them even both of them .
and i &apos;ll argue that it &apos;s good .
widrigkeiten are not a barrier that we need to get to work with our lives better .
widrigkeiten are just going to our lives .
and i tend to see widrigkeiten as my shadow .
sometimes i was very present to present , sometimes he &apos;s hardly , but he &apos;s constantly .
and i want to invite the effect of the kampfs of the kampfs of a human .
there are widrigkeiten and challenges , and they &apos;re just alllzu real and the question doesn &apos;t mean , whether we &apos;re not sure of widrigkeiten , but not how we get to that .
so we &apos;re not just responsible for that , which is that we preserve , but they also try to get to preserve it to get to that .
and we don &apos;t want to give our kids , if we give them feeling , they can &apos;t be able to adapt .
you have to separate things : to a medical fact , to be more than the medical fact , and to the social opinion , whether i &apos;m disabled or not .
and to be honest , the only real act and some of the things that i had to put apart is that the world is constantly , they could describe me with these definitions .
in our desire , the people who are aware of us , and you can predict the cold , hard truth to ask , we have to think that we don &apos;t have to wonder that we don &apos;t have to understand the idea of what is someone in fact is that .
perhaps the idea of what &apos;s concept is just a lot of what &apos;s going on in a broken way , and how we repair the repair , for each individual , greater disability than the pathology .
if we don &apos;t have a person , and not all of its forces , and we create in addition to the natural fight , which you might lead to , another disease .
we degradieren a man who has value for our society .
so we have to look beyond the patologie out and look at all the most part of human populations .
most of the most important thing is that it &apos;s between perception of our industry and our great erfindergeist , a connection .
we should not solve these herausfordernden , or we &apos;re not trying to avoid them , we should not try to avoid the carpeting , but it &apos;s about to see what the widrigkeiten in the widrigkeiten .
i think it &apos;s rather about to ensure that we don &apos;t necessarily have to have to have a fully fully fully fully to overcome them to the schopf to raise a kampf-ausdruck and maybe even with it .
and maybe we can do it , widrigkeiten as a little natural , stimmiges and useful and feel like that presence doesn &apos;t improve .
in this year , we celebrate the 200 . and geburtstag from charles darwin , and when he wrote about 150 years ago , darwin , in my eyes , in a very human nature .
i would like to start it so , not the most powerful person , and not the most intelligenteste of its kind , but the ones that changes it can be .
there &apos;s a little bit of creativity .
not only do you know , we know that the ability of people , to survive and aufzublühen , from the struggle of human mind is to be determined by conflict .
so , again , change and persistence are the greatest skills of people .
and maybe we know , we &apos;re going to be able to get the time we really become more .
possibly , is that the sense of widrigkeiten , a sense of the ichs , a sense of our own force .
we can make ourselves something .
we can give a new meaning to the past time .
maybe we can see a widrigkeiten duty .
so , for a change for a change that we haven &apos;t yet adapted .
i think the biggest damage that we have to have is that we should be normal .
let &apos;s face who is normal ?
there &apos;s no normal .
there &apos;s common . it &apos;s not the normal normal , and they would really know that poor person , to know , to learn , &quot; to learn what if they really have to be really ?
i think , rather than that .
it would be great if we could resist this paradigm against the possibility of the possibility or the strength to formulate it , so we can even make a bit more dangerous qualities , and they invite them to invite your own special and valuable ability to do .
anthropolgen have found that we &apos;ve always found that we &apos;ve always been trying to afford the members of our society , and to afford to afford to afford to afford to afford to do .
there &apos;s been hints of verletzungen injuries with , and that would be happened to be körperlichen in the middle of the people for society , and that happened , because the lebenserfahrung in the überlebenskampf of this group , because the lebenserfahrung in the überlebenskampf of this group was valuable to society .
they don &apos;t have these people as they and useless ; they treated as a little bit special and valuable .
a couple of years ago , i went to the town in the town i grew up , in the town in the northeast of pennsylvania , and i was standing there before a scheffel .
it was summer , and i had shorts .
and i hear like a guy behind me , &quot; well if that &apos;s not aimee mullins . &quot;
and i &apos;m calling and see this older man , i had no idea who he is .
and i said , &quot; well , we know what we &apos;re ? i can &apos;t remember you . &quot;
and he said , &quot; well , she &apos;s oblivious to me .
when i saw her first time she was in my mother &apos;s . &quot;
oh , so the one .
and of course , it &apos;s made .
this was dr. kean , a man , the man i was given by the day i knew i had this day , because i decided to get to my birthday at my birthday .
the doctor &apos;s office in my mom was in the holiday , and so my parents had the man who was brought me to the world , not .
and because i was born without copyright protection , and my feet had been brought back to them , and i was born with the other fuß , and i was the überbringer , the fremde was to the bad news .
he said to me , &quot; i had to go your parents to come and never would be like , and i never would have a independent life , and then they were just lying to me , and then they just lie . &quot;
so i found that he was really looking at my entire childhood , whether i was zeitungsausschnitte zeitungsausschnitte of my entire childhood , and he used these clips to teach his students or a senior student , and he used these clips to teach his students or a sportlichen , medizin-studenten out of the hahnemann medical school , and he used to teach his students , und medical school .
and he called this part of his kurses , the potential of the human being .
you can &apos;t just have enough , as critical of the quality of life in quality of life .
and then , dr. kean told , he said , &quot; i &apos;ve learned that children , if you weren &apos;t told you , and even if you were just not going to get a little bit more , if you make kids yourself , you can get a lot of things . &quot;
see , dr. kean has changed .
he had understood that the medical diagnosis , and how somebody do it , two different things are .
and i also think my thinking in the course of time , if you were asked me at age 15 years , i would have my prostheses against legs from meat and bones , i would have no second gezögert .
i was going to be normal .
if you ask me , i &apos;m not sure that &apos;s not so sure .
and this is because i &apos;ve been carrying something with my legs , and not despite it .
and maybe this change also happening because i &apos;ve got so many people who gave me a doors , instead of trying to encounter me , rather than to encounter me , rather than begegnen me .
you see , it takes a person who knows how you can make their powers and can make their powers powers , and they &apos;re through .
if you &apos;re somebody to somebody , your own , inner powers -- the human spirit is so empfangsbereit -- if you open up , and for someone in a crucial moment , you open up a door , they &apos;re a very good teachers .
they bring them to open oneself .
the real meaning of the worts &quot; suck in the word &quot; educe . &quot;
it means something that means that in a sense that &apos;s potential .
again , what do we want to do is we &apos;re doing now .
in the 1960s , in the 1960s , in the 1960s , in the 1960s , gymnasien gymnasien in gesamtschulen .
they call &quot; streaming trials &quot; in the united states , we call this as &quot; tracking . &quot;
the students will go to grades .
and the next pupil will be geprüft , they get better teachers and so forth .
they then have a dreimonatigen period of students with a &quot; dirty course , &quot; i told them , they were very clever , they were asse , and after these three months , they really wrote einser .
and of course , it &apos;s been hearing in the heart , the other things were told the einser-schülern that they were just sufficient .
and just as it was then after three months after that .
but only those who still were -- except for students that would put the school .
and in this study in this trial was that teachers weren &apos;t .
the teachers didn &apos;t know that something changed .
and they just realized that the einser-schüler and the students are the students that are the students , and just as you treated them and they &apos;re treated .
the only real progress is a gebrochener mind , the broken , no hope , no more schön. , our natural natural , and our innate enhance our capacity .
but if we do it , if we do , to help the human mind to help , to hope , even to other people around the way around , and to find the phantasievoll , to be able to be able to do , and then we put our forces into a positive .
if a mind about these qualities are able to understand , we can create a new reality and new arrangements .
i want to end with a poem that was written by a persischen poet called hafiz im , but the poem is called &quot; god , &quot; any child god , &quot; any child god , &quot; any child god , &quot; any child god , &quot; any child god , &quot; any child god , &quot; any child god , &quot; any child , &quot; every child is always
come on . thank you very much .
how would you better than they are right ?
suppose i said that , by a few changes of their genes , a better memory -- and faster , and faster .
or you want to be more powerful , more power .
you want more attractive and confident ?
how would it be to live in good health ?
or maybe you &apos;re one of those who always creativity creativity .
what would you like most of the most ?
what would you like to do , if you could just have one ?
creativity .
how many people would choose creativity ?
raise your hands . let me see me .
a few . probably , about as many as there are creative people here .
that &apos;s very good .
like many would love for a good life ?
you know , a few more .
how about fitness ?
some less .
what is longevity ? &quot; ?
ah , the majority . i loved , as a doctor .
if you could only one of them have , it would be a whole other world .
is this all lovely ?
or is it possible ?
the evolution is a andauerndes subject here on the ted conference , but i want to tell you the idea of a joke .
the big geneticists in the 20th century , t.g. dobzhansky , who was also a kommunikant in the russian orthodox , &quot; i was writing a piece of a paper that was like &quot; no idea of evolution in biology . &quot;
now , if you &apos;re one of those who don &apos;t have the evidence for biological evolution -- i &apos;ll give you the permission -- and maybe you can get your personal kommunikationsgerät , and maybe you can put it on a look at the permission -- and maybe you can get your personal kommunikationsgerät , because nothing else &apos;s talk about this talk about any sense of them .
but if you accept biological evolution , you can see it , is it just about the past , or it &apos;s about the future ?
it &apos;s not for others or even it &apos;s us ?
this is another glimpse of life .
in this painting , i have a bush as a center of the verzweigungen in every directions , because if you look at the edges of life , because if you look at the edges of life , because if you look at the edges of life , they &apos;ve survived the edges of the life , and it &apos;s got its environment , and starches .
the human part of this busches , far at the end , is , what we &apos;re most interested in most of them .
we &apos;ve been teaching from a collective ancestor of modern chimpanzees we have about six or eight million years ago .
in this period , there may be 20 or 25 of different varieties of hominids .
some of them have come and gone .
we &apos;re for about rund years .
it seemed to be , as we would be right from the other parts of the life , but actually , in the most fundamental , are the fundamental mechanisms that are fundamental mechanisms .
clearly , you know , we can pull out of that , and the mechanisms of a collective bacterium can flow to produce the protein of human services , which is used to treat the diabetiker .
this is not like humaninsulin ; this is the same protein that &apos;s chemically ununterscheidbar of what &apos;s going to come from .
and we &apos;ve been talking about bacteria , what is you aware that each of us in our gut , more bacteria than the cells in the rest of our body ?
maybe 10 times .
i mean , think of , if antonio damasio is going to tell you , think about the bacteria .
our gut is a wonderful gastfreundlichen environment for this bacteria .
it &apos;s warm , it &apos;s dark , it &apos;s very painful , it &apos;s very comfortable .
and you &apos;re all going to be able to play all nutrients that they could only provide , no longer provide .
it &apos;s really a lighter way to bacteria with occasional unterbrechungen , jeodch , forced to the exit .
but , contrary , they are a wonderful environment for these bacteria , just as they are important .
it &apos;s helping to the digestion of alternative , and they protect them against certain disease .
but what will come in the future ?
are we in a kind of evolutionäres balance in form ?
or are we going to be something else -- something that might even be better at the environment .
now let &apos;s go back to the time of the big bang , 14 years ago -- the earth , the first mehr-zelligen organisms , maybe as 800 , or a billion , maybe as 800 , and then the human species that are going to end up in the last several years .
in this enormous unvollendeten of the universe is the life on earth is just a single building , and the animal of the human life , a small notenverzierung .
we were to .
this is also the most important of this talk , so i hope , d .
now , when i was a neuling on college , i had my first biologiekurse .
i was fascinated by the elegance and beauty of biology .
i fell in power in einzelligen organisms , and i posed a very basic solid : in most of life organisms , is in most of life , rockets is a cell that is cell , and all the genetic information in einzelligen organisms , in both tochterzellen .
but at the time , as a mehrzelligen organisms began to change things .
misuse of water growth is going to go into the picture .
and especially important : the advent of the sexual growth that is the genome is , the rest of the body .
indeed , you say that the most unausweichlichkeit of the death of death in the same instant corresponds to the same moment as the sexual layer .
now i have to confess , if i was a college-student , i thought , well , sex / death , a very reasonable / death -- it seemed to be very vernünftig at the point , but it &apos;s been to my gain .
i &apos;ve come to come to understand the feelings of george burns who in las vegas have been vorführte in the &apos; 90s .
and one night is there &apos;s a pat of his hotelzimmertür .
he opens the door .
he &apos;s a beautiful spärlich spärlich .
they look at it and says , &quot; i &apos;m here for super-sex . &quot;
&quot; this is beautiful , &quot; says george &quot; i &apos;m going to take the soup . &quot;
i came to the realization as a doctor , i was a goal in the other way that i was listening to the goal of evolution -- not necessarily inevitable , just different .
i tried to maintain the body .
i wanted to keep us healthy .
i wanted to rebuild the health of a disease .
i wanted to lead a long purpose and healthy life .
it &apos;s all about the amount of the genome that &apos;s next generation , and so generation generation .
from a evolutionary standpoint , they &apos;re in the nächste , and i like booster rockets to send the genetic fracht into the next stage of orbit to take care of it .
i think we would all be the mood that the greatest customers would understand , &quot; i don &apos;t want to get to the point of myself .
i want to do it by stopping . &quot;
evolution doesn &apos;t mean to be more valuable .
it &apos;s not the most popular way , the most of the strongest , or the fastest , and not even the first time .
evolution the creatures that are best for the best position to adapt .
it &apos;s only the test of survival and success .
based on the bottom of the ocean , bacteria , the thermophil , and they &apos;re dadurch to the hot spots , would be flying in there , it would be andernfalls , if fish were , they &apos;ve done it , they would have done a bewohnbare environment .
so what does that mean when we look at what happens in evolution , and how we &apos;re thinking about the space , and how we &apos;re thinking about the space , and particularly we &apos;re going to say , &quot; we would say , there &apos;s a number of possibilities .
the first one is that we don &apos;t get to get us .
we reached a kind of balance .
and the reason that we were able to get us from medicine , we &apos;ve been able to get a lot of genes to get a lot of genes that have otherwise been otherwise in the otherwise would be the otherwise would be in the otherwise distance .
and secondly , we have a powerful , our environment is so konfiguriert that we &apos;ve done it , we adapt to us adapt precisely we adapt to us precisely ourselves , we adapt to the point of ourselves .
and by the way , we &apos;re exploring , and they &apos;re so much that they can &apos;t say that , that means that isolation is necessary to evolution , for evolution .
a second possibility is that it &apos;s a evolution of the traditional way , of course , the forces of nature .
and the argument here is that the wheels of evolution are becoming more complex .
and so far , the isolation , when we are as a species , if we were to go to all odds , it will be in charge and change the environment that evolution is affecting natural gas .
but there &apos;s a third opportunity to create a verlockende , and a verlockende , and terrifying , and financial is the way of financial intelligence , and financial and financial and financial and financial and financial source , and financial , the way to be able to bring it .
i call it neo-evolution -- the new development of this , of course , the new development of course , is , but it &apos;s also led and decided to make us as a demonstration of the decisions we do .
well , how could that happen ?
how could it be possible to do that ?
now , let &apos;s look at the reality that people are today , in some cultures , are doing some cultures .
they &apos;re , in some cultures , the choice , to have more men than women .
it &apos;s not necessarily good for society , but it &apos;s the thing , what the individual and the family .
so think , if you can &apos;t just be able to choose your gender , but also to be able to make the body &apos;s body , the disease would heal and the disease .
what if you could do the genetic change , to remove the natural world or alzheimer &apos;s disease or more than that would eliminate public health care or more ?
wouldn &apos;t want to make these changes in your genes ?
if we &apos;re going to be vorausblicken , this kind of changes that are possible .
the human genome project started in 1990 , and it took 13 years .
it cost $ 2,7 billion dollars .
in the following year , when it was 2004 , they could do the same thing for 20 million dollars in drein until four months .
today , you can have a sequence of three billion-dollar of the human genome towards a price of about dollars in about a week .
it &apos;s not going to be long long to be more long to the reality , that it &apos;s going to be the 1,000 dollars in the world , and it &apos;s going to be more available for more .
one week ago , the national academy of the national academy of engineering , the national academy prize winner , the national academy prize winner , two of the natural process of science and willem stemmer , two scientists , two scientists , two scientists , and to wünschenswerte proteins in a sense of a relative way -- called frances arnold .
a couple years ago , the lasker-preis dem dem yamanaka verliehen verliehen for his research in the cell department of a adult hautzelle , and through the manipulation of only four genes , the cell , the cell , to become a pluripotenten stammzelle -- a cell potentially in your body .
these changes are in the coming .
same technology , that can make the human insulin in bacteria , they can &apos;t do any protection of themselves , but also to the immunity against other viruses .
whether you believe it or not , it &apos;s a experimental study in the gang with vaccine against the cells in the cells of a tabakpflanze .
can you imagine something good , that &apos;s from tobacco ?
this is all reality and in the future will be much more .
imagine two different little changes .
you can change the cells in your body , but what if you could change the cells of your own ?
what if you could change the sperm and eizellen , or the newly befruchtete egg to be able to ei their children a better chance to be a better chance to give a better chance -- the diabetes , the hämophilie , the hämophilie , the hämophilie , the hämophilie , the hämophilie , the hämophilie , the hämophilie , the hämophilie , the hämophilie , the hämophilie , the
who don &apos;t want to do ?
and then the analytical technique , the same motor of science can enable the change of science to avoid disease , also allow us to adopt financially super-attribute -- saving a better memory .
why don &apos;t have the schlagfertigkeit of a ken jennings hben , especially if you can extend it , the next generation of the watson-maschine ?
why not have the fast muskelfasern that will allow them faster and longer to go ?
why not live longer ?
these are unwiderstehlich unwiderstehlich .
and if we &apos;re on a place where we can pass it on the next generation , and we &apos;ve got to adopt the attributes of the union that we want to be transformed from alt-stil evolution .
we &apos;re going to have a process that &apos;s in the rule of the rule of 100,000 years , and we can take it back to a thousand years -- and maybe even the next 100 years .
these are decisions with whom their grandchildren , or their grandchildren , their grandson are going to be .
we use this decisions about the shape that &apos;s better , the more that &apos;s more than that &apos;s what is more secure ?
or we &apos;re very much different attributes that we want to have some of us , and not for others ?
we &apos;re going to form a society shapes and uniformierter , or robuster and vielseitiger ?
these are the kinds of questions we need to meet .
and most of all , we will ever be able to develop the wisdom and the wisdom that we need to make this decisions ?
in the good case , and they used to be thinking , they &apos;ll be able to tell us .
thank you .
i want you to imagine something that you &apos;re going to imagine , a portable robot that gives you übermenschliche skills or another , the rollstuhlfahrern helps you get to go back and go back and go back and go back and go back and go back and go .
we call the berkeley bionics of these robots .
they &apos;re not something else than something that you &apos;re going to get in the morning and your velocity , and they will help you to keep your balance .
that &apos;s where the real world &apos;s population is created by man and machine .
but not only that -- and they connect them with the universe and others there .
that &apos;s not just a crazy idea .
now to show you now , what we &apos;re working with , we start talking about the american soldiers , which is about 100 pounds on his back to his back , and it &apos;s about the anfrage that they should wear more equipment .
of course , this leads to some significant significant , 30 percent of them -- chronic rückenverletzungen .
so we thought we would embrace this challenge and build a exoskelett , that would help improve with this problem .
so let me show you now now , or the human universal carrier .
and the soldier : with the hulc-exoskelett , i can sprinkle 200 pounds of verschiedenartiges terrain , many hours long .
so , in design , it allows to be able to go deep deep and highly wendige movements .
it feels what i want to do where i want to go and then , and then i put my strength and perseverance .
we &apos;re far as far as with our industriepartner of this device , this new startup field in this year .
so it &apos;s true .
now let &apos;s look at our view of the past , something that i particularly passionate about .
there &apos;s 68 million people who are in the world &apos;s seats .
this is about one percent of the west .
and this is indeed a conservative estimate .
we often talk about a very young people who are in the prime of their lives -- 20s , 40er , 40er -- from fate , and the wheelchair is the only option .
but it &apos;s also about the most population of the population , the number .
and so rather than that &apos;s pretty much of the only option -- if you &apos;re about a hirnschlag , or other people -- is the wheelchair .
and so it &apos;s been the way for 500 years , since his , really successful , really successful .
so we thought we could start to write a whole new polio-free chapter in the area .
let me introduce you now , now , let me show you now , the head of amanda boxtel , which was 19 years ago , who couldn &apos;t run more than i could run more than 19 years ago .
thank you .
as i said , amanda , our elegs .
it has sensors .
his vollständig sensors in the crutches , the signals zurücksenden on our onboard-computer , which is on your back .
here &apos;s also batteriepackungen , the motorantrieb is sich on their own , and so as to their kniegelenken , which they &apos;re moving forward , in this fairly geschmeidigen and very natural gas .
i was 24 years old , and in bestform , when a monströser purzelbaum was a skiabfahrt mich .
in a fraction of a second , i lost every feeling of a second , and every motion below my life .
not too long after a doctor in my krankenzimmer and he said , &quot; amanda , you &apos;ll never go again . &quot;
and that was 19 years ago .
he &apos;s got steel hope from my consciousness .
anpassungsfähige technologies have ever come to ever learn to learn from being able to drive and go to the hands to drive .
but nothing was invented me back to me , until now .
thank you .
as you can see , we have the technology to make us and share with you .
it &apos;s in our hands and we have all the potential here to change from the future generations -- not just for the soldiers or amanda and all the bathroom , but for amanda here .
thank you .
at home in new york , i was a boss of a non-profit organization called robin hood .
if i don &apos;t get the poverty , i &apos;m clicking a gehilfe of a feuerwehr-hauptmanns in a volunteer löschzug in a volunteer hospital .
now , in our city , in the stadt of town , you have to be very early on the brandstelle to be able to get to mitmischen .
i remember my first fire .
i was the second volunteer volunteer at the brandstelle , so i had quite a good opportunity to do .
but it still was still one more than the other volunteers to achieve the verantwortlichen and figure out what our jobs would be .
when i found the hauptmann found , he had just been in a very serious conversation with the hausbesitzerin who certainly had a der of their life .
it was in the night , and she stood in the schlafanzug and barfuß under a parachute out of the strömenden , while you put in the house in flames .
the other volunteers came to me was -- let &apos;s call him lex -- was -- that &apos;s the hauptmann when the first volunteers was to rescue the house and the dog of the dog .
the dog ! i was a therapist .
there was a lawyer or vermögensverwalter , who &apos;s now for the rest of his life , telling people that he was going to rescue a living organism to rescue a living organism to rescue a living organism , except five seconds .
now , i was the next .
the hauptmann winkte me .
he said , &quot; honey , you have to go into the house .
you &apos;ve got to go to the top , and you have to get this woman &apos;s wife a pair of shoes . &quot;
i swear .
now , not exactly what i hoped to me , but i went out -- the stairs high , the flur , the hallway in the end of the &quot; &quot; the &quot; real &quot; feuerwehrmännern over time , the treppen , the flur , the flur in the bedroom , the way to get the shoes .
i know what you &apos;re thinking , but i &apos;m not a hero .
i was going to get my prey back to the bottom , where i was looking at the muscle my speech and the loved ones .
we put our treasures our grandchildren out of the hausbesitzerin , where , not surprisingly , much more attention than mine .
a few weeks later , after the feuerwache , the feuerwache , in which they were interested in the brave einsatz in the rescue of your house .
one story was kindness , we had a pair of shoes .
both in my profession at the robin hood , as a freiwilliger in my nebenberuf as a prime , i &apos;m witnessed , von of generosity and freundlichkeit in the big scale , but i also see the nächstenliebe and the muts of the individual .
and you know what i &apos;ve learned ?
they &apos;re all important .
so if i look at this room and people see , which are either already going on a beachtenswerten success , or on your way , i want to go down to a memory : wait a memory of a student .
wait for a difference in life another one in another one another , until you &apos;ve reached your first million .
if you give something to you , you &apos;re going to right now .
you can use to put them in a suppenküche , and they put a park in the neighborhood .
be a mentor .
not everybody day will give us a chance to save lives of a human being , but every day gives us the opportunity to change one .
so they put it on ; they save the shoes .
thank you .
bruno : mark , mark , come back .
thank you .
i &apos;m going to come from a community that the secret of humanity &apos;s secret .
a place where the women &apos;s doing the zepter , with sex , and the game is the day -- where are fun of a serious issue .
and no , it &apos;s not rocket science or san francisco .
ladies and gentlemen .
this is the world of wild bonobos bonobos in the wild .
bonobos are actually equipped with chimpanzees our next living relative .
so that means we have a common ancestor , a evolutionary grandmother , which is about six million years ago .
well , chimps are known for your aggressivität .
but unfortunately , we have this aspect of the most popular construction in the narrative of human evolution .
but bonobos show us the other side of the kingdom of the kingdom of the kingdom of the kingdom of the kingdom .
as chimpanzees , by large , almost einflößenden kerlen are kerlen , will be die by ermächtigten .
and they really do what strikes up , because this leads to a broader toleranten society , in the lethal force was not yet .
but unfortunately , bonobos are familiar with the primates of the primate .
they live in the deep sea , and they &apos;re just accessible to go to zugänglich .
congo is a paradox -- a country of an amazing biodiversity and beauty , but also the heart of darkness , even in darkness , which is the heart of darkness , and almost as many lives , almost as many lives as the world war .
it &apos;s not surprising destruction of the bonobos risk of risk .
and the rückgang of the baumbestandes is leading to be a stadion mit with the verbliebenen bonobos bonobos , and even there we are not sure to be honest .
and yet , in this country , violence and chaos , you can hear a verborgenes , that the trees can absorb .
who are these relative ?
we know it &apos;s called &quot; love &quot; love &quot; -affen , &quot; because they have häufigen sex , including sex sex , and rules like this conflict and social networking .
i &apos;m not saying that would be the answer to all the humanitarian -- because life of the bonobos is from more than the kama .
bonobos -- like people -- love it , you don &apos;t like to play .
game doesn &apos;t mean just kinderspiele .
for us , and it &apos;s kind of fundamental for the attachment of connection and the care of tolerance .
and we learn trust and the rules of the game .
so bright , creativity and resilience , and it &apos;s about the diversity of diversity -- diversity at interactions , diversity of behaviors , diversity of behaviors , diversity of connection , diversity of connection .
and when you see bonobos to play , you see the evolutionary origins of human menschlichen , dance and rituals .
play is the kitt that &apos;s uns .
now , i don &apos;t know how they play , but i want to show you some unique footage from the wild .
first of all , a ballspiel auf -- and i don &apos;t think about it .
so here we see a young female and males in a verfolgungsspiel .
look what she does .
this could be the case of the evolutionary origins of &quot; she takes him to the eggs . &quot;
i think it &apos;s like it &apos;s like it &apos;s not true .
yeah !
so sexspiele are common , both in bonobos , in bonobos .
and this video is really interesting , because it shows -- and this video is really interesting , because it shows the ideenreichtum that you can bring new elements into the game -- like the testicles -- and also , as the game is both trust and more -- while it &apos;s a time .
but the game is a formwandler .
game is a formwandler and it can assume many shapes , from which some of whom are ruhiger , phantasievoll , curious -- maybe to find the outcome .
and i want to show you that &apos;s fuku , a young female , and they &apos;re playing with water .
i think , just as it &apos;s how we play sometimes alone , and we loten ourselves our inner worlds .
and it &apos;s this playful curiosity that gives us to see , and interact , and the unexpected , we &apos;re forming , are the actual reason of creativity .
this is just a little vorgeschmack on the insights of the insight that &apos;s going to us in our past .
but they also also think about a secret for our future , a future where we have to adapt to collectively challenges through bigger creativity and druch .
the secret is that the game is the key to these skills .
in other words , play , game is our high-capacity .
so , in a more effective world , we need to play .
but we &apos;re going to make the best of our proverbial ?
game is not silly , not silly .
it &apos;s essential .
and people are equally equally life not made of teeth and claws alone .
just when it &apos;s rarely angebracht , maybe the nötigsten .
and so my favorite , let &apos;s put us this gift of evolution , and together , as we play the creativity and the wonder .
thank you .
i want you to imagine two pairs , the same day , at the same time , at the same moment , every baby &apos;s zeugt .
so two pairs , every single baby .
now i want you to use too much time to imagine the zeugung , because , if you look at the whole time , they won &apos;t listen to me .
so , think about a moment .
and in this scenario , imagine that in a case that &apos;s a y chomosom thing that is going to x chromosome on x chromosome .
and in the other case , the sperm x chromosome , that x chromosome chromosome .
both are überlebensfähig , both .
we &apos;ll come back to these people .
i &apos;ve been on most of my activities .
under a hat , i &apos;m going to dwell with the story of anatomy .
i &apos;m a brilliant historikerin , and in this case , i &apos;m like humans with anatomie umgingen -- that &apos;s the same body -- that they have mit umgingen , with körperkonzepten umgingen , like they thought about bodies .
other hat that i &apos;ve been worn in my work , the activist of the activist , as a patientinnenanwältin -- or how i sometimes say , when i say , when i say , by people who are patients .
in this case , i worked with people who have been working with people who are social norms .
so i &apos;ve been working with people who are siamesische twins , two people in a body .
i worked with people with zwergenwuchs , so people who were smaller than they were .
and i &apos;ve been very often with intersexuellen people whose gender atypisch is -- so people who don &apos;t have the average male or female female .
and as general , we can use the word for the word .
intersexualität &apos;s coming in many different forms .
i &apos;ll just give you a few examples of geschlechtsvarianten who don &apos;t know what the male or female .
in one case you might have someone with a xy chromosomenbasis , and the sry gene of y chomosoms , the protogonaden , the protogonaden , which we all have stage all of time .
and therefore , they give the testes off the fötalen testosterone .
but because this individual is the legal fehlen to see the testosterone , the body isn &apos;t going to the testosterone .
and this is called androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so much testosterone , but not a reaction to it .
as a consequence , the body is more than the typical side of the characteristic of creation .
if your child is born , it looks like a girl .
she &apos;s a girl . she &apos;ll be brought up as girls .
but it takes it to you the puberty and their breasts and their breasts and their breasts and their breasts and they &apos;re developing them , until somebody &apos;s going to come to that there is something else .
and they &apos;re doing some tests and figuring out that they instead of instead of eierstöcken and gebärmutter , and it &apos;s not a y chromosome .
and it &apos;s important to understand that you could actually be able to think of this person for actually a minute , but they &apos;re not really .
women , like men , have in our body , something called adrenalindrüsen .
they &apos;re in the back of our body .
and the nebennieren represent androgene androgene , which is hormone hormones .
most women , as i am -- i think a typical woman is not to be -- i don &apos;t know what my actual chromosomenaufbau is not , but i think i &apos;ve probably been on the typical -- most of the women as i actually competed on androgene .
we produce androgen and we &apos;re talking to androgene .
the implication is that somebody like me actually , that &apos;s more androgenen , that more androgenen was exposed to mine , who was born with severe , and a androgenrezeptor-defekt .
so gender , you &apos;re really complicated ; don &apos;t just get the middle of the spectrum of the spectrum of gender -- in a sense , you can have the entire range of bandwidth .
even an example : a couple of years ago , a few years ago , i received a 19 19 student , who was born , had sex with his girlfriend , and he was just found out he was found he eierstöcke and had a uterus .
he had a moment of a angeborenen nebennierenrindenhyperblasie .
he has xx , and in the womb , the mutterleib were so strong , his nebennieren so strongly really active that they &apos;ve made essentially a male hormonumgebung .
and as a consequence , his genitalien was his genitalien , his brain was the most typischeren male teil .
and when he was born , he saw like a boy , no one boy like there .
and he wasn &apos;t until he was 19 years old , he got enough medical school , in fact , because he innerlich the doctors that he was in the inner city .
okay , just a quick example of a woman &apos;s disease .
some people with xx chromosomes , something that &apos;s called the ovotestis , which is eierstockgewebe of hodengewebe .
we don &apos;t know exactly why this is happening .
so , so , in many different varieties , laundry .
the reason why children with this kind of body -- was it zwergenwuchs or siamesische twins , was es twins , and from surgeons , to the norm , is not because this is not because this is a physical capacity of advantage .
in many cases , these people are completely healthy .
the reason why are often different kinds of surgical is going to be made , because they threaten our social categories .
and the typical post-conflict is our system based on the idea that a particular scientific form of certain identity .
so we have the concept that a woman is to have a female identity ; it &apos;s a black person , is supposedly , a african anatomy of mine is going to have to have a african anatomy of your history .
so we have this awful idea of being an idea .
and if we were faced with a body , that &apos;s actually something really different , what we &apos;re doing on these kategorisierungen .
so we have a lot of civil culture that we have a lot of civil war .
and our nation is really focused on a very romantic concept of individualismus .
now , you can imagine how it &apos;s going to be when children are born who are two people in a body .
where i had most of excitement in my last time , the südafrikanische läuferin was caster semenya letztes last year , whose gender was asked to gender in berlin in the leichatlethik berlin .
many journalists me , i ask me with the question , &quot; what test you will do , is whether or a doctor &apos;s semenya ? &quot;
and i had to explain to the journalists that there is no test .
we now know that gender is a lot of gender , that gender is not enough to be the nature of a positive and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and female and
so we have a situation where the further our science , we &apos;d be more confident that these categories were actually very concerned that we &apos;ve had to be concerned more comfortable , which we have to do more at creating germ delicate , much more comfortable than we have .
and that &apos;s not just in gender .
it &apos;s also about to be aware of race , which is much more complicated than our terminologie has been allowed .
in our case , we &apos;ve got all kinds of bereiche areas in our own fields .
we also like the fact that we &apos;ve at least 95 percent of our dna in common .
what are we going to start with the fact that we are just through a few more dramatic situation ?
as we continue to continue our science , we get progressively progressively more in in a zone of the unbehagens , where we need to realize that the most primitive categories that we might have probably .
we see this in all sorts of life .
one of the areas we see this to the beipiel , in our current culture , in our current culture , in the current current , are the fighting over the onset of the onset and the end of life .
we &apos;ve got tough talks about what point is to people , that &apos;s what it &apos;s right is right as a lot of life .
we have a very difficult event , perhaps not as public as the question is , when someone &apos;s dead .
our ancestors had never been hard on hard to fight when someone was dead .
they have somebody under a spring , and if they moved back , they didn &apos;t have it .
if you don &apos;t get more , you buried it .
but today we are in a situation where we are people living organs and they want to tell people to work .
and as a result , we &apos;re going to be able to deal with the fact that we really difficult , when someone &apos;s dead , and that &apos;s what it &apos;s really hard to do in a really hard situation where we don &apos;t have much like earlier .
now , you could assume that the whole thing was going to do that , and they really would really do happy .
i &apos;m politically progressiv , i verteidige people with severe bodies , but i have to admit it &apos;s worth me .
and realize that these are really much more insecure than we thought it was .
and it &apos;s been blessed to be done in terms of democracy .
so to tell you about this anspannung , i &apos;ve got to say that i &apos;m a big fan of the founding .
i know they were rassisiten , i know they were sexisten , but they were great .
i find they were so high , and so radical , what they did was that i was throwing all of my paar 1776 1776 das 1776 1776 , and it &apos;s not because of music that is completely forgotten .
it &apos;s because of what 1776 with the gründungsvätern .
the founding fathers were out of my view , the original anatomischen activist , and that &apos;s why .
what she was zurückwiesen , and they put it through another , which was radical and beautiful , and 200 years for us .
as you remember , the concept of the monarchy of monarchy , and the monarchy of the monarchy of the monarchy of the monarchy of a very small concept of anatomy .
the pregnant world had no concept based on dna , but they had a concept of the geburtsrechts .
they had a concept of blood vessels .
they were the idea that people who had given political power , because of the vererbten blutlinie of the day blutlinie blutlinie from the day and so on .
the founding fathers took the idea behind and put them through a new anatomisches concept , and this concept that everybody was going to be launched .
they nivellierten the spielfeld and decided that , as a result , the lack of the zählten , not the difference . and it was very radical .
now , they made it to the part because they were part of a aufklärerischen system , in the two things together .
democracy has been , but at the same time , science continued to science .
if you look at the history of the founding fathers , it &apos;s clear that many of you are interested in science , and they were in a concept of a naturalistischen world .
they went from the explanations of the way , and meadows a psychic concept of power , back , where the transmission was on a very vagen set of geburtsrecht .
they moved to a naturalistischen concept .
and if you look at the declaration of the declaration of a sense , you &apos;re talking about nature and the god nature .
they don &apos;t talk about god and the nature of god .
they talk about the power of nature , to tell us who we are .
and as part of this , they &apos;re talking about a concept that was about anatomischen .
and so they &apos;ve got to really enjoy the future .
they didn &apos;t think about it , but what they did was great .
so what was going on ?
for example , women used to be the wahlrecht , the concept of the founding , that &apos;s actually not significant enough that we should not have the most wahlrecht , which is to be quite property that we should not have the most wahlrecht , which is to be right in your own , etc , etc , etc . , etc .
and women &apos;s argumentierten .
next thing that came to the age of the age , where we looked at people like sojourner truth , who are , &quot; i don &apos;t have to miss woman ? &quot;
we find men in the marschierenden reihen , who say , &quot; i am a man . &quot;
again , people separate different skin who were murdered to anatomische , and they were successful .
we see the same at the behindertenrechtsbewegung .
of course , the problem is that , as we start to look at all the commonalities , we need to start to think about why we &apos;re going to be certain trennungen .
well , i think , i want to look at certain trennungen , anatomisch , in our culture .
i want to say to the fish , for example , the same rights as people are .
i don &apos;t want to take the way we should have to do .
i don &apos;t want to say that 5-jährige &apos;s right to sex you want to get sex or getting married .
so there &apos;s some anatomic trennungen that are doing for me , and we think , i think , should avoid .
but the challenge is to figure out what it &apos;s and why we retain them to them and whether they &apos;re good .
so , come back to those two creatures that have led to the coverage of the talk .
we have two creatures , both of the center are the same day .
let &apos;s imagine that one of them , maria , three months ago , she &apos;s the one of june 1st of june .
and the other hand , the other hand , it &apos;s born , he &apos;s at the one who &apos;s born in the one who &apos;s born in the one who &apos;s born in the previous page of 1980 .
just because of the fact that maria months was born , so they all possible possible rights in front of things , three months ago -- that &apos;s quite a einvernehmlichen sex -- that &apos;s fairly sex sex -- that &apos;s right , to drink this right .
and to all of this , not wait for all this , not because he actually has a different biological old , except for the zeitpunktes of his birth .
we find other people &apos;s rights , you know .
and the other thing you say is that he &apos;s a male -- although i don &apos;t told you that he &apos;s a männlich , that he &apos;s a male , which is going to be männlich , which doesn &apos;t have to be able to do about what &apos;s going to worry about .
maria , can &apos;t be able to see the same right , the things in all of the states , and that &apos;s right to marry .
and in fact , in every state , a woman , but maria can only live in a few days a woman .
so we have this continuity of anatomischen categories that are mapped in many ways .
and for me , the question is , what are we going to do , because our science is to make progress in the area of the area of the area of the area that we have to admit that a democracy that &apos;s going on on anatomy .
i don &apos;t want to give science science , but at the same time , it feels like the science is going to be aware of it .
where do we go ?
it seems like our culture is a kind of pragmatic posture of the random posture , &quot; well , we have to pull a line , so we pull them out . &quot;
but a lot of people have a lot of people in a very strange position .
so , for example , has a point in the point , texas has decided that you don &apos;t have a y chromosome , and a woman means that you have a y chromosome .
now in practice , people don &apos;t get their chromosome .
but it &apos;s also very bizarre , because of the history , i &apos;ve been told you about the androgenrezeptor-defekt .
if we look at a founding the founding fathers of modern martin , dr. martin luther king , who said , &quot; i have a kind of solution to me . &quot;
he says we should not say , &quot; your skin color , but after the property of their character , &quot; judge , and goes beyond anatomy .
and i want to say , &quot; yeah , this sounds like a really good idea . &quot;
but how do you do that in practice ?
how do you get people to your charaktereigenschaften ?
i also want to point out that i &apos;m not sure that we should distribute , i have to say that i should distribute a series of golden , which is probably going to make a series of golden , probably the benefits of the most golden , some people i know .
i want to remind you of a bunch of labradorhunde , the fähiger are fundiertere , intelligentere , intelligentere and reifere decisions about their sexual relationships as some of the 40-jährige that i know .
so how are we going to move the question of character &apos;s properties ?
it turns out to be difficult .
and part of me , what if the content was something that would be something that would be made in the future of a maschinenlesbar -- can be made of an actual movie .
do we really want to go into this direction ?
i &apos;m not sure where we go .
what i know is that it really seems important to think about the idea that the united states is in the united states is to be thinking about questions of democracy .
in our business , democracy , democracy , we &apos;ve done our thing done , and i think we would do our jobs in the future .
we don &apos;t have the situation , as it &apos;s in iran where a man who feels the death rate of the death rate , it &apos;s ready to be a geschlechtsumwandlung to become a geschlechtsumwandlung , where he &apos;s going to stay in .
and not this way not exist .
i &apos;m happy to say that we don &apos;t have this big one -- a surgeon that i was talking about a few years ago , who had twins had twins to make them , to be able to make a name .
but when i was going to work with him , and he asked why he had this eingriffe , and it was highly riskante -- was his response , that children were going to be treated , and that &apos;s why he had to do it .
i replied , &quot; well , you have a political point in a private sector , rather than a surgery ? &quot;
the united states is tremendous opportunities to be the ones that they are , without that they &apos;re going to change the state of expression .
so i think , we must be .
all right , just to realize that i &apos;ve talked about the fathers .
and i want to think about the possibility of democracy , or you have given the mothers to have the mothers .
and i want to say something that &apos;s radical for a feminist , and that &apos;s what i think is that there are different kinds of things that could be done by various kinds of anatomy , insbesonders people a gruppendenken .
for years , because i was interested in the field of intersexualität , i also have to research research in the domain of the geschlechterdifferenz .
and one of the things that i really found interesting is the difference between men and women in the way they do in the world , as you think and in the world .
what we &apos;ve learned from kulturübergreifenden studies is that women , in the average -- not any one , but in the average -- not any of social relationships and the benefits of people who are within the group that are much more attention to .
and that &apos;s why we think about how we have a very interesting situation .
i was a reporter to ask me , asked me , asked me , asked me , asked me , my interest in feminism -- i was looking at as a feminist , so it &apos;s a really big deal .
he said , &quot; you tell me what &apos;s the hidden female . &quot;
and i thought , &quot; well , this is the stupidest question i &apos;ve ever heard .
feminism is about gender stereotypes about gender , so that &apos;s not the hidden zero .
but the more i &apos;ve been thinking about his question to make more thought that there was something more weibliches in the mirror .
the idea is , there might be something to say , in the average , what they &apos;re doing social relationships , and that &apos;s what they &apos;re doing social relationships , and aufmerksamer for the schutzbedürftige .
so where the founding fathers grew extremely powerful , as individuals were being able to buy more mothers in this concept , we have more of that if we were able to make more mothers in this concept , not just as you can protect , but how to do it for each other .
and maybe it &apos;s what we &apos;re going to do in the future , and if we &apos;re talking about anatomy of anatomy -- less about the individual body , to think about connection , and more about relationships .
so that if we &apos;re going to try to make a more effective connection , we think we think about what we can do for each other .
thank you .
i &apos;m a jessi , and this is my suitcase .
but before i show you what i &apos;m going to do in it , i &apos;m going to make a very public tree , and that &apos;s : i &apos;m obsessed with outfits .
i love to anyone to anyone , to find a different farbenfrohes , verrücktes bodies , to wear and inadequate in the past time .
but i don &apos;t buy anything .
i get all my clothes out of the second hand , and in second-hand-shops .
thank you .
so second-hand-shopping allows me to reduce the impact of my science to the environment , and also the end of my purse .
i meet all kinds of times , my dollars for a good purpose for a good purpose , i look pretty unique ; it &apos;s very much to my own schatzsuche .
i mean , what will i find today ?
it &apos;s my size ?
i will like the color ?
it &apos;s less than 20 dollars ?
if all the answers , i feel like i &apos;m won .
i come back to my suitcase , and i &apos;ll tell you what i &apos;ve been doing for this exciting week at ted conference .
i mean , what does somebody with so many of outfits ?
so i &apos;m going to show you exactly what i brought .
i brought seven , i brought seven , and this is all .
so , i got a week , all of a week , anything i &apos;ve done in my suitcase .
i &apos;ve been wondering that i could wear anything i would find , would find if i was going to go back to the palm of the springs .
and since they didn &apos;t heard me from me , when the woman who are here at ted in your underwear , it &apos;s called that , i found some stuff .
and i want to show you my tidied show for this week .
sounds ?
i &apos;m going to do this , i &apos;m going to show you some of the lessons i think if you believe it or not , from this abenteuern , i learned anything new .
let &apos;s start with sunday .
i call this the luminous tigers .
you don &apos;t have to spend a lot of money to look like .
you can almost be used for less than 50 dollars .
this whole life , including the seed , inklusive me , and it was the most expensive piece that i carried in this whole week .
monday : color is something .
it &apos;s almost impossible to be bad , bad gelaunt , if you &apos;re going to be hellrote .
if you &apos;re happy , you &apos;re going to other people .
tuesday : all the way down to be completely überbewertet .
i &apos;ve spent a lot of time in my life trying to try and i was myself to be , and i &apos;m going to try and work at the same time .
just be who they are .
if you &apos;re going to surround the right people , they won &apos;t just understand it , you &apos;re going to estimate it .
wednesday : hug your typical child .
sometimes people say i looked like i &apos;m playing , or i &apos;m going to remember i remember .
i &apos;m sorry , and i say , &quot; thank you . &quot;
and confidence is the key .
if you think you &apos;re going to look at something good , it &apos;s almost secure .
and if you think that you don &apos;t look good , you probably have right .
i grew up with a mother that day me .
but i was just 30 , i really understood what that means .
and i &apos;ll just wrap up with you .
if you think that they are inside , and there &apos;s a wonderful person , there &apos;s nothing that you can &apos;t .
so there &apos;s no excuse not for anyone here in this audience .
we should be able to rocken all the way we want .
thank you .
friday : one universal truth -- five words : golden staircase .
and finally , saturday a matter of unique , unique style , is a great way to tell you about a word without understanding a word .
it was always been and over and over and over and over and over and over and over and over and over , just because of what i was wearing . and i had great conversation .
obviously , it &apos;s not going to be all of this in my tiny suitcase .
so before i go home , i will , i &apos;ll never get this again .
because the lesson i learn to learn about this week is that it &apos;s okay to go .
i have to do this stuff , because the corner will always be a different crazy , farbenfrohes , strahlendes , strahlendes , strahlendes , das , just to me , if i was a little love of the heart , and it &apos;s looking at .
thank you very much .
thank you .
good afternoon , all together .
i have something that i want to show you .
think about this as a fliegenden , as a flying .
this is what we call our lab to our lab .
let me tell you a little bit about it .
so if you take this picture -- i &apos;m originally going to take a italiener , and every boy in italy is growing with this slide in the past several decades , but the reason i &apos;m showing you this is something that &apos;s going to happen in the past several decades .
so , sometime ago , it was so that if you wanted to win a formula , they would choose her budget and put money on a good driver and a good car .
and when the car and the driver &apos;s good enough , they won &apos;t run .
now today , you need a race , you know , you can actually win , like this one -- something that happens to the system , some thousand sensors , the information that information car , some thousand sensors , and then they use the auto to make decisions and make it back to the next few and things in real time during the information .
this would you like , in ingenieurteams , a echtzeit-kontrollsystem .
and basically , it &apos;s a system that comes from two parts of it -- a spürenden and a reagierendenteil .
what &apos;s interesting is that the most echtzeit-kontrollsysteme is actually beginning to live in our lives .
our cities were able to have been working with networks and electronics with electronics and electronics .
they &apos;re going to be in the free .
and as a computer , you start to go on other ways , and they &apos;re going to be involved and harder .
if we herrichten cities , it &apos;s actually a big thing .
just by the way , i want to mention that cities only two percent of the world &apos;s land , but 50 percent of the world &apos;s population live in there .
they &apos;re 75 percent of the energiekonsums -- for 80 percent of co2 emissions .
so if we do something with the cities , it &apos;s a big thing .
over the cities , the following all of this kind of wahrnehmen and antreiben in objects of the body .
this is from a show that has given the paola antonelli for moma , during the summer , the sommers .
it &apos;s called &quot; my mind . &quot;
now , all our objects , our environment , to speak to us .
in a sense , it &apos;s almost every atom of any atom out there , a sensor and a antreiber .
and the changes radically radically different , which we have people with our environment .
in a sense , it &apos;s almost as if the old dream of america is about michelangelo .
you know , as a car crash , it &apos;s called it to the end , it means he took them to the hammer , and i said , &quot; perché non ? &quot; why don &apos;t you do you fake ? &quot;
now , looking at our environment to answer us .
i &apos;m just going to show you some examples -- again , with the idea of our environment , and it &apos;s accessible .
let &apos;s start with .
now the first project i want to show you is in the truth of one of our research .
it was in italy , four years ago .
and what we did was actually a new kind of network that was deployed around the world -- that &apos;s a mobiltelefonnetz -- and all kinds of information and aggregierte information from this network , aggregierte information from this network , which is the operators of the operators to understand how the city works .
the summer was a happy summer .
it was as a italy , it was in italy .
some of you may remember , it was as italy against france , and then tacked at the end of the end of the kopfstoß .
and no matter , italy , you have a gewonnen in the end .
now , now you look at what happened on this day , just when the watch the activity that happens in the network .
here you see the city .
you see in the middle of the kolosseum , the fluß tiber .
the morning , before the play .
you see the top .
early , people here and there are the phone calls and move .
the game starts at -- silence .
france makes a gateway . it &apos;s a gate .
halbzeit , people make a short call .
second halbzeit . end of normal theory .
first is a little bit of a second .
zidane , in a moment of the kopfstoß .
italy wins . yeah .
well , in this night , everybody in the center of celebration .
they saw the big den .
the next day , everybody went into the center of the siegerteam and the prime minister to hit .
and then all the time .
you see the image of the late of the space , circo , where the last time that people go to the celebration -- to have a big party , and you see the end of the day .
now , this is just one example of how we feel the city , in a way we couldn &apos;t plan for some years ago .
another example of the fact , here &apos;s not about people , here &apos;s not about people , but to make things that we use and consume .
now , today we know , our things are going on .
this is a map that tells you that chips show you , you have a mac of computer , like they came together .
but we know little bit about where the things go .
so we actually designed a few little markers to follow the waste as the waste as it goes through the system .
so we &apos;ve started with some volunteers that will give us something more than a year ago , in seattle , the things that they would have -- different kinds of things that they would see -- different kinds of things that they would be .
then we put the little chips , which little brands , and then started to follow it .
here &apos;s the results that we &apos;re going to get .
from seattle , &quot; seattle ... &quot;
after a week .
so we realized that there &apos;s a lot of ineffizienzen in the system .
we can do the same things in the same way .
the data was not available .
but this is a lot of unnützer transporte and more complicated things .
the other thing is , we think that if we see that if we see , that if we see , that if we see , that if we see , that the cup we see is that it &apos;s still somewhere on the planet .
and the plastic bottle that we still remain every day .
and if we were going to show people , we can do a behavior of a behavior .
so that &apos;s the reason that project .
my colleague at mit , assaf biderman , could you have a lot more about the other and the many of the other wonderful things that you can do with , but i want to talk to the second part of the second part , we &apos;ve been at the beginning of the process , and that &apos;s the most basic component of our environment .
and the first project is something that we did in zaragoza , spain .
it was starting with a question of the bürgermeisters that came to us and said that it &apos;s really a nice tradition of public places of becoming different kinds of water as part of architecture .
and the question was , how could you make new technology with it ?
and one of the ideas that was at mit in a arbeitskreis ermittelt , imagine , imagine , imagine this one , valves , magnetventile , valves , valves , who are open and closing .
they &apos;ll be like a wasservorhang out of water .
if this bildpunkte , you can write them , you can make patterns , images , text .
and you can see him , and he &apos;s going to open up to you to let them feel like you can see on this picture .
well we &apos;ve launched the mayor belloch .
it &apos;s got really gefallen .
and we got the mission to design a building of the expo .
we called it the digital water .
all of the buildings out of water .
there &apos;s no windows or windows , but when they &apos;re going to go , it &apos;s open and they go .
the roof was also covered with water .
and if it &apos;s an amazing , if you want to get the bed nets , you &apos;ll even go the roof .
or you could turn the buildings , and the whole architecture of how in this case , you know , this one , you get the roof , you get the roof of people who were there and say , &quot; they have broken the building . &quot;
no , they don &apos;t touch the building , it &apos;s just that architecture is almost disappear .
here you see how the building works .
you see the person who will go through what happens in the inner .
and here you see me when i was trying to test the test of sensors that will opened the water , not getting wet .
now , i should tell you what &apos;s going to happen as a kind of sensors .
but actually it was in this night , a more deeply fun .
all the children from zaragoza came to the building , because the way she was completely different .
no longer a building that would open up , but a building that &apos;s still going to happen and holes in the water , you had to be able to get your eyes without getting wet .
and that was , for us , very exciting , because as architects , engineers , thinking about how people are thinking about how people are the ones that we create .
but the reality is still unpredictable .
and this is nice to create things that are using the use and with people .
here &apos;s a picture of the building with the physical bildpunkten , the bildpunkten hybrid water water .
and this is what we &apos;ve got to show up about this , what we &apos;re going to show you now .
imagine this delightful thing could really start with flying .
imagine , they could have little helicopter that are flying through the air , and each of you with a small bildpunkt with a small bildpunkt with wechselndem light -- almost like a cloud that can move through space .
here &apos;s the video .
imagine a helicopter , like the ones you saw earlier , who is moving with others , completely .
you can have this cloud .
you can have a kind of flexiblen display , or display like this -- a smooth formation in two dimensions .
or nuclear in three dimensions , where the thing that changes , the light is not the position of the bildpunkte .
you can play with different kinds of different ways .
imagine the screen could just be able to do different or sizes , in different auflösungen .
but then it could only be a 3d cloud of bildpunkten , where they can put on and through the way they move , they can look from many , many ways .
here &apos;s a real flyfire-steuerung , the herabsinkt to form a gleichmäßiges .
if you turn the light on it , it looks like we &apos;ve seen before .
imagine that every single one of people will be controlled .
it could be every single one impulse , which is , of people coming from people or something .
i want to show you something too .
we &apos;ve been working with roberto bolle , one of the best balletttänzer in our time -- the étoile of the metropolitan in the middle of the middle of theater , and the scala in milan -- we &apos;ve got to use his movements in 3d to use them as an impulse to use them .
here &apos;s roberto dancing .
on the left side , you see the bildpunkte , the different eingefangenen sensations .
it &apos;s actually a echtzeit-3d-scan and a bewegungsaufnahme .
so they can actually claim that .
you can do this all the time .
but then , if we &apos;ve all got to have all of the bildpunkte , they can play and play with color motion and drehbewegung play .
this is what we want to use as an entity for the flyfire .
i want to show you the latest project to work .
it &apos;s something we &apos;re going to work for the olympic olympics in london .
it &apos;s called the cloud .
the idea is , imagine , imagine that we &apos;re going to do something that we call people to do something that we call it , wolkenbewegung , like we call a scheunentor , but with a cloud .
imagine that each one can give a little donation for a bildpunkt .
i think that &apos;s remarkable of the last few years , the last few years , is that we &apos;re going to be a physical world .
this has all been able to know everything , and it makes it through the internet .
now , today , we can take the first time -- and the campaign has been shown -- can we change the digital world , from the digital world forces that the physical world can change the physical world .
that can be in our case that we use it to design and create a symbol .
this is something which is built in the city .
but tomorrow can it to ask ourselves to the challenges -- think of the climate change or the co2 emissions -- how can we change the digital world .
so the idea is that we actually actually do the people with the way that they &apos;re doing things together .
the cloud is over again , in the same fashion as a cloud is a cloud of particles .
and these particles are water , while our cloud is going to be a cloud .
it &apos;s a physical pathway in london , but with bildpunkten .
they can move inside and different kinds of experiences .
you can actually look at it , you &apos;re actually looking for the most important moments of olympia and available , and it &apos;s available to the community .
so both , the physical cloud in the sky and something about the top you can go and go to the top you can go and go to the top you can go and go to the top you can go and go to the top you can go and go to the top you can go and go to the top you can go and go to the top
you can .
and a kind of digital leuchtturm in the night -- but as a allerwichtigstes , a new kind of experience for everybody who want to go to the top .
thank you .
as an artist &apos;s connection , i think the relationship is very important .
by my work , i &apos;m realizing that people are not separate from nature , and that all together is connected .
the first time , i was going to show 10 years ago , where i saw my first charter .
ergriff .
my heart year-old , i was schwindelig , as i was trying to shoot what was going on .
the guy around me , ragten 60 , almost 60 feet from the water , and i could only wonder that this was a snowflake on a snowflake , year after year .
so as a calf or by sie them out of eisschollen .
each iceberg has its own individual personality .
they interact with their surroundings and their experiences .
some people are getting to get each other and more , in the bitter end , whereas others couldn &apos;t do it more and in a anfall of the anfall passion .
if you look at a iceberg , you think they are isolated , separate and alone , as we can &apos;t see ourselves .
but the truth is far away .
as a iceberg , the iceberg , i &apos;m going to put up his vorzeitliche .
as the iceberg in the iceberg , he &apos;s free water drinking water , the many life cycle .
i &apos;m going to go back to my footage of this as if i was portraits of my ancestors , when i was doing portraits of my ancestors , where they use this way , and never more likely .
it &apos;s no death , if you melt out ; it &apos;s not a end , but a fortführung of your pfades is built in the life cycle .
part of the ice in the eisbergen that i have been photographiere is very young -- a few thousand years old .
and part of the ice is more than 100,000 years old .
the last pictures i want to show you , show you a iceberg that i &apos;ve been in kekertsuatsiak in greenland .
very rarely , you actually witness a rollenden .
here &apos;s now .
on the left , they &apos;ll just look at a little boat .
this is about five feet long .
please pay attention to the shape of the iceberg , and where it &apos;s on the wasserlinie .
you can see here , it starts to roll out , and the boat has moved to the other side of the guy that &apos;s there .
this is the average size of a grönland-eisbergs .
it &apos;s not going to take a daily foot on the water , or 40 feet .
and this video is in real time .
and just like this , shows you the iceberg of a different side of the personality .
thank you .
my life is really striking to work through some of the work of some amazing projects .
but what i was ever worked on the coolest , it was about this guy .
his name is tempt .
tempt was one of the leading commanders of the &apos; 80s .
then one day , he came back from walking and said , &quot; paps , my legs . &quot;
and that was the outbreak of the time .
tempt is completely paralyzed .
he can only use your eyes .
i was him .
i have a company to design design and animations , so is inevitably , so much part of what we admire in the meaningful narrative .
we decided to say , tony -- tempt -- and his thing .
i met with his dad and his brother and said , &quot; we &apos;re going to give you this money .
what will you do with that ? &quot;
and his brother said , &quot; i just want to talk to tony .
i just want to thank you with him and i said , &quot; wait , is that -- i don &apos;t know , i don &apos;t have any given people using this devices ? &quot;
and he said , &quot; no , except if you get to the higher gesellschaftsschicht , and you can insurance insurance , you can really do that .
ordinary people are not available . &quot;
and i said , &quot; how do you now ? &quot;
somebody has any the film and taucherglocke .
that &apos;s how they communicate -- so they were .
i &apos;m going to staunte , &quot; very archaisch , how can that be that ? &quot;
so i came up with the need , just a check , and i asked a check , and i hired a check from which i couldn &apos;t had the slightest idea of how i should .
i &apos;m looking at location and he &apos;s standing on my brother , and his dad -- with the words , my proposal is , &quot; well , my proposal is going to talk to him , and we &apos;ll find a way that he can make it .
because it &apos;s a farce that somebody who &apos;s not going to communicate . &quot;
so i was talking about a conference .
i met these people from grl , graffiti research , and they allowed a technology that allows you to provide a light on trying to provide a laserpointer on it , and then you have a laserpointer to draw the negative space .
so they draw around and make more mature .
they say that all things that are going up there , a lebenszyklus follow .
it starts with the testes , then the schimpfwörter , the danach and the zuletzt , and the people actually do art .
but there was always a life in their presentation .
so i went home and ate my wife with my wife , and i was going to think , second time , if there &apos;s this technology , we should use your eyes to control , to get things that would be a laser steuern to be able to do it , so that it &apos;s really awesome .
the dawn of the journey .
and about two years later , about a year later , after a lot of them , and much of things , and we have some things .
first , we have the versicherungen die of the doors , and actually , in fact , for a device that he can communicate with that , which is able to communicate -- a stephen hawking-maschine .
that was unbelievable .
and he &apos;s really extremely funny -- i call him yoda , because you talk to him , or get a email , and thinks , &quot; i &apos;m so unwürdig , this guy is incredible . &quot;
we also have seven programmierer from all around the world -- literally from all the corners of the world -- at home .
my wife , my children and i are the garage , and these hackers and programmierer and programmers and programmierer and anarchisten .
many of our friends , we were beautiful , and we all know that we were zurückkämen and all the visuals in the walls .
but for over two weeks , we went to strandpromenade in venice , my children were einbezogen , my children were able to do my dog and we were able to put this .
it &apos;s called eyewriter and you can see the description .
this is a cheap sonnenbrille that we bought on the strandpromenade of venice , something more nuanced and some stuff out of the past and the elektronikhandel .
we took a ps3-kamera , you have a gerät , they have a led-licht program , and now we have a device that &apos;s accessible to that , we can build the code that software can download software .
so we have a device that &apos;s completely freely freely freely .
no insurance can be querstellen .
no krankenhaus .
everybody can actually communicate with your eyes , or draw .
thank you .
thank you very much , that &apos;s unbelievable .
so on the end of the two weeks we went back to tempts .
i love this picture because it &apos;s the room from someone else , and that &apos;s his room .
now , there &apos;s all of these rummel flakes from the big picture of the big deal of the big rummel .
and after about a year of planning , two weeks , nudelparties and durchgemachten nights , for the first time , tony first started back to seven years .
and this is an amazing picture , because this is his life , and he &apos;s seeing it &apos;s going to happen .
we have his bed , so he can see it .
we have a friend of a friend of the parkplatztes of the hospital .
and he drew back to the first time , in the beisein of his family , and you can only imagine what was going on on the parking lot .
so we had to get to the parkplatz parkplatz , so we felt that as a part of the sprüher-szene .
at the end of the day he took us a email with a folgendem content : &quot; for the first time in seven years , i &apos;ve been doing something .
i feel , i was prosecuted under water , and finally somebody got to go down and finally my head , my head was so i breathe . &quot;
isn &apos;t that overwhelming ?
this is something like our solar chimney .
that &apos;s what we call the consumer and whistles us .
and we need to improve a lot of this device .
it &apos;s a fabulous device , but it &apos;s a zaubertafel .
and somebody who has a solches potential , it makes a lot more .
so we &apos;re starting to figure out how to do it , faster and stronger .
since this period , we all have all sorts of recognition .
we won some prizes .
think it &apos;s free , no one of us .
it comes out of our own pockets .
so the engine were , &quot; oh , that &apos;s fantastic . &quot;
armstrong across us , and then , december , in the context , has given us the most time-magazine honored that was one of the 50 best inventions in the last night , which was really neat .
the dmca that &apos;s been -- and this includes the whole circle -- that this april , when you see this one , when the april in in the middle of los angeles , called &quot; the kind of the streets &quot; to the streets &quot;
and there &apos;s probably pretty much the toughest vertreter of the straßenkunstszene anwesend -- banksy , shepard fairey , caws -- all these guys are going to be there .
tempt is going to be part of the show , which is quite different .
so basically , i think , if you see something that &apos;s impossible , then it can do it .
everything in this room was impossible -- this stage , this computer , this microphone , the eyewriter -- it was at all at some point .
do it . you all here .
i &apos;m not a programmer and never had something to do with augenerfassungstechnologie , but i just push some of the amazing people , so that we could put together something on the legs .
and this question should be each of them , and that you have to do something that has to be done , if you don &apos;t have to be when i get when you get to know when ? and if not , who then ?
thank you .
so i write for kids , and probably america &apos;s most popular law gelesener .
and i always tell people i don &apos;t always want to get a scientist .
you can have seen as a farmer or in leather , but no one has ever been touched .
i want to tell you about some of you and why .
well , a enlightenment is usually , you know , you can get it out there .
you go to block the block and it &apos;s the garden as an epiphany .
this is a painting of a circle .
one of my friends has been doing . richard bollingbroke .
it &apos;s the kind of complicated that i want to tell you today .
my circle began to high school in stow , ohio , where i was the klassenschwuchtel .
i was the one of the jede in the jungentoilette green and blue , until a teacher i saved .
they saved my life by watching the toilet in the wild .
did it .
it did for three years , it did .
and i had to go out of the city .
i had a thumb , i had a daumen , and it was introduced me to san francisco -- i found a lover -- and then i found it back in the &apos; 80s , i found it a work at aids-organisationen .
and before about three or four years ago , i received a call from this teacher , woman , who said , &quot; i have to see you .
i &apos;m a sad thing that we never have seen as adults as adults .
can you get to ohio , and please come together with the guy that i know they found that they found .
and i should mention that i have bauspeicheldrüsenkrebs , and i want you to be a good job . &quot;
well , on the next day , we were in cleveland .
we looked at it , we laughed , we cried , and we knew they &apos;d be in a hospice .
we brought one of them for them , and we brought them down , and we &apos;re just going to give them on their family eight , because it was necessary .
it was something we knew .
and just as the woman who had been learning as adults to be aware of , and she turned into a box box , and it became a box full of asche .
what happened was that the circle was closed , it was a circle -- and the revelation of that i &apos;ve been talking about .
the revelation is , the death penalty is a part of life .
she saved my life saved , and my partner and i passed yours .
and you know , this part of life needs everything that needs all of the rest of life .
he needs truth and beauty , and i &apos;m so glad that this was so much that i mentioned here .
it needs exactly the same thing -- it needs love and pleasure , and it &apos;s to us .
thank you .
imagine a great explosion , whereas it &apos;s on 1,000 feet .
so imagine a plane full of smoke .
imagine a triebwerk , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack , klack .
sounds frightening .
well , i had a unique place to this day , i sat down .
i was the only one who could speak with the flugbegleitern .
so i saw her right , and they said , &quot; no problem , we &apos;ve got some birds . &quot;
the pilot had the machine already gewendet , and we weren &apos;t as far away .
you could see the manhattan .
two minutes later , three things happen .
the pilot gives you machine looking for the hudson river .
it &apos;s usually not the route .
he took the engines .
imagine a geräuschloses plane .
and then he said three words -- the most interesting words that i &apos;ve ever heard .
he says , &quot; bereitmachen to the aufprall &quot; for the magic &quot;
i didn &apos;t have to talk about the bordpersonal .
i could see it in her eyes , there was horror , life was at the end .
i want to talk to you three things i &apos;ve learned about me .
i learned that in a moment , everything else is different .
we have this lebensplan , we &apos;ve got these things that we &apos;re doing in life and i thought about all the people we wanted to do a hand , and i thought about all the people i wanted to do , all the experiences i wanted to do .
i was later on thinking about this , i think one of the &quot; i &apos;m like , &quot; i was quiet . &quot;
because if the wine is the person , and the person is there , it &apos;s going to be a dog .
i never want to live more something in the lives .
and these urgency , this goal changed my life really .
the second thing i learned about this day , and that was when we were exploring the george washington bridge , so pretty much , i thought , there &apos;s one thing i thought , there &apos;s one thing i really do .
i had a good life .
in my own humanity , and with my mistakes , i &apos;m going to be able to become better in everything , and in everything i &apos;m going to do .
but in my humanity , i gave my ego space .
and i &apos;m going to get the time that i wasted things wrong things , with people who have a little bit .
and i thought to the relationship with my wife , to people .
and then , when i was thinking about , i decided to do negative power from my life .
it &apos;s not perfect , but it &apos;s much better .
i &apos;ve got two years of no longer with my wife .
it &apos;s just great .
i &apos;m not trying to have right ; i &apos;m happy to be happy .
the third thing i learned from the interior of the inner clock , &quot; 15 , 15 , 13 , 13 , 13 , ... &quot; herunterzuzählen .
you can get water .
i said , &quot; please split in the air . &quot;
i don &apos;t want this thing in 20 parts of how to do it .
while we &apos;ve been doing , i had this feeling , man , not terrifying .
almost as if we were trying to prepare our lives .
but it was very sad .
i didn &apos;t want to go ; i love my life .
and this sadness formierte really is really that i &apos;m just going to take one of the things .
i wish i just wish my children seemed to grow .
so , one month , i visited a guy -- erstklässler , not much künstlerisches -- erstklässler , not much künstlerisches .
yet .
and i was just as a child .
and in the world , everything for me .
i realized that was true , by looking at the dots , that it was just a great deal to be a great parent .
more than anything , everything else is my own goal in life , is a good dad .
i was studying the miracle of this day to die .
i received another gift , which is in the future , and i &apos;ve got to live and different .
my favorite problem today , is : imagine what happens on your flight -- not — it &apos;s not -- but you ask it to you , and how would you change ?
what would you do , they think , because they think they were to be there ?
how would you change your relationships and the negative energy in it ?
and more than anything else , are they the best parents that they can be .
thank you .
the idea behind the stuxnet is pretty straightforward .
we don &apos;t want to build the bomb .
the most important for the development of nuclear weapons is the uran-anreicherungs-einrichtung in manila .
the gray boxes that you see here are echtzeit-kontrollsysteme .
now , if we do now , we &apos;re going to do systems , the systems , which is drehzahlen and ventile , then we can actually create a lot of problems with the centrifuge .
these gray boxes , not with windows-software , they &apos;re based on a completely different other technology .
but if we do it , that a effektives windows-virus is a very effective der , which is going to be used by a robotic bar to konfigurieren these gray box , then we &apos;re in business .
and this is planning behind the planning .
so we start with a windows-dropper .
the nutzdaten will be able to see gray box , the centrifuge and the iranian kernenergie-programm is verzögert .
this is a kinderspiel , isn &apos;t it ?
i want to tell you how we found this .
when we went to stuxnet and we began to völlig , was completely unknown , what was the meaning of the meaning and purpose of this .
the only thing we knew is very , very complicated , what the windows- part of the angeht , and he made a myriad of unzähligen day- .
and it seemed to be able to do something , with these gray boxes , this echtzeit- kontrollsystemen .
the dmca our attention and we started a labor- project where we surround our environment with stuxnet infizierten , and we studied this .
and then something weird happened .
stuxnet verhielt , like a laborratte , which is not like cheese -- schnüffelte , but didn &apos;t want to eat it .
it didn &apos;t make sense in my mind .
and after we started with different kinds of cheese , i was looking at this , this is a gezielter attack .
completely , in particular , there &apos;s completely a specific target .
the dropper streift aktiv was active on the gray box when a special different was discovered , even if the special program is trying to wake up on this target .
and not , then , do not , then , do it .
so , the most difficult thing really got to do my interest and we began to work with trying to work around the clock , because i thought we don &apos;t know what the goal is .
it could say , let &apos;s say , &quot; a us- power plant or a chemieanlage in germany .
so we should soon find that , what is the goal .
so , extrahierten and dekompilierten , we &apos;re finding the angriffs- code and found that he &apos;s in two digital sprengköpfe -- a smaller and a bigger .
and also , we also noticed that they were very smooth , of people who had apparently all available information available information .
she was exploring , and they had to attack them .
probably , they even die the schuhgröße of the maschinenbedieners .
so they knew everything .
and if you &apos;ve been told , that the dropper of stuxnet complex and high-tech is , let me tell you : the science is a science for themselves .
it &apos;s much more difficult than anything we &apos;ve ever seen .
here &apos;s a excerpt from this angriffs- code .
we &apos;re talking about -- about 15,000 lines .
pretty much as it looks like , like assemblersprache .
and i want to tell you how we were able to be smart from this code .
so , what we were going to use as the first ones , were systemfunktions- aufrufe , because we know what that thing .
and then we searched to timern and datenstrukturen and trying to bring this with the real world -- with potential traditional goals in the real world .
so we took theories about these goals that we could tell them .
so , to make this theories , we call ourselves in a reminder that it &apos;s definitely about hochgradige sabotage , it has to be a nonprofit goal , and it &apos;s probably not a very , very probably in iran because there are most infections .
now , in this area , there &apos;s not a couple thousand goals .
it &apos;s basically the hinaus atomkraftwerk of the buschehr atomkraftwerk , and on the urananreicherungsanlage in natanz .
so i said to my assistant , &quot; i &apos;m going to take a list of all experts for zentrifugen and kraftwerke . &quot;
and i called her to her , and i &apos;m going to know what we compare to you in code , what we had in code and the data .
and this worked very well .
so it was possible to be able to bring the little digital sprengkopf to the rotorsteuerung government .
the rotor one is moving in the centrifuge , this black object that you see .
and if you put this on the speed of this rotors , then you can actually put the rotor to crack the rotor , and then eventually the centrifuge .
what we found out is that the goal of the attack was actually , it was gradually allowed to let them happen to get -- evidently in trying to let them go quickly quickly .
the big digital sprengkopf -- we got a glimpse by looking at this data and datenstrukturen .
so , for example , the number of 164 is very serious from this code ; you can &apos;t breathe .
i started doing this , scientific literature , talks about how these zentrifugen in natanz , and found that they are strukturiert in so-called kaskaden , and each rung contains 164 zentrifugen .
so that made sense , it &apos;s going to be fit together .
and it became better .
these zentrifugen in iran are in 15 years in 15 years .
and guess what we found in the angriffscode phase ?
almost identical .
so again , this really really really well together .
and this was given us big confidence that we did here .
now , don &apos;t you get me wrong , that didn &apos;t just happen .
these results have been achieved by several weeks .
and often , we ran out in a field and we had to collect them .
but anyway , we found that both digital tubes in reality , in fact , and the same goal , but from different directions .
the little sprengkopf is a kaskade , and überdreht and verlangsamt them and the big sprengkopf of the tritt , the big sprengkopf , the big sprengkopf , the big sprengkopf , and manipulated on the große of interaction .
so , in large , and all the other we are very confident that we actually have , what is the goal .
it &apos;s natanz and it &apos;s just natanz .
so we don &apos;t have to worry about other goals of stuxnet .
here &apos;s something really cool stuff that we &apos;ve discovered -- has really really been touched in the socks .
there &apos;s the gray box , and you see the zentrifugen .
now , what this thing is that is that it &apos;s the eingehenden values of sensors , so for example , the eingehenden values -- so for example , and it &apos;s stellt code -- and it &apos;s stellt code , which is still sitting during the middle of the wrong , it &apos;s going to end up with the wrong books .
and actually , this is the most fragile flying data from stuxnet .
so it &apos;s just like in hollywoodfilmen , where the verfolgungsjagd mit is going to be fed with vorher videoaufnahmen .
that &apos;s cool , isn &apos;t it ?
the idea of this is not just the maschinenbediener maschinenbediener in the middle of the state .
in fact , it &apos;s much more dangerous and more strident .
the idea is to be an digital sicherheitssystem .
we need digital sicherheitssysteme there , where a human skin cannot respond to it .
so , in a power plant , if you have the big dampfturbine to quickly , you have to open up with milliseconds .
of course not being done by a human being .
so that &apos;s where we need digital sicherheitssysteme .
and if the supply endangered , you can actually do it really bad things .
the power plant can .
and neither the maschinenführer , nor the sicherheitssystem .
it &apos;s frightening .
but it &apos;s still worse .
and what i &apos;m saying is very important .
think about it . this is a attack .
he has nothing whatsoever to do with zentrifugen , with urananreicherung .
so he would work so well to work -- in a power plant or in a automobilfabrik .
it &apos;s generisch .
and you don &apos;t have to -- as the attacker , you don &apos;t have to be the nutzdaten nicht , as we saw it in the stuxnet .
you could use ordinary wurm- technology for the spread .
you just have to disseminate it as far as possible .
and if you do that , you get a cyber- massenvernichtungswaffe .
that &apos;s the implication that we have to ask ourselves .
so unfortunately , the biggest number of goals for those attacks of attacks not exist for those attacks .
they are in the united states , in europe .
so all these green areas are the zielreichsten environments .
we have to ask ourselves , and we &apos;re going to start to try better .
thank you .
i have a question .
well , it became very much of it as well that people would assume that the mossad is behind it .
is that it &apos;s also your opinion ?
okay , you know ?
okay . okay .
and i think , is the most profound task , but the driving force is not israel .
so the driving force is the cyber- superpower .
there &apos;s only one of those games , and that &apos;s the united states -- fortunately , fortunately .
because otherwise our problem would be even bigger .
thank you that you have a heidenangst , thank you .
i &apos;ve spent the last few years to make me in situations that normally very difficult to be very difficult and they &apos;re kind of a kind of time .
i &apos;m going to prison -- difficult .
i &apos;ve been working on a kohlebergwerk .
i &apos;ve been shot in kriegsgebieten .
and i spent 30 days to eat nothing like this here -- at the beginning , a bit of difficult in the middle , very dangerous .
actually , i have the most important part of my career , and this all only attempt to try to investigate the way that they are , and hopefully , and hopefully , it &apos;s hopefully , and hopefully , on a kind of thinking , what they &apos;ve done for the audience and they do .
so when i knew i would come to come here to go into a tedtalk , to look at the world of branding and sponsoring , i knew i was a little bit more .
some of you may have heard about this , that i &apos;ve heard a couple of weeks ago , a ad .
i &apos;m going to get some facebook-nachrichten , some twitter-nachrichten , and i gave people who were able to get the namensrechte to my tedtalk .
really , some happy people and companies , for-profit and non-profit , the great opportunity , the opportunity to buy the talk you just to buy the point -- the namensrechte of the talk you just saw , the namensrechte of the talk you just had to buy the point of content and not many evidence of evidence what was going to be .
so what you got , was , what you were to : my name is : my name here : my tedtalk , which you have no idea what the subject is going to be able to go to the ears , especially if i was going to make your company to go to their participation .
but it &apos;s a very good opportunity to do .
you know how many people have this tedtalk ?
a lot of them .
that &apos;s the way , by the way .
despite that warning , i knew that anybody would buy the namensrechte .
if you had to be wondering this , i couldn &apos;t have been able to say that with certainty .
but in the new project i work , my new film , we &apos;re going to investigate the world of marketing , the advertising .
as i said , i &apos;ve said , in some of these terrible situations , but nothing couldn &apos;t have been able to prepare anything , nothing could be told me to something like this , and so hard to just like this guy in a room .
you know , i had this idea of a movie .
what i want to do is about product placement , marketing and advertising , where the whole film is released by product placement , marketing and advertising .
and the movie is called &quot; the greatest sold . &quot;
so what happens in the movie , ever sold , is that everything down to the end , the beginning , the beginning , from the beginning , from the beginning , from the beginning , from the beginning , from the beginning , from the beginning , from the beginning , the beginning , the marke of the brand x. .
now , the brand , the qualcomm , the staples , the staples center , the staples center ...
these people will be connected to the movie -- forever .
and so the film is this whole notion of this whole notion -- that &apos;s what ? in eternity forever ?
i &apos;m a redundante person .
that was more appropriate to the accent .
it was like , &quot; in the eternity forever . &quot;
but we &apos;re not only going to be not only the brand x as a titelsponsor , but we &apos;re going to ensure that we &apos;re going to sell any of the possible category in the movie .
we might sell a shoe and it &apos;s going to be like the greatest shoe that you &apos;ve ever worn in -- the greatest shoe ...
the greatest car you ever are threats , from &quot; the greatest movie sold &quot; the greatest drink ever had ever been to a awareness of &quot; the greatest movie sold . &quot;
so the idea is to show aside that brands is a part of life , actually , they have to finance the film .
and we actually show the whole process of how it works .
the goal of all the movie is transparency .
you &apos;ll see the whole thing in the movie of the video .
so this whole concept , the entire concept , the whole film , at the beginning .
and i would wonder if you could help ceg that , it would help .
you know , it &apos;s funny because i heard it first is the ultimate respect for the audience .
but i don &apos;t know how to be people .
you have a perspective -- i don &apos;t want to show &quot; any &quot; to &quot; not &quot; because that has an ongoing konnotation -- but you know how to be the design ?
how much money is going to be able to deliver this ?
1.5 million .
i think it &apos;s difficult to meet , but i think it &apos;s definitely worth of any sense , some really awful brands .
who knows when the film comes out of it coming out , we might see how a horde would vollidioten .
what do you think about how the answer is going to be ?
the answer will probably be , &quot; no . &quot;
but , it &apos;s a difficult thing to do , because of the movie or a hard thing to me ?
jk : both .
so ... does not mean that optimistic .
so , my gentleman , can you help me ? i need help .
i can help .
okay .
fantastic .
we have to think what brands .
yeah .
if you look at the people , they &apos;re going to have -- you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know ...
there &apos;s some of some of the places that we can apply .
put the camera .
i thought , &quot; imagine the camera , &quot; make the camera out , &quot; make it , we wanted to be a hintergrundgespräch .
it turned out , that it was actually meant to say , &quot; we want to do with your video . &quot;
and just so much of all these companies , one left .
no wanted to do something with the movie .
i was amazed .
they didn &apos;t want to do anything with the project .
and i was confused , because i thought , the whole concept that idea of advertisements , your product as many people as possible as possible as you can see .
especially in the world today , in the world of this interface and old media and the zerstückelten media landscape -- is it not the idea of the very exciting exciting to be causing the masses of mass news .
no , that was what i thought .
but , you see the problem was that my idea was a fatalen mistake , and that was the end .
actually no , that was not the mistake .
that would be no problem at all .
that would be fine .
but this is , what &apos;s this picture is a problem .
you see , if you &apos;re transparency at the google-suche , this is one of the first images that seems to be .
i really enjoy your way , sergey brin . right now .
this was the problem : transparency -- free of täuschung and tücke ; immediately , and durchschauen ; immediately , and durchschauen ; immediately , and access to information , especially , what geschäftspraktiken angeht is certainly -- the last thing is certainly the largest problem .
you know , we hear a lot of a lot about transparency .
our politicians say it , our president tells us , even our ceos say it .
but when it comes to it , it &apos;s going to be changing anything .
but why ? well , transparency is fear -- like this strange bear , the still brüllt .
it &apos;s unvorhersagbar -- like this strange landstraße .
and she &apos;s also a very risky .
what else is risky ?
a whole dish is eating a whip .
that &apos;s really risky .
so when i started talking to companies , to tell you that we wanted to tell this story , they said , &quot; no , we want you to tell a story .
we want you to tell , but we want to just say that you &apos;re going to tell our history . &quot;
you see , when i was a child , and my father got me to lie -- and he &apos;s sitting on , and look at this look at this point -- would say , &quot; my son , there &apos;s every three .
there &apos;s your version , there &apos;s my version , and there &apos;s the real version . &quot;
so , you can see , with this film , we wanted to tell the real version .
but there &apos;s only one company , a public ready was ready to help us -- and this is just because i &apos;ve been john und and richard kirshenbaum for years -- i realize that i had to do it alone , i had to do the mittelsmann and directly to my team .
so what you suddenly began to understand , or what i started to understand that if you start to understand that if you start to speak with these companies , the idea of how your brand is understood , a problem is .
i have friends who were big , gigantic hollywood-filme , and i &apos;ve friends that little independent-filme like i do .
and my friends , the great , gigantic hollywood-filme , say that the reason why your films are so successful , at the markenpartnern , they have .
and then my friends , the little independent-filme , &quot; well , how are we going to deal with these big , gigantic hollywood-filmen . &quot;
and the movie is called &quot; the greatest movie . &quot;
so how do we see ban in the movie ?
always , if i do it , and i always do the medizinschrank , they &apos;re going to see any more thoroughly .
and every time i &apos;m somebody , i can say , &quot; are you enough enough for this interview ?
are you as far as they do . you see a little nervous .
i want to be able to calm on the calm .
maybe you should have a little bit of this interview . &quot;
and then we offer one of these great düfte .
either &quot; floral &quot; or a &quot; paradise &quot; , &quot; you &apos;ll have choice .
we &apos;re going to be both for men as well as it includes for women , roll-on , or a stick , whatever .
that &apos;s the kurzfassung .
now , i can ask all of your questions , and you give them a ausfühliche version .
we are smaller brand .
as you talk about the smaller movies , we are as a brand one .
so we don &apos;t have as a budget like others .
so , these things -- you know , people are at any people -- this is kind of , why we are interested in .
what words would do you try to do better ?
shame is blank .
this is a great question .
woman technology .
technology is not the way you describe something that is going to do something beyond the achseln .
we &apos;re going to talk about the next , fresh .
i think , &quot; well , &quot; is a great word that this will really leads to something positive is doing something called &quot; bekämpft odor and feuchtigkeit . &quot;
it lasts you .
how can we hold them more fresh , better , more complicated , three times .
these things have a positivere effect .
and this is a millionen-konzern .
what is me ? what about the druchschittstypen ?
i have to talk to the guy who are like me , otto-normal-verbraucher .
they should tell me something about my brand .
how would you describe your brand ?
hmmm , my brand ?
i don &apos;t know .
i really like to really like a nice clothing .
woman revival &apos;s trifft , except for the waschtag .
now , what is the brand gerry ?
unique .
i think the genre , the style i have , is that i guess glamour .
i like many black colors , lots of grautöne and stuff like this .
but i normally normally have a accessoire , like sonnenbrillen , or a jewelry and such a real stuff .
one woman would be a brand one , it would probably be a classic machine .
and the brand : the brand that i am , is , i would say , lässige .
woman # 2 : partly yogi , teils brooklyn-mädchen -- i don &apos;t know .
man three : i &apos;m the schmusetyp .
i sell all the country in the world .
so , i think that &apos;s my brand .
this is my brand in my little , verzerrten industry .
man : my brand is fedex because i was ausliefere .
man : brand brand alkoholsüchtiger schreiberling .
it &apos;s not ?
attorney : i &apos;m a anwaltsmarke .
i &apos;m tom .
well , we cannot all be the tom-marke , but i don &apos;t see myself at the interface of dark and lässiger .
and what &apos;s noticed was that i needed a research .
i needed somebody who could be in my head , someone who really help me understand what you call &quot; the markenpersönlichkeit . &quot;
and so i found a company called an olson zaltman in pittsburg .
they have companies like nestle , febreze , hallmark , to explore these markenpersönlichkeit .
if you could do it for you , could help me also help me .
they brought their pictures , yeah ?
i &apos;ve been . the first painting is a picture of my family .
just tell me a little bit about how that &apos;s with your thoughts and feelings about them .
these are the people who are my worldview .
tell me about this world .
md : this world ? i think the way that the world is the world where you live -- like people around you , the family , the family , the way that you live in your life , the work and so on .
all of these things are and start by a place , and for me , and start to my family in west virginia .
what &apos;s next to you want to talk about .
the next day of my life , the most day of my life .
and the idea is to the idea and emotions ?
it &apos;s like i &apos;d like to be .
i like things that are different .
i like things that are weird . i like to do things .
tell me about why , why -phase -- what is it going to us ?
what is the machete ? in the welchem are they currently currently .
why is it important , neuzustarten ? what does the red represents the red ?
and tell me a little bit about this part .
a little more about them , they &apos;re not .
which is , you &apos;re going to have a handle ?
this must be frightened . in which kind of rollercoaster ?
eeeeee ! no , thank you .
thank you very much for your patience .
well . good .
yeah , i don &apos;t know what &apos;s going to happen .
there &apos;s a lot of crazy things that happened .
the first thing i saw was this idea that your markenpersönlichekti two , but it &apos;s ergänzende sides -- the sheer morgan is a achtsame / .
they &apos;re very good .
and i think there &apos;s almost a contradiction .
and i think some companies are just going to focus on a strength , rather than it .
many businesses tend to do -- and this is the human nature -- things that they &apos;re not secure , these elements , and they turn them welcome -- things where they are actually secure , and they transform themselves into something positive , and that &apos;s a geschickter schachzug .
what other brands are like ?
the first is a classic , apple .
and you can see this here , target , wii , mini , mini wii and jetblue .
now , there &apos;s verspielte brands and achtsame tags , these things that come and go , but a verspielte , achtsame , achtsame , achtsame .
a achtsame , verspielte brand . how is your brand ?
if somebody ask you to describe their earrings , your earrings , how would you ?
you put it a up-attribut ? are you something that is the blood in wallungen ?
or are you more likely to be a down-attribut ?
are something that &apos;s a little bit of a quiet , reservierter , conservative , conservative .
up-attribute are things that are playful , the verspielt , zeitgemäß , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , ausgefallen , magisch , magisch and mystisch .
or are they more like a down-attribut ?
are they and mondän like 007 ?
are you etabliert , pflegend , beschützend , compassionate like this .
they &apos;re verlässlich stable , stable , geborgen , geborgen , bedacht and weise like the dalai lama ?
in the movie , we had more than 500 companies called 500 companies and down-firmen and the &quot; no &quot; no &quot; because they wanted to be part of the project .
they didn &apos;t intend to do anything with this movie , because they don &apos;t have control , no control over the finished .
but , 17 markenpartner , the ready were , to avoid that , and they finally , finally , to tell stories that we don &apos;t really have to tell stories , stories , that would never support a werber .
they befähigten us to tell the story of the neuromarketing , as we used to tell the story in this film , you use to be mris to the brain stem brain , both advertising to make advertising .
we drove up to the paulo where was worden .
in the entire town , not anzeigentafel , no poster , no poster , nothing .
and we drove up in the school where companies are in the impoverished schools in the state of the state , in all america .
the incredible thing is that the projects i &apos;ve got to have the most feedback or where i had the biggest success , those are , where i was with things .
and that &apos;s what these brands did .
because they umgingen the mittelsmann , they umgingen the agencies , and they said , that doesn &apos;t really have to have their interest in mind .
i &apos;m going to negotiate with the artists .
i &apos;m going to work with him and something completely different , something that people might think that our view is .
and how did that do ? what was it successful ?
now , the film was wearing the sundance film , and we can look at this .
according to burrelles , the premiere in january , and then , and then , and that &apos;s not even the whole thing -- there was 900 million aufrufe of this movie .
it &apos;s actually only one time of two one of two weeks ago .
this is just online -- no press , no television .
the film was still not run .
there &apos;s not even online . no streaming .
he didn &apos;t have happened in other countries .
now , finally , has been a very big one .
and this is not bad for a project where almost every werbeagentur , which we talked about , your customers , who have to make them .
something i think i &apos;m saying , is that if you have your chance to get your chance to risk risk of a negative opportunity .
i think if you &apos;re going to get people to get people to get them closer to fail .
i think that if you have to do his latest employees , you &apos;re going to take action , you &apos;d pay for a profit .
i feel that we need to encourage people to encourage people to do risk .
we need to encourage people to have a fear of opportunity that they might have .
finally , we should be heißen .
we should put the bear in the cage .
they &apos;re welcome the fear . they welcome the risk .
it &apos;s a big american size , so we welcome the risk .
and then , we should welcome it .
now , more than ever before , it gives us a bit of a bit of honesty .
and that said , with honesty and transparency , my memoir talk , &quot; i called them &quot; sie &quot; from my good friends of emc , the dollar 7100 for the namensrechte in ebay .
big data is going to be in the whole opportunities for organizations in big opportunities .
emc presents &quot; hot &quot; she willkommen &quot;
thank you .
now , morgan , in the names of the transparency , this is what we have to do with the $ $ 7100 ?
this is a great question .
i have a check of a check , ausgestellt , ausgestellt on the oberorganisation of the ted-organisation , the sapling-stiftung -- a check in a höhe of dollars to finance my ted-auftritt year .
my name is amit .
i made a little different about google , and i &apos;m talking about to do something with museums and art . my favorite ones that &apos;s now , i was a green light .
and it took 18 months .
a lot of spaßiger verhandlungen and stories that can i tell you , with 17 , two countries .
but i &apos;m going to focus on the demo .
there &apos;s lots of stories about why we &apos;ve done .
i think my personal view of my view is very simply with this slide and their access to it .
i grew up in india .
i was given a great training training -- i don &apos;t feel like i had to do too many , many of them and not have access to this .
when i went to visit me and i was watching this one , i started a lot of learning .
and while i was working for google , i tried to do this , i tried to have this desire -- art -- to lead to the technology .
we then got a team , a great team , and we started talking .
i &apos;m going to start with the demonstration , and you just try to tell some interesting things that have been doing the launch .
so you go to googleartproject.com. .
you can museums here .
there &apos;s the uffizi , the moma , the hermitage , the rijks , the van der rohe .
i &apos;m even going to be in one of my favorite , the metropolitan museum of art in new york .
you get two to pure -- very simple .
click , and wumms , is to be in this museum .
it doesn &apos;t matter where they are -- i don &apos;t know , mexico , no matter .
you go and move around .
you want the museum in the museum ?
open the map , and they &apos;re going to jump out with a click .
in the way , they want to be like to the end of the economy .
just keep . lots of fun .
she came .
thanks , but the best comes out .
now i am a student from one of my favorite , breugel in the prison .
i see this .
if the museum gave us the image , you click on it .
this is now one of the pictures .
these are all metadata .
those of you who are really interested in art , here , here -- but i &apos;m going to shake this out .
this is one of the images we &apos;re going to do with something called the so-called gigapixel-technologie .
this painting for example , about 10 billion , i think .
and a lot of people ask me , &quot; what do you get for 10 billion ? &quot;
so i &apos;m going to show you , this is what i &apos;m going to show you , this is what i &apos;m going to show you .
you can &apos;t really easily go into it and rauszoomen .
you see something here .
i love this guy ; his expression is priceless .
but then they want to be deeply .
and so i began to play around , and i found that there was something that goes down .
and i thought , &quot; wait a minute , that sounds interesting . &quot;
i went close to the ran , and i noticed , and i was starting to do this kids .
i was a bit , and i spoke to some familiar with some familiar and found it to be a game called squail , where a gans with a blade of grass .
it was quite popular .
i don &apos;t know why they did it , but i learned something about it .
in order to get close to the fit .
just to give you the final , zoome , i think you can see what you get .
here we were , and this is the painting .
the best thing comes back , in a second .
let &apos;s jump quickly to moma , again , again , in new york .
another lieblingsbild of mine .
the previous example of the previous example , it was about making the details .
but what if you want to see the baseline ?
and what &apos;s only when you just want to see how van &apos;s picking up this masterpiece , because it has created it ?
you &apos;re zoomed in the way you can go in .
i &apos;m going to zoom into one of the lieblingsteile in this picture , i really am going to be .
that &apos;s sternennacht , probably never seen this before .
now i &apos;m going to show you my face function .
there &apos;s still many more , but i &apos;m missing the time .
this is the really cool part , it &apos;s called the collections .
each of you , everybody -- same as rich or poor , if you have a great house -- doesn &apos;t matter if you have a great house .
they can go and online the same museum -- from all these images , you can put your own collection .
just , you go in -- and i &apos;ve created this , it &apos;s called the power of the zoom .
this is in-group , in the nationalgallerie .
they can start all with balloons , their friends , and so , you start to think about what they feel when they look at these masterpieces .
i think , is , is that the main thing for me that all of the wonderful things here are not from google .
they don &apos;t get from the museums .
i should not say that .
they come from artists .
and that was a experience in the humility .
i mean , i hope we &apos;re faced with this digital medium of art , and they &apos;re just doing it .
and the biggest question that tells me , &quot; did you do this , to replicate the experience of a museumsbesuchs ? &quot;
the answer is no .
it &apos;s supposed to be the experience .
it &apos;s about . thank you .
thank you .
this is a plot of your brain . your brain can be taken into two .
this is the left half that &apos;s logical , and then the right half of the side , the intuitive side of the site is .
if we could have a scale , they could have to measure each other , we could do your brain .
for example , this is a completely logical .
this is a person who &apos;s completely intuitive .
now , where would you put your brain on this scale ?
some of us may have gone to one of these extreme , but i think that most people in the audience , your brain is about -- with a high school board that &apos;s in both hemisphären .
it &apos;s not as if they &apos;re both exclusive exclusive .
you can beat them and intuitively .
and so i see as one of the people , in common , the most important experimental quantenphysikern , which is a good prediction to put the complex together .
but at the same time we need a good component to actually turn it into the experiments .
how do we develop this intuition ? well , we love to play it with things .
so we go out and see how it &apos;s like , and then we start to design our intuition to the intuition .
basically , they do the same .
so one of the intuitions that you have to have developed about the years , is that a thing is probably just a place .
i mean , it can sound strange thinking about that a thing at the same time , two different locations , but they were not born with this idea , they &apos;ve developed it .
i remember seeing a child in play on a bodenschwelle .
he was still a toddler and not very good at it , and he was constantly .
but i bet this plays a play with the bodenschwelle , so that it &apos;s a very very valuable , which is , the big things you just don &apos;t want to leave you and they stay on a pile .
and this is a great konzeptionelles model of the world , so they don &apos;t have a teilchenphysiker .
it would be a terrible model for a teilchenphysiker , because they don &apos;t play with bodenschwellen , but with these little strange particles .
and if you play with your particle , they make all kinds of weird things -- how they are getting directly through walls , or they &apos;re at the same time to be at the same time in two different locations .
and so they all wrote that these observations , and called the theory of quantum mechanics .
this was the end of the physics , a few years ago , you needed to go and needed the little bits of tiny particles .
but they needed to be the big day-to-day day-to-day objects around us .
this didn &apos;t necessarily work my intuition and maybe it &apos;s just because i don &apos;t know that many times .
well , i &apos;m going to play with you , but not very often .
and i haven &apos;t seen them .
i mean , nobody has ever seen a particle .
but my mind was not supposed to go anywhere .
because if all the things are made of particles , and all these particles are the following the rules of quantum mechanics , then not just all the rules of quantum mechanics ?
i don &apos;t see why not that .
so i would love to be connected to the whole thing , if we could show that alltagsgegenstände is the following of quantum mechanics .
so i made a few years ago , doing this .
i created one .
this is the first object you can see , that &apos;s in the quantenmechanischen superposition .
so what we &apos;re looking at here is a tiny computer chip .
and you can see this green dot there in the middle .
this is the piece metal of metal that i &apos;m going to talk about .
this is a picture of the object .
here i &apos;m looking at something . we &apos;re looking right here .
and here &apos;s a really big close-up of this little bit .
so what we &apos;re looking at is a little bit of metal metal , it &apos;s a springboard , and it &apos;s over the edge of the historical .
so i made this thing on a similar to you make a computer .
i went to a clean room with new siliziumscheiben , and rackerte for 100 hours of all the big devices .
for the last bit , i had to build my own machine -- to try this kind of swimming in the past , and they &apos;ll get the thing .
this thing has accelerated the ability to be the ability to be superposition in the quantenmechanischen superposition , but it needs a little bit of a help to do it .
look , let me give you a analogy .
you know how to be in a special elevator to his head ?
i mean , if i &apos;m alone , i &apos;m going to take all kinds of weird stuff , and i &apos;m hearing it to all of these things , because i don &apos;t want to do all of this stuff , or , frankly , frankly , frankly , frankly , frankly , frankly , frankly , frankly , frankly , frankly , frankly .
so , quantum mechanics , that unbewegliche objects are equally equally .
the most destitute of unbewegliche objects are not only humans , but also the light that you may and the wind , which is going to take over the past and the heat .
and so we knew that if we wanted to see that this piece metal metal is quantenmechanisch , we had to be able to go out all the mitreisenden .
and we did it .
we put the light off , put it into a vacuum and saugten all the air out , and then it &apos;s almost to almost , in the elevator , there was the piece of metal metal metal , to behave as it was .
so we have a movement .
we found that it &apos;s really strange .
instead of that it &apos;s just a little bit , vibrierte it , and the way it was about like this -- like a ausdehnender and zusammen blasebalg .
and then we got to put him a little push , we could put it to the same time , we could not get it to the same time , not too -- something that &apos;s in quantum mechanics .
so what i &apos;m really fantastic is just fantastic .
which means it &apos;s going to be more equal to the same time .
let &apos;s think about the atoms .
so the first case : all the trillionen of atoms are going to metal , and at the same time , the same atoms , and down .
just to put it up with the präzisen zeitpunkten .
the rest of the time they are .
that means that every atom at the same time , two different locations , what &apos;s called the same thing that &apos;s called the whole piece of metal in two different locations .
i think that &apos;s right , really cool .
really , really .
that was worth me for all of these last year into the clean room , because , check out between a single atom , and this piece of metal is about as the difference between metal and you .
so if a single atom can be in two different locations , this piece of metal metal in two different places , why not it ?
i mean , this is just what my logische page .
so imagine you &apos;re going to be at the same time to come out of several places , how would it be like that ?
how would you make consciousness that you &apos;re your body in the room ?
there &apos;s another aspect of history .
when we aufwärmten it , the light anschalteten and the box , we saw that the piece of metal would be there .
and so i had to develop this new intuition that it looks like all the objects in the elevator in the aufzug are actually just dilute objects that are in a small room .
you hear a lot of talk about how quantum mechanics says that everything is connected .
now , this is not quite right ; it &apos;s not quite right ; it &apos;s not quite right .
there &apos;s more behind it , it &apos;s even deeper .
it &apos;s so that these connections , their ties with all the things you see , literally , in some point who you are , and that &apos;s the tiefsinnige and strange of quantum mechanics .
thank you .
in 2007 , i decided we should think of economic development .
it should be our goal that if families are thinking about where they are , and they want to be able to work on the way at least different cities that everybody in the middle of the competition .
at the moment we &apos;re facing this is far from this goal .
there are billions of people in the developing world , which isn &apos;t even a single city that they &apos;d welcome .
but the amazing thing about cities is that they &apos;re so much more value than it costs them .
so we could easily easily easily deal with duzenden , maybe they &apos;re hunderten of new cities .
now , this may sound , you &apos;ve never been thinking about new cities .
they just put the construction from the apartments against cities .
imagine half the people who want to live in homes , did it already ; they haven &apos;t half .
you could try to extend the capacity of existing apartments .
but you know what you would like to go and get out of the apartments and whose environment to avoid and avoid and vom and vom .
so it turns out , as a very hard , all of these extensions are .
but you could build a completely new place where you can build a completely new new , and you would build a support and a support system , and it doesn &apos;t .
so i suggested that governments are able to create new surfaces that have enough place for a city , and they gave them a name : charter acid .
i &apos;ve found out that , about the same time , javier and octavio over the challenge of a population in the same way .
they were knew that every year every year , you know , every year , a year to ensure that every year , to make sure that these people are going to stay in their own country , and exactly the same thing in the same way .
and this is what happens when we said , &quot; what happens when we are just a botschaft area of our country , and if we can do a message from the canadian and then if we want to work on the canadian rules , and then if we want to work on the canadian rules , and can make it all the time doing everything that they normally do
in the summer of 2009 , under a heftigen .
in the next planmäßigen elections , the pepe wahlen lobo in a turnaround , a lot of innovation than also schlichtung .
he &apos;s going to be , to become more energy-efficient .
meanwhile , i went to tedglobal with a talk .
and so , in general , you try and replaced by the study of consumers , i tried to reduce this complicated concept of the charter city .
the first thing is the importance of law , laws , the determine you don &apos;t have to be able to be stören .
we &apos;re entering new technologies , but for progress , it needs to use technologies and laws , and it &apos;s usually laws that are us .
in the autumn of the fall of los angeles a friend of guatemala &apos;s foot .
again , he took him .
the two senses .
and they said , &quot; let &apos;s the head of our country &apos;s head . &quot;
so we ended up in december of a hotels in the sitzungssaal valley .
i tried to do a lot of time , like valuable cities , to make much more valuable .
and i used this chart to show you how valuable rohland is to a place like new york , think that a area in some cases a few square of dollars per square meter is worth of dollars .
but it was a very abstract discussion , at a point when there was a pause , said , &quot; paul , might be said , &quot; paul , might we look at the tedtalk . &quot;
so the average american , in very simple , the average is that a charter , the laws of the laws of the laws of the laws of the laws of the laws of being able to decide either and the people who are going to live in between those rules .
so i was asked by the president of the course of the course of the course that we have to do this project is important that it &apos;s important , and that this is the way to bring our country .
i was asked to go to tegucigalpa and then at the fourth of the fourth and birth to think .
so i have a more gefüllten talk , which is a graphic like this particular one has tried to decide that if you want to make a lot of value in a city , it has to be a very big city .
this is a picture of the city , and the air is the neuen airport that was built in the middle east .
and the other airport has a 24-hour of 100 quadratkilometern .
so i tried to convince the honduraner that if you want to build a new city , you want to start with a field of at least 1,000 quadratkilometern .
this is more than 250 thousand tomorrow .
six applaudiert .
the faces of the audience were very serious and alert .
the director of congress came to the stage and said , &quot; professor romer , thank you for your talk , but maybe we might be able to watch the tedtalk .
i have this on my laptop .
so i got to go out and they have the tedtalk .
and i &apos;m too unhappy to be a new city of people new opportunity .
it would be able to live the possibility of a city that would be in the wrong , instead of miles away .
and new city also includes new ways of leaders .
the leaders of the government in the community would be in the help of the regierung , they could depend on the social media company that they could be able to trust that the charter is really going to be able to trust that the charter is really .
and the realization of president lobo , was that the gewissheit of the durchsetzung i thought about thought when you could get the foreign investors in order to get the foreign investors in the field of all the parties in the field , and to photograph in common sense .
we are in a field .
this is a picture of this picture .
it &apos;s been fasst quadratkilometer .
and shortly after that , january , you &apos;ve got to get a change of the constitution to have a verfassungsgemäße version that &apos;s for special entwicklungsgebiete .
in a country that was just a very happy crisis behind a time , in congress , to follow with 124 mit .
all the parties , all the fraktionen of society is unterstützten .
to be part of the constitution , but twice the most congress will be approved .
february 17th february was born to a second .
and immediately , after this choice , between the 21st and the february of february , all of 30 hunduranern of the world that most of interest was interested in the most part of the städtebaus .
one place is .
this is a painting from a big new person that was built in a professional tube than the finance .
all you can see on this slide , within four years after years of four years after it took us four years after it .
the other place that was very interested in the most , singapore .
it &apos;s been already two towns in china and the third is in preparation .
so , if you think about it , it &apos;s what we &apos;re standing today .
they &apos;ve already already been a baugrundstück ; and they &apos;ve already washed this area for the second .
it &apos;s already been working on a legal system that managern is allowed to be allowed to do it in a external system .
a country has already offered offered to provide his supreme court to provide the gericht berufung of the dortigen .
also städtedesigner and -bauer are very interested .
they even bring them funding .
one thing you know , we know , there &apos;s been done , there &apos;s lots of mieter .
there &apos;s lots of the kind that would like to be like in america , especially in a place with a freihandelszone , and there &apos;s lots of people who would like to live there .
on the world , there are 700 million people who are saying that they would like to be permanent in another place .
a million people out there , and they hike into the united states .
many of you are fathers , who forced to be their families to suchen- themselves , to be able to suchen- , they &apos;re at least mothers who have enough money to get to eat and clothing .
unfortunately , sometimes sometimes , they &apos;re sometimes trying to find their parents back to the ones that they &apos;ve seen since a decade , for a decade .
so what is it for a idea of thinking about how to make a whole new city ?
even more inclusive of these cities , or hundreds of millions of the world ?
what is it for a idea that each family has a choice between a choice between a different cities that are in the middle of new residents .
that &apos;s an idea that is worth spreading .
my friends from my friends , i was asked to say thank you .
you know how many decisions you do to a typical day ?
you know how many decisions you &apos;re going to meet in a typical week ?
i &apos;ve been told a survey with over 2,000 , and the average number of decisions that the angabegemäß is a typical american americans on a day , a day , is a day a day .
additionally recently , i was a study with ceos , in a week , she was going to go to the ceos .
and these scientists are just doing the different topics ever since , these are true , and how much time they make decisions that are related to the issues .
and they found that a average american ceo are busy in the week .
every one of these topics , of course , many smaller decisions .
fifty percent of your decisions have been declining in the past 15 minutes or less .
just about 12 percent of your decisions , they &apos;ll take a decade or more your time .
think about your own decisions .
you know how many decisions you can get you to meet the nine stunde in the next hour ?
how good you think are they &apos;re making the decisions ?
today , i want to talk about one of the most important of our modern time talking to be .
i want to talk about the problem , and some of these sorts of things solutions .
now , if i talk about this problem , i will ask you some questions , and i want to know your answers .
if i ask you a question , raise your , you &apos;re only the hand , if you want to burn some of these calories .
well , please , please , i ask you a question , and your answer is , my first question for today is , are you ready to hear about the entscheidungsüberlastungsproblem ?
thank you .
when i was a abschlussstudent at stanford , the stanford i went to this very short , at least he was really exklusiv .
it was a store that &apos;s meant it .
this business store , it was almost like a vergnügungspark .
they had 250 different kinds of mustard and a variety of different types of vegetables and essig and vegetables and vegetables and more than two species of water -- and that was a time when we actually did leitungswasser .
i loved it to this business , but i asked me , well , how do you get you kaufst , you know ?
here &apos;s the olive gear .
they had been about 75 different kinds of different oil , including those who were in boxes , who were von by thousands of years old olivenbäumen .
so i decided to visit me one day , and i asked the head , &quot; does this model , that they really are , people are really able to get all of these possibilities ? &quot;
and he pointed on the busladungen of tourists who came every day and they had their cameras .
we decided to do a experiment , and we chose to do it for our experiment .
here &apos;s her marmeladen .
they had different kinds of marmelade .
we &apos;ve got a little verkostungsecke right at the entrance of the geschäfts .
we have six different pathways , or 24 different flavors , and we looked at two things : first , i would have more people stand up and marmelade ?
it &apos;s more people , when there were 24 , about 60 percent , when it &apos;s six percent , about 40 percent .
and then we saw ourselves in the face of this , people tend to be a glass of marmelade .
now we saw the umgekehrten effect .
from the people who were faced with smallpox , they were actually just a glass of marmelade .
so , from the people who are faced with six , now we looked at that 30 percent of them actually have a glass of marmelade .
now , if you calculate it , they bought people six times more than a glass of marmelade , who they had to have six to the choice , when they had 24 to selection .
now , to decide , not a glass of marmelade , probably good for us -- at least , it &apos;s good for our accomplishments -- but it turns out that the strangeness is affecting us very much decisions .
we don &apos;t decide to decide even if it &apos;s against our own best interests .
so the subject of the day , thank you .
i &apos;m going to describe a study that i filled with gur huberman , emir kamenica , in kamenica , where we were able to retirement the decisions for almost a million americans of about 65 across the entire united states .
and what we looked at was whether the number of fondsangebote , which was a rentensparplan , the 401 plan that would affect the likelihood of whether more is going to tomorrow .
and we found that there was a relationship between a relationship .
so in those plans , we had about 657 plans that people had something between two to each other fund .
and what we found was that the more surprising had been offered that the teilnahme was lower for participation .
if you look at the extreme , the plans that had two fund , they had a teilnahmerate in the siebzigern -- still not as high as we want .
in the plans that almost 60 fund , the teilnahmerate fund is now about ungefähr .
now , it turns out , even if you &apos;re going to be able to get more choices when they were able to have choices , even , it &apos;s negative consequences .
so the people who decided to worry about , more likely to be more choices to available , the more they want to do it and vice versa .
the more choices they stood , the more they put their money in the past .
not one of these extremes choices , belongs to the decisions that someone would recommend people recommend and their future is well-being .
well , in the last 10 years , we have three liberal consequences in humans , we &apos;ve observed that the little bit of more and more choices .
it &apos;s the choice on -- it &apos;s going to be on , even if it goes to your own .
they make more bad decisions -- the worse decisions and worse and worse medical decisions .
you decide to decide for things that they make themselves , even if you make it objective .
the main reason is that we might be aware of us to see this big difference full of mayonaise , senf , essig and marmelade , but we don &apos;t even know the comparison and empty , and then something that &apos;s called the amazing purpose .
so what i &apos;m going to share with you today is four basic observation that we &apos;ve been on different strains and on different kinds of formats , and they can &apos;t use their business .
first of all : do it .
you &apos;ve heard it before , but it was never real as a day that is less more .
people are always concerned when i say , &quot; i say . &quot;
they always make regalfläche , they always lose .
but in fact , we see it more and more and more , that if you &apos;re willing to be ready and the unwichtigen gleichartigen , now , there &apos;s a increase increase of the rate , and there &apos;s a increase increase of the rate , and there &apos;s a improvement of entscheidungswahrnehmung .
as a cross-country skier and gamble die the different kinds of 26 , and they &apos;ve been on 15 kinds of 26 on 15 , they made a rise of death rate in 10 percent .
as the golden cat corporation to get the worst verkauften corporation to sell 10 to the worst verkauften loswurde , they made by 87 percent of the world &apos;s anstieg and the reduction of cost .
you know , the average supermakrt today , gives you a little bit of action .
a typical typical bietet is going to happen today .
but the most mysterious supermarket that is now the round of the world today , and they offer them to just give you a mere positive -- one kind of tomato sauce in the cans .
now one of the best examples i think one of the best examples that recently have been coming up to the market , it &apos;s a program that &apos;s been being harvard , that &apos;s a program that is being offered .
every harvard collaborator employees is taking an lebenszeitfond part .
so that &apos;s what really has to do is they want to be saved by 20 hearing , not 300 or more .
you know , people often say , &quot; i don &apos;t know how to do it .
it &apos;s all important opportunity . &quot;
and the first thing i ask the staff of the question , &quot; tell me how the options are different from each other .
and if your employees can &apos;t even deceived , it doesn &apos;t even customers .
now , before we &apos;ve got lunch today , i had a conversation with gary .
and he said that he would be willing to be willing to all be a all-inklusive bezahlten in the audience in the world in the world in the world .
here &apos;s a description of the road .
and i want to read you .
and now i give you a couple of seconds to read them , and then i want to tell you to clap if you &apos;re willing to take them down .
okay . everybody &apos;s ready , and everybody &apos;s anzunehmen .
all of you ?
well , let me show you something more about it .
they knew , it was a trick , or it ?
now , who &apos;s ready for this journey .
i think i may have more hands .
all right .
the fact is that they &apos;ve been looking at this , when you had more information , when the second time , but i would argue it to guess that it would take it to the second time .
because the pictures of it is to be authentic .
what i &apos;m going to bring to the second technique that you can do with the problem of the entscheidungsüberlastung , it &apos;s the konkretisierung .
it &apos;s about people to understand the difference between understanding what consequences need to understand what consequences are about to have the consequences of the individual and the konsequenzen of those consequences and konkret .
why are people about average average , average average , average average , if they use a ec-karte or a credit card , as it was in the form ?
because it isn &apos;t going to be true .
and it turns out that if you do it , it &apos;s something that is inspiring to be a very good tool to make people to save more .
so we &apos;ve got to do in a study that i did with shlomo benartzi and alessandro previtero did , we made a study with people at ing previtero -- to be a study who worked for ing -- they were all the versammlung in a meeting in the convention of their rentensparplan .
and during this gathering , we &apos;ve just got this convention just as as it always , only we have a little more comfortable .
the ones that we have had a little bit of gefügt that we were asked to think of all of the positive things that happen in their lives , if they &apos;re saving money .
in which we did this easy thing , there was one of the participation reaching over 20 percent , and there was a increase in the number of people who were willing to save or a increase in four percent by four percent of the percent that they were willing to pay for the sparkonto .
the third technology : kategorisierung .
we can make better more than with more choices than more choices .
here &apos;s a study that we did a study that we did in a zeitschriftengang .
it turns out that it turns out the wegmans in the upper space and below the northeast , the number of 331 whales has been going to be saved between 331 , to high magazines .
but you know what ?
if i show you a hundred years , and they &apos;re going to be in , and they believe that 20 magazines , and those in 20 categories , you believe that i &apos;ve given you more and more of the 400 , and i gave you the 400 of the 400 , if i gave them the 600 power .
because the ones tell me how i can keep them apart .
here &apos;s two different types of schmuckauslagen .
one is called &quot; jazz &quot; and the other is called &quot; swing . &quot;
if you think that the left is going to release the ad is and the ad right is the ad right , they clap in the hands .
okay , there &apos;s a few .
if you think that the one on the left is , and the one on the right side , you &apos;re going to ask you .
okay , a few more .
well , it turns out , they &apos;re right .
the left is jazz and the one that &apos;s on the right , but you know what ?
this is a solid kategorisierungsschema kategorisierungsschema .
the apple must have to say something , not the selection .
and this problem , you often see , if you look at the long bullet points of these lines .
who want to know ?
my fourth technology : 93 .
it turns out that we can actually get in fact with more information than we think we have to simplify them .
we need to increase the complexity .
i &apos;ll show you an example of what i mean .
let &apos;s give us a very , very complicated choice : the purchase of a car .
here &apos;s a german autohersteller who gives you the ability to konfigurieren their car .
they need to create 62 different decisions to make it .
now , they differ with these decisions in the number of choices that they offer per capita .
autofarben , außenfarbe of cars -- i &apos;ve 56 .
the , , the getriebe -- four ways .
now , what i do now is , i would appear the order of the decisions .
half of the customer &apos;s going to be , in the low capacities , 56 autofarben is four to the low cost .
the other half of the customer &apos;s customer is about the low opportunities , four , four , the 56 of autofarben , many possibilities .
what do i look at ?
how are they .
if you &apos;re constantly denial the baseline of the decision , which is that they &apos;re going to be overwhelmed , that &apos;s what i &apos;m going to do .
what you find is that people who are going from the many who always come from the low circle and over and over and over again .
we are losing them .
and they take the little choice to the surface , then they stick .
it &apos;s the same information . it &apos;s the same amount of possibilities .
the only thing i did , is the order of things that are going to be transformed in this information .
if i start with the simple one , i learn how i &apos;m going to browse .
even though the getriebe , i never had nothing about my preferences in the interiors , never just sitting me on it .
it &apos;s also me in common sense that i &apos;m going to do , and so i &apos;m willing to make me feel interested in .
let me wrap up .
i &apos;ve told you about four techniques that the address the problem of the entscheidungsüberlastung mildern -- i &apos;ll do it real -- -- you &apos;re going to do it -- we can make better with more categories , less ways to prevent complexity .
each of these techniques i &apos;m going to take you today is to manage your opportunity to help you to manage your opportunity -- good for you , you can use them , good for people who are service them .
because i think the key to the biggest movement is that you &apos;re picky .
and the more we &apos;re going to be able to be wählerisch , the better we are able to make the art of choice .
thank you .
hi . i &apos;m kevin allocca , trends-manager , youtube , and i &apos;m going to look at youtube-videos .
that &apos;s true .
today we want to talk about how videos are werden , and then , why is it really important .
we all want to be -- the berühmtheiten , singer , sänger , comedians , when i was young , seemed to be so infinitely difficult .
but webvideos have enabled that we all are all going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be part of the culture of our world .
every single one could be more about the internet to the next saturday to the next saturday .
but at youtube , more than 48 hours per minute .
it &apos;s only one tiny percentage ever of viral and will thousands and so forth to the cultural moment .
how does this work ?
three things : tastemaker , teilnahmecommunities and the unexpected .
well , we want to go .
oh my god . oh my god .
oh my god !
! !
! !
last year bear vasquez of this video that he &apos;d put in front of his house in yosemite national park .
in 2010 , it was 23 million times .
this chart shows how it looked like this video last summer .
not supposed to be bear on the virales .
he just wanted to share a rainbow .
because you just do it , when you &apos;re living with independent bear .
he had lots of naturvideos .
and this video was actually already been in january .
what happened here ? &quot;
there was jimmy kimmel .
jimmy kimmel sendete den the tweet that was done so popular .
because tastemaker like jimmy kimmel ask us new and interesting things , and show them a big audience .
it &apos;s called &apos; . everybody get get down down , everybody get down to to , everybody , friday , friday , friday , friday , friday , friday , hättet , hättet , hättet , you know , that we would lead to that conversation without talking about this video game .
rebecca rebecca : &quot; friday &quot; is one of the most popular video .
it was almost 200 million times .
this is what the chart looks like .
just like &quot; double rainbow &quot; seems to be from nowhere .
what happened to this day ?
well , it was friday , that &apos;s true .
if you want to know , these other spikes are also freitage .
but what about this day , this particular friday ?
well , tosh.0 gabelte , it was to write a lot about it .
michael j. was the mystery science , was a first , that &apos;s been a first joke .
what matters is that a relationship or a group of tastemakers a set of tastemakers , a lot of audience and experiment with a large audience and so on with it .
and then they have these community of people who are going to insiderwitz the big insiderwitz , and to talk about it .
now there &apos;s 10,000 parodien of &quot; friday &quot; at youtube .
already in the first seven days , there was a census of every single day .
unlike the 20th century , the participation century is the participation of the community that we &apos;re going to be recognized in this way , we &apos;re going to be verbreiten or something new .
&quot; nyan cat &quot; is animation and music in endlosschleife .
that &apos;s it just .
this year was almost 50 million times .
and if you think that , you know , you know , there &apos;s a dreistundenversion dreistundenversion that was frozen by four million .
even the way that video look at this video .
cats , cats look at the cats that look at this video .
so , the kreativität of the techies , the creativity that are in the internetkultur of the techies and geeks .
there was no matter .
somebody made a test version of it .
and then it became international .
a whole remix-gemeinde map , from the ground that made it from a dummen joke to something that we can participate .
today , we don &apos;t just find any of something we &apos;re doing with .
who would be able to do anything that could be ?
who would have saved rainbow rainbow , or rebecca black elk , or &quot; nyan cat cat . &quot;
which is that drehbücher , where does that drinsteht are doing something like that ?
in a world where we &apos;re going to have a minute of the days in the middle of the subject , can just really unique and unexpected unexpected wie like the cardboard videos .
i admit i wasn &apos;t really interested in my very much interested , when i was looking at this great video , which one guy who was gegen against strafzettel for bicycles .
i got a ticket , because i &apos;m not going on the radweg , but often there &apos;s been told that i &apos;ve been told the einen of the radweg .
since the whole thing was very surprising and humorous , it was actually niestats the idea and his argument five million times .
this approach is true for anything new , what we do .
and this is where we have a big question , but this is a big question , but this is a big question , but that &apos;s a big question .
what does that mean ?
ohhhh .
what does that mean ?
tastemaker , creative teilnehmergemeinden , completely , are the features of a media and culture , and culture , and that &apos;s the audience in the audience .
as i said , one of the most of the most of the most of the most of the most of the most of the most of the most of the most of the most of the most major stars -- did his start with youtube .
no one has to be light .
and today we feel as owners of our culture .
and that &apos;s not the characteristics of old media and they &apos;re not helping to the media from today , but they &apos;re going to be the conversation of the future .
thank you .
how can i talk about three generations , and how can the amazing strength of these connectedness , and i never got more blood than that , her mother and nights in a small boat in the midst of a high school boat , and i never got more blood than that , her mother and nights in a small boat in the midst of a high school boat ,
it &apos;s not yet .
it &apos;s a puzzle that &apos;s going to be done .
i want to tell you about some of the puzzlestückchen .
imagine the first piece : a man who burns his burns .
he &apos;s a poet &apos;s a poet , a writer , a man , a man , a year , the simple american of the simple american union and freedom of his own home .
so , you know him in the einmarsch of the kommunisten in saigon , as he must have been a single waste .
the words , so long , his friends , spotteten .
he was moving into the silence .
he died , broken through history .
he &apos;s my grandfather .
i &apos;ve never personally personally .
but our lives are so much more than our memories .
my grandmother never had ever lost me .
i had to make sure that it wasn &apos;t free for free , and it was my job to learn that the story was trying to zerdrücken us , but we &apos;ve been getting .
the next puzzleteil shows how a video was going to im leise leise .
my mom may be 18 when her father was 18 -- before , in a arrangierten marriage , i had two little girls .
for her , they had to have a job interview , the flucht of your family and a new life in australia .
it was completely excluded .
after a vierjährigen and filmreifen saga glitt a boat is still a boat in the lake , as a fischerboot .
all adults were aware of the risks .
the greatest fear had them to be fearful , rape and death .
as i was in the boat , my mom was my mom , a little giftflasche .
i would have only one of the gefangennahme , my sister and i , you know , and my grandmother is going to drink this .
my first memories are from this boat -- the expulsion of the motor , the klatschen of the motor , the clapping of every wave on the subject , the vastness and empty .
i remember the pirates that many times came from , but they were looking at the todesmut of men on our boat in the engine of the engine , the six hours .
but i remember the lights off the ölplattform coast of the malaysischen coast , and on the young man , the late man , who collapsed , and the taste of the first apfels that was one of the men on the platform .
no apple has ever changed again .
after three months in a refugee we landed in melbourne .
and the next month is about four women in three generations that have been together a new life .
we &apos;re going to look at footscray , one of the most arbeiterklasse vorort , that &apos;s population from immigrantenschichten .
unlike that , in the alteingesessenen mittelklassevororten , whose existence were totally unknown , except there was no anspruchsdenken .
the flower comes from the ladentüren from the rest of the world .
and the most popular gebrochenen was given to people who had one thing that was going together , they started to start fresh .
my mom was working on farms , then on a screen , six days , twice , twice , double days .
it &apos;s been made of their time to find english and it-qualifikationen .
we were poor .
each dollar has been turned to , and i was given in more education and mathematics , no , what we needed to be about altogether , and we had to do it , and most of mathematics were the new stuff that came from the second hand .
two few strümpfe for the school , every one to really remote control .
a schuluniform to the knöcheln , because she had to be six years .
and there were rare , the rare but waren of &quot; schlitzauge &quot; and here and there &apos;s wandmalereien , &quot; i go home . &quot;
how home ?
something else in me .
and there was a meeting to the reconciliation , and an assertion , said , &quot; i &apos;ll go out of the way . &quot;
my mom , my sister and i slept in the same bed .
my mom was every night , but we &apos;ve been told each other , but we heard each other , the movements of our grandmother in the house .
my mom suffered from the boat .
and it was my job , every night to stay until their alpträume , so i could put them back .
they opened up a computergeschäft , made a kosmetikerausbildung and a geschäft .
and the women came along with their stories about men who were not ertrugen , angry and unflexibel kids , imprisoned between two worlds .
loans and sponsoren were .
centers has been built .
i lived in parallelwelten .
in one of one of the classic asian student , the unerbittliche demands itself .
in the other part , i was living in life , the tragic scars of violence , the drogenmissbrauchs and the isolierung .
but that &apos;s how many years of aid .
and because of this aid , i was living in my last year , as the boy of the year .
and i was taken by a puzzlestück to the next hall , and the edges were not all .
le le barón , anonyme bewohnerin , was now tan , and social activist , refugee and social activist , and they &apos;ve never heard of them , and in the behausungen that they never imagined imagined .
i was not familiar with the computer models .
i didn &apos;t know how to use the besteck .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about wine .
i didn &apos;t know how to talk about anything .
i wanted to return to the routine and the second one of the lives of a unknown unknown vororts -- a grandmother , a mother and two daughters who had stories like the stories of their day and einschliefen , we still are three still in the same bed .
i told my mother , i would not do that .
and they remembered me that i was so old , as they did the boat .
no , no way we had .
&quot; just sound , &quot; she said , &quot; and &quot; and not , what you &apos;re not . &quot;
so i was talking about jugendarbeitslosigkeit and training , and the vernachlässigung of marginalisierten and entrechteten .
and the more i talked about , the more i should tell .
i met people in all lebenslagen , so many of them were doing what they loved , were missing in the limits of the possible .
and even though i had my degree , i realized that i could not confuse with a career in a global way .
there must be another more difficult .
and i realized this at the same time , that it &apos;s okay to be a maverick to be a maverick , a neuankömmling , new , new , new , new thing , new thing you have to be grateful , maybe a gift of the boots .
because dazuzugehören can lead to the collapse of the horizons , so easy to mean that you &apos;re the assumptions of the environment .
i &apos;m not enough from my bequemlichkeitsbereich to know that , yes , the world , but not as it as you were .
in the ways that we don &apos;t have been allowed to have been ermutigt .
there was a power , a seltsame optimism , a strange mixtur of the humility and the wagnisses .
so i followed my gut .
i collected a little team of people to me , for the schublade , don &apos;t go to a unwiderstehliche challenge .
for a year , we had no business .
at the end of a tags , i would provide one big den of the tags of the whole wall , which we shared .
we were working until midnight .
most of our ideas were crazy , but it was a few brilliant ones , and we managed to change the breakthrough .
i met the decision to pull in the united states .
just a trip there .
my gut again .
three months later , i was moved with umgezogen , and i was walking around .
before i talk about the talk , i want to tell you about my grandmother .
she grew up to a time in the konfuzianismus social norm and the local mandarin of the local community .
life didn &apos;t change since it was not changing .
her father died seven months after her birth .
her mom went alone .
with 17 , they were the second woman of a day that was she suggested .
without a man , she was picking up her for a sensation , by putting him and anklägerin in her own case , and another sensation , as she won .
&quot; is not going to be a &quot; lost . &quot;
i just duschte right in a hotel in sydney , when she died . 1,000 miles away .
i looked through the duschtrennwand and she saw her on the other side .
i knew they were to go to it .
my mom was a few minutes after that .
a few days later , we went to a buddhist temple in footscray and they sat in their tracks .
we told her stories and versicherten her , we were in their own .
and midnight midnight came the monk and said he &apos;s got to close the same .
my mother asked us to put her hand .
and they asked the monk , &quot; why is your hand so warm and the rest of her is so cold ? &quot;
&quot; because she has been doing it for tomorrow , he said .
&quot; they didn &apos;t . &quot;
if there &apos;s a ligament in our family , it &apos;s going to be the women .
you see who we were , and how life has been shaped us , we can see that the men would be able to be able to come in our lives that would be in the quere .
defeat would have been too simple .
now i would have to have my own children , and i still think about the boat .
who would ever be ?
yeah , i fear , i was afraid of privilegien , vor .
i can give you a set of your life , the courageous of the wave of every wave , stetige tuckern , stetige tuckern of the motors , the weiten horizon , the weiten horizon , who doesn &apos;t have any more garantiert ?
i don &apos;t know .
but if i could be this and you can certainly be , i would do it .
also , tans is now today , in the fourth or five- .
i &apos;m here to share my photography .
is it even photograph ?
because this is , of course , that &apos;s a picture that you can &apos;t ride with its camera .
yet my interest in photography when i was my first digital age , at age 15 years old .
i just put it with my former work , but it was a little different , because the camera was in the planning , the process of the process in planning .
and if you have a picture of a camera , a camera , you know , the process , when you put on the trigger .
so for me , in the photography , to be more likely to be the right place to the right place .
i believed that everybody could do that .
so i wanted to create something else , something that the process begins , when the trigger starts to .
photographs like this : a much more befahrenen road .
but it has a unexpected twist .
and behaltet still is a realistic plane .
or photographs like this -- dark and farbenfroh , but all with the collective purpose , a realistic plane .
if i say i say i &apos;m going to go back .
because , of course , it &apos;s not something you really designed , but i always want to look like it as if you could have seen it as if you could have seen it as if you could have seen it .
the pictures that you have to think about a very brief moment to try to trick .
so it &apos;s more about a idea that is about a idea that really .
but what &apos;s the trick , the most realistic ?
it &apos;s about the detail or the colors ?
is it about light ?
what creates the illusion ?
sometimes the illusion is the illusion .
but it &apos;s about how we interpret the world , and how it can interpret it to a two-dimensional surface .
it &apos;s not about what &apos;s wrong , but what we think is .
so i think the basics are very simple .
i see you see , as a puzzle , where you can take different pieces and able to create a alternative reality .
and let me show you an easy example .
we &apos;ve got three times the same amount of physical objects that we all identify to identify in a three-dimensional world .
but in a certain way , each other kind of adjacent , they can create something that &apos;s still looks like it might .
but at the same time we know that it &apos;s not possible .
so we measured our brains , because our brain is just not really makes sense .
and i see the same process in the middle of photos .
it &apos;s really just about to combine different ways .
so the things that do you have a picture of a picture , i think it &apos;s the things that we don &apos;t think about the things around us .
but if we combine , it &apos;s really important to think about it , because otherwise you just kind of look out .
so i would say that there are three basic rules to follow a realistisches outcome .
as you can see , they &apos;re not three images .
but combined , you can make something special like this .
so the first rule is that the gains have the same perspective .
secondly , we have the same beleuchtungsart .
and these two pictures , these two , these two demands -- from the same height , and the same thing .
third , it &apos;s about to distinguish it to distinguish where the individuals are starting to start and end , by making them seamlessly .
it &apos;s not possible to say how that photo actually did .
so by color , contrast , contrast , contrast and atmospheric on the edges of the individual imagery , fotografische madly , fotografische inks , fotografische inks , fotografische inks , fotografische inks , fotografische , wir , wir the boundaries between the different pictures , and let &apos;s see how a picture of the levels , even though a picture is a picture of the levels .
here &apos;s another example .
you may think that &apos;s just a landscape , and the bottom of the bottom .
but this painting is completely composed of different locations .
i personally think it &apos;s easier to create a place as a place that you don &apos;t have to use a compromise with the ideas in its head .
but it requires a lot planning .
and when i had this idea in winter , i knew i needed to be used to take months to plan to plan to plan to find different places for the pieces .
for instance , the fish was brought on a anglerausflug .
the waterfront comes from another place .
the unterwasser-teil is from a quarry quarry .
and yeah , i even have the house at the top of red , to make it look at it .
to get a realistisches outcome , it &apos;s going to come from me from the very planning .
i &apos;m always going to start with a sketch , a idea .
and then it &apos;s about the combination of different pictures .
and this is very good at all very well .
and then , if you look good footage , it can result quite beautiful , and also quite realistic .
so these are all tools available , and the only thing that gives us a focus , is our imagination .
thank you .
i would like to talk to you about why so many electronic gesundheits-projekte .
and i think the most important point is that we &apos;ve stopped connecting to our patients .
and one of the things we introduced in the radboud-universität islands , it was a haupt-zuhörer .
it &apos;s not particularly painful scientifically , and they &apos;re a cup cup of coffee , or tea and asks the patients , the families , relatives how about it ?
how can we help you ? &quot;
and we think we want to think that this is one of the main problem , why all the time -- maybe most of the electronic gesundheits-projekte , because we stopped listening .
this is my baseline . a very simple thing thing .
she has a button to go .
and every morning i &apos;m going to do it .
and yeah , i have a problem , how you might recognize .
i would like my job to sleep 95 .
it &apos;s just simple : every time i &apos;m going to take the cancer , you &apos;re going to google my data on google health .
and there are also going to be in my allgemeinarzt abgerufen , so he can recognize where my favorite life , and not only the moment where i &apos;m throwing the support or so , but with a glimpse of the past .
but there &apos;s still something else .
maybe you &apos;re familiar with you , i &apos;ve got to twitter .
so every morning i &apos;m going to talk to my stencils and the people talk to me , before i &apos;m sitting in the car , &quot; i &apos;d just be a little more nurses today , lucien . &quot;
but this is what &apos;s going to happen , which is , what can happen because this is the gruppenzwang , gruppenzwang , to help patients because that could be used against obesity , or it could be connected .
it also used to be used to get people from their chairs from their chairs , and they &apos;re going to bring together some kind of play , to play together to play together to play your health .
it &apos;s moving up to the market .
it &apos;s going to be this little blutdruck-messgerät that you &apos;re going to be in a iphone or something .
and it &apos;s going to be able to measure people , from home to measure it to their heart , to measure it to their doctor and send it to others , for a little more than 100 dollars .
in this point , the patient come to the game , you can &apos;t just get control over the control , but also , in health challenges that are going to be in health care , but also , in health challenges , to make the kostenexplosion of the health , and we &apos;re driving , and so on .
do you make methods that are easy to use , and begin to be connected to the team .
and that can you reach through those methods , but also by crowdsourcing .
and one of the things that we did do , i want to share with you a quick video .
we all have navigationssysteme in our cars .
maybe even in our mobile phones .
we know exactly where all of the atm around maastricht around .
we know , one of them , where are all the time .
and sure , we can find some fastfood-ketten .
but where the next generation of the next generation of this patient is going to help this patient ?
we have herumgefragt , and no one knew it .
no one knew where the next lebensrettende was going to find the next round of the road in this moment .
so what did we do ? we have an crowdsourcing in the netherlands .
we have a website and a menschenmasse , please share a aed , please share a aed , please share a aed , please share it when he &apos;s lying , &quot; because sometimes he &apos;s working on geschäftszeiten , of course .
and over 10,000 miles were in the netherlands .
the next step was to find the applications .
and we have a solar system designed .
we &apos;ve developed a app for layar , extended reality to find these aeds .
and if you &apos;re in a city like maastricht , and someone , you can use your iphone , and within the next weeks , you can save the next aed of life .
and then we don &apos;t want to just be as aed4u as the product itself , but as a aed4us .
and we want to put this on a scale .
and we ask our colleagues around the world , from other universities , that we can help us feel like knotenpunkte behavior , to crowdsource that aeds around the world .
and if you &apos;re in vacation , and somebody &apos;s a person &apos;s own , or someone else , you can find a aed .
the other thing we want to ask , is that business in the world are that companies are helping us in the whole world of this aeds .
this may be kurierdienste , or techniker , for example , just to assure , that the smartest aed is still in its place .
please help us , and try to improve the health , not just to improve it , but to take advantage .
thank you .
today i &apos;m going to report from unexpected discoveries .
i work in the solartechnologie-branche .
and my little startup , wants to force us to make a hard power by looking at it by looking at it by making it .
there &apos;s an amazing thing .
here &apos;s a short video of what we do .
oh . a moment .
it &apos;s maybe it &apos;s going to be .
now , we can just relax -- i &apos;m just going to show you just to skip the video , just to skip the video .
no .
that &apos;s not a thing , isn &apos;t it .
okay .
solartechnologie is a little bit of ... &quot;
oh , my time is far over .
okay . thank you .
so a few years ago , i started a program to work the stars in technology and design to get design to get a year that is so much that it &apos;s actually , we have them in the government .
the program is called &quot; code for america , &quot; and it &apos;s a bit like the friedenscorps for a meal .
we choose a year of a bunch of them out and we make them work with stadtverwaltungen .
instead of putting them into the third world , we send them in a rathäuser .
and there were amazing apps , working with urban employees .
but what they &apos;re really doing is to show what is happening today .
so al gore .
al &apos;s a hydrant in the city .
this looks like he looks like he &apos;s looking for a date , but what he really looks like , is someone who &apos;s freischaufelt , someone who &apos;s freischaufelt , because he knows it &apos;s not very good at the brandbekämpfung when he &apos;s a meter snow .
how did he get to look at this particular kind of help ?
we had a team of fellows in boston in boston in boston in boston in boston .
they were there , and it &apos;s got february of february of lots of geschneit .
and she decided that the city never had this fire frei .
but a particular fellow , a man named erik michaels-ober , who were still something else , and that was that the residents are free off the distance to schaufelten , right in front of these pieces .
so he did , he did what everybody developers would do , he wrote a app .
it &apos;s a nice little bit of a app , where you can adopt a fire system .
you stimmst him to him free , if it was .
if you do that , you can give him a name , and he called the first al gore .
if you don &apos;t , you can take it away .
so there &apos;s a nice little bit of them .
this is a modest little bit .
it &apos;s probably the smallest of the world &apos;s 21 apps who have been written in the last year .
but they do something , what does not do other people .
it &apos;s spreading .
there &apos;s this guy in the i.t. expressway that he could use this app , not for snow , but to make the citizen tsunami-sirenen .
it &apos;s very important that these tsunami-sirenen work , but people steal the batteries .
so he got the citizen to test them .
and then decided , to use the app to use the citizens that verstopften gullys .
and chicago , they just introduced the people who were die , , when it was .
we know now , nine cities , the ability to exploit this app .
and they &apos;ve got to do it , organic , of course .
if you know something about regierungstechnologie , you know , it &apos;s not going to go .
the beschaffung of software often are in the rule of a few years .
we had a team that last year in boston , for three people and half months .
it was about one method , with the parents , which the right public children are teaching their children .
and then told told that if it was about the normal channels , it would have been given over two years , and it would have been over two million dollars .
and this is not even really not .
there &apos;s been a project in the middle of the california that the taxpayer has been paid for two billion dollars , and it doesn &apos;t work .
and there &apos;s projects like this on the federal government .
so a app that &apos;s written in a few days , and then it &apos;s called selbt , is a kind of a shot in a kind of shot in front of the government .
it shows how the government could work better -- no more like a private business , how many people think they should .
and not even like a technik-unternehmen , but rather than the internet .
and that means free access to be open and productive .
and that &apos;s important .
but more importantly , this app is that they &apos;re a new generation , which is the problem of government anpackt -- not as the problem of a verknöcherten institution , but as a problem of collective .
and this is a very good news because it turns out that we &apos;re very good at the collective action with digital technology .
now there &apos;s a big community of people who make tools that we need to do things effectively together .
it &apos;s not just &quot; code for america , &quot; there are hundreds of people in the country that are burning and regierungs-apps , every day in their own communities .
they don &apos;t have the government .
they &apos;re deliberately with her , but they don &apos;t complain about it .
and these guys know what we lost from the eyes .
and then , if you all your feelings of politics , and the snake charmers and all the other things that we really have , is to be in the words of tim o , &quot; what we &apos;re doing in common we can &apos;t do alone . &quot;
now a lot of people have the government .
and if you &apos;re a man , please , i urge you to think about it , because they &apos;re changing the things .
politics is not happening . the government is in the change .
and because the government finally looked at their power out of us -- erinner , &quot; we are the people ? &quot; -- how we think about it , is going to happen , like this change .
i didn &apos;t know very much about government , when i started this program .
and how many people , i thought that it was the government to actually choose to choose people .
now , after two years , i &apos;ve got to come to the conclusion that it &apos;s especially in the kommunen to beutelratten .
this is the ability for service and information .
there are you going out to get when you go into your town .
if you ever have the chance to have a chance to work in your mind , like our fellow scott silverman silverman as part of the program -- in fact , you &apos;re all the way , the people who are separated around many different issues -- including that a beutelratte in your house .
scott &apos;s anfruf .
he &apos;s going to be in the official &quot; in the official .
and he didn &apos;t really start with the tierfänger .
and he says , &quot; look , you can just open up all the doors in your house and see if this is playing ? ? &quot;
and this was the work . for scott .
but that wasn &apos;t the end of the beutelratten .
boston isn &apos;t just a call .
it has a app , a web- and handy-app , called citizens connect .
we didn &apos;t written this app .
so this is the work very popular people in the office of new york city .
one day -- this is an actual report -- came to this : &quot; beutelratte in my mülltonne , not say whether it &apos;s dead .
how do you get them ? &quot;
but what happens to &quot; citizens &quot; &apos;s &quot; citizens &quot; connect &quot;
scott unterhielt of human being human .
but in citizens connect , is fine , so everybody can see it .
and in this case , it &apos;s a neighbor neighbor .
and the next post we get , &quot; i was there , found the mülltonne behind the house .
yeah ? yeah . um .
the mülltonne auf on the site .
nice night , sweet beutelratte .
pretty simple .
that &apos;s great . this is the digital physical .
and it &apos;s also a good example of how the government goes to the crowdsourcing .
but it &apos;s also a great example of the government as a platform .
and i don &apos;t necessarily have an engineering definition of the platform .
i &apos;m going to talk about a platform for people to help themselves and to help others .
one citizen would be able to citizen , but the government was an central role .
they also transform these two people .
and you would have them with multiple reform , if they had been a license , but a neighbor is far better and minimal goods .
if you have a neighbor to help the other time we make our communities .
let &apos;s call the tierfänger , costs a lot of money .
one of the most important things is that we have to think that the government isn &apos;t the same as politics .
and most people understand that , but they believe that one is the input of the rest .
our contribution to the system is the vote .
how many times we often voted a policy leader -- and sometimes we have a lot of energy to choose a new political leaders , and then we put a lot of energy to choose our values and our needs , and then not a lot of change ?
that &apos;s because the government is like a tv , and politics is the obersten 15cm .
and what is that is what we call it .
and we use this word with such contempt .
but it &apos;s that contempt that this thing we own and for that we own and for that we &apos;re going to work something , and then we &apos;ll find ourselves .
people seem to think politics .
if we want to do that , that &apos;s what we have to do is to do it .
because this is where the actual regierungsarbeit is in the middle of the space .
we have to put on the end of the government .
so the sinaloa federation has done it .
you have seen this data ?
it &apos;s a group of citizen that has a very detailed 325-seitigen report that has a response to the finanz-reform .
that &apos;s not a political active person , that &apos;s bürokratisch active .
now , for those of us who have the government , it &apos;s time that we think about the world that we want to leave our children .
you &apos;ve got to imagine the enormous challenges you need to ask .
we really think that we can get what we need to do without a institution that can do you have to act in the names of us all of us .
now , a government is absolutely necessary , but it needs to be more efficient .
the good news is that technology can be able to transform the function of the government , actually , something that actually can do something that actually can achieve the society .
and there &apos;s a generation that &apos;s grown internet , and the white is that it &apos;s not so hard to do things together , you have to build the only systems .
now the average age of all of our fellows is 28 , unfortunately , almost a generation of a generation of most of them as most of them .
this is a generation that grew up with your voice as a no-brainer .
they don &apos;t fight this struggle that we all fight , who is going to be , who talk about who are talking about who are talking about who are talking about who are talking about who are talking about who are talking about who are talking about who are talking about who are talking about who are talking about who are talking about who are talking about who are
you can make your mind , on each channel of each time , and they do it .
so if you &apos;re faced with the problem of the government , they don &apos;t really know that it &apos;s so much about to use their voices .
they use your hands .
they use your hands to write applications that are improving the work of government .
and these apps are using our hands to improve our communities .
this could be a fire hydrant program , and i think , a mülleimer with a beutelratte .
and sure , we would have these same web techniques that all of you can do all the time , and many people do .
but these apps are like small digital memories , that we &apos;re not just consumers , and we &apos;re not only consumers of the government and giving them .
we are more than that , we are citizens .
and we won &apos;t improve the government to improve that until we do better .
so the question i have to ask you : if it comes to the big , important things we have to do together , we &apos;re just a lot of votes , or will we also be a lot of hands ?
thank you .
usually my role , in the people , what i really think , and i was feeling , i would tell you what i really think , and i &apos;m going to try and understand what &apos;s really going on , and i was feeling here , with these incredible sprüngen , which is what we &apos;re hardly able to get to that .
i will start to start with you , just a single point of slide .
if you could show you just slides .
this is a slide which i happen to be made of my folder .
it &apos;s not about the details of the slide , but rather to the poor form .
this slide show this slide from a analysis of uns about performance abuse of risc , compared to the performance of a solar networks .
the interesting thing here is that this slide , as we are often in our field , a kind of straight on a semi-logarithmischen curve .
in other words , everyone &apos;s going to be a potency in the leistungsskala .
and this is a rule that we have to use this guy in semi-logarithmischen curves in the field of technology .
something very strange .
this is basically what i &apos;m going to talk about here .
so if you could put the light over again .
another one , because i &apos;m going to draw something that paper here .
now why do we draw graphs in the technology ?
the reason for this is , if i draw it down to a normal curve , where , we say that &apos;s the timeline , so that &apos;s a bit of the technology that i want to deal with this , then the graph will be albern .
that &apos;s like this .
and that tells us a lot .
if i want to share another technology , let &apos;s say a transporttechnologie , then it would be on the semi-logarithmischen scale , in the form of very unvernünftig , in the form of a flat line .
but if something like this here , then this is the qualitativen conditions .
so if the transporttechnologie just as quickly as the mikroprozessor-technologie is going to be able to get übermorgen into a taxi , and in 30 seconds , we would be in tokyo .
but this is not that fast .
there was never been before in history , this kind of rekursivem growth , through which the vast majority of them are exponentially .
so the question i want to ask you , if you look at this exponential curves , you see , they &apos;re not going to go .
it &apos;s not possible that everything forever and forever go and forever go away .
there &apos;s two ways of land : this is two ways .
either , it &apos;s going to be a classic diagnostic line like this , to something completely new , or it &apos;s going to happen .
that &apos;s what about it .
well , i &apos;m an optimist , so i think i think that &apos;s the way that it &apos;s going to happen .
so that &apos;s really what we &apos;re here at the moment in the moment .
we &apos;re here on this line , in a transition of the world &apos;s optimism is about a new kind of world .
so the question i want to ask , and i often myself often myself , is how this new world is going to be gone ?
what is this new state of affairs to the world .
because the transition seems to be very , very confusing , if you &apos;re resting right inside .
when i was a kid , there was the future somewhere in 2000 and people were often talking about what would happen in 2000 .
now , there &apos;s a conference here , there &apos;s people talking about the future , and you realize that the future is still in 2000 .
and on the other than we don &apos;t .
so in other words , the future is going to be a year since i am in the world .
i think the reason is that we see that something is happening in the way .
the transition is happening . we can all feel it .
and we know that it &apos;s just not going to take a point of making 30 or 50 years of time , because it &apos;s so different , that it &apos;s so different that a simple hochrechnung of what we do is now not make sense .
i want to talk about what this might be like we are right now .
to do this , i &apos;m going to talk about some other things that really do with technology or computers .
because i think that really , really , we need to go back to step back and look at the thing on a längeren .
and that &apos;s what i want to look at the most zeitskala of life .
i think that the bigger sense , if you &apos;re going to be a few milliarden-schritte .
so let &apos;s go back to , and it &apos;s been a couple of years , and the earth was a big , steriler steinklumpen with many of them .
if you look at the way that these chemicals were organized , then we have a pretty good picture of what they &apos;re doing .
i think there &apos;s theories that lead to understand how all of it has been , but i will tell you a very simplified story that is at that time , at that time , herumschwebten herumschwebten , which is different types of rezepten for chemicals .
some of these öltröpfchen enthielten are a special combination of chemicals that allowed them to stop the other chemicals from the moment and so on .
all the way began to be in .
these little öltröpfchen were the sinne zellenform .
but yet , these worsening didn &apos;t look like about alive because each one was just a little bit of a small , zufälliges recipe of chemicals .
and every time it divided , they have to create chemicals like that , they have a befindlichen chemicals .
so every single problem was a little different .
in fact , the tröpfchen , which one of the growth of cheap machines than others and more chemicals and shared faster .
so , this is neigten to survive longer , and they &apos;re really stuck in grösserem .
so this is just a very simple chemical form of life , but more interestingly , it will be , if this kind of tröpfchen is a trick .
in some way , we don &apos;t understand that we have the ability to do information , information .
they learn to store the recipe as information , and in a particular chemical shape , which we call dna .
in other words , they have in this geistlosen , evolutionary way of a way that you could use them , niederzuschreiben , so that this information will be gespeichert and copied .
the amazing thing about this is that this kind of information over time of the information was going from 2.5 billion years in which it was originally .
in fact , the recipe for us , which is our genes from the exactly same code and the same .
and every living every life has to do the exact same time and the same code .
we are as far as we can &apos;t get to vergnügungszweck , is to be able to write in this code .
and i have a hundred mikrogramm mikrogramm , which i &apos;ve been in airports to keep in airports .
it &apos;s what i &apos;ve done -- what i did is i &apos;ve done this code -- the code is from normal letters , which we use to symbolisieren -- and i &apos;ve written my visitenkarte on a piece of dna , and it &apos;s 10 ^ 22 times .
so if somebody was a hundred million copies of my mind , i &apos;ve got enough for everybody in this room and even on this world , and it &apos;s right here .
i would have been in fact a egoist , i would have them on a virus , and then in the room .
so what is next to move ?
dna was a very interesting step .
and the veranlagten that cells -- that &apos;s what she did was they &apos;re happy for another billion years .
but then a different thing happened to be very , very interesting , where things were completely different , and that these cells have to communicate and information that information , so that communities have emerged .
i don &apos;t know if you knew that , but bacteria can actually have their dna .
that &apos;s why the consistency is going to grow the consistency .
some bacteria have found themselves , and they have a lot of bacteria with other bacteria in the dna , and now we have a lot bacteria , which are they &apos;re doing , because the bacteria communicate .
these communication girls are now doing this , of how to look at what was in the same boat , they were synergetisch .
so they either survive , or they went on under the community of the community of the community of the community of the community of the community of the community of wiederholt and the evolution .
the übergangsstelle is now where these communities are so close to the communities that they decided to write the recipe for all the community in a zeichenkette .
and the next interesting phase took about another billion years .
we &apos;ve been mehrzellige communities , communities from many of verschiedlichen zellentypen , which is what we do as an individual organism .
in fact , we are also related to the community community .
we have many cells that are not going to be alone .
you &apos;re skin cells without heart disease , and that &apos;s so on .
so these communities began to feel weiterzuentwickeln , so that the plane , the evolution of what the evolution were no longer , but the whole thing that we call organism .
the next step was going to be able to end up in this room .
the zellengemeinschaften began to work .
and they developed special structures , which nothing else has made other than information within the organism .
and these are the neural structures .
so the neurons are the informationsverarbeitungsapparat that these zellengemeinschaften are built .
they started to be used to specialists to the community , special structures , which was responsible for learning and understand and this is the work of information .
and this was the brain , and the nervous system of this communities .
this gave them a evolutionary advantage .
because this moment is actually a individual -- learning happened , but the lowest time of one of the lifespan of one of the organism &apos;s lifespan , instead of these evolutionary period .
so a organism , so one organism could learn to eat a certain fruit because they had bad , because they had to be sick and made sick , the last time he was eaten .
now , this could occur in the lifetime of a single organism , whereas the hundreds of thousands of years , because this information was worth of the individuals who died because of this point , because these were not yet there yet .
so the nervous system has the evolutionsprozess response to this particular incident because evolution could now be able to take place in a single individual .
they could be able to make a nurse in a mind .
what happened next to that is that the individual organisms have a way to communicate with each other .
let &apos;s say , as an example , the raffinierteste of this kommunikationsart is the human language .
it &apos;s an amazing invention when you think about it .
i &apos;ve got a very complicated , unordentliche and verwirrte .
i &apos;m sitting here and i basically basically have a genommen sound of me basically a similar idea in your head that has a certain idea that i think has a certain idea .
so we take something very complicated , it &apos;s moving in a way , a sequence of sound , and producing some kind of complicated in the heads of others .
so this allows us to work again , it allows us to work again .
and what we did , we &apos;ve done it , we &apos;ve got humanity , we &apos;ve begun to work .
we also have the same steps , which mehrzellerorganismen , what we &apos;ve been doing -- the abstraction of our methods , as we present data .
the invention of language was a little step into this direction .
telefonie , computers , cd-roms , cd-roms , cd-roms , and so on all our means , our idea that we &apos;ve built in our community to make this information .
and it connects us all together into something that is much bigger , and also able to develop more quickly on the way we were .
so nowadays , it can happen in the time of microseconds .
you &apos;ve also seen tys little evolutionsbeispiel , where he was a bit of evolution in the convolution &quot; program , right outside your eyes .
so now we have the zeitskalen again .
the first steps of the story i &apos;ve been told you , i have a billion of a billion a piece of a time .
the next steps , like the nervous system and the brain , dauerten a few hundred million years .
then the nächstens steps , like language and so on , more than a million years .
and this next steps , as electronics , just to make a few decades .
the process of thinking itself , and then , i think , is the word for this -- if something is its änderungsgeschwindigkeit .
the more it changes , the faster it changes .
and i think that &apos;s what we see here in this pouch curve .
we see the process that &apos;s going to be .
i &apos;m living with professionally computers , i know i can use the mechanism that i use using computer , not use computer , without the kürzlich advances in computing .
my current tätigkeit is how to design objects with such a high complexity that it &apos;s impossible to design this in traditional sense .
i don &apos;t know what every single transistor in the verbindungsmaschine power .
it &apos;s got billions of that .
what i do instead , and what do designers do things do , we think of a certain abstraktionsebene , looking at this machine , and the machine does something that makes a capability far beyond , better and faster than we could ever do it .
and they &apos;re doing it in part with the techniques that we don &apos;t even understand until now .
one method , which is particularly interesting , and what i &apos;ve been used in the last time , i &apos;ve been using it , the evolution itself .
we &apos;re installing a evolutionsprozess in the machine , which is in the mikrosekunden-bereich .
to give an example to call an example , in the most extreme , we can create a program that stretches from random .
we say , &quot; computer , generiere , five million random million random million dollars from .
now , you &apos;re going to be able to get all of these randomly chosen , and you can get to the most , which i think about my own . &quot;
so in other words , i want first to kick what i want .
let &apos;s say , i want to watch numbers that would be a simple example , which i used for that .
so , in the programs that can be involved in the home of a few seconds .
now , of course , the chance of randomly chosen are very small that they &apos;re just chance to be a little bit of a way , so not yet , will not be able to do this .
but one of those things might have been lucky to two numbers in the right order .
now i say , &quot; computer , take the ones , take the ones that my own work are going on .
they &apos;re going to rest the rest .
now , all the übriggebliebenen that have the numbers of numbers .
and that &apos;s a method of the rekombinierens , provide reproduction . &quot;
take two programs , and they produce kids through the exchange of your subroutinen , and the kids are vererben the properties of the subroutinen of the subroutinen of the subroutinen .
now , i have a new generation of programs that are separated by combinations of programs that are closer to the vorgaben as others .
tell , &quot; please , &quot; please . &quot;
she &apos;s back .
maybe some of mutations .
and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and try and do this whole .
all of these generations are just a few milliseconds of few milliseconds of few milliseconds of few milliseconds .
and so i can have a evolution about millions of years in the computer , in the computer , in the computer , in the computer , in the computer , a computer , a few hours of a few hours .
so , after that , i &apos;m going to show up the numbers of a lot of time .
the fact is , these programs are so much more efficient than any program that i &apos;ve ever been to do .
if i look at this show , then i can &apos;t say how they work .
i tried to understand them .
it &apos;s been around and strange programs .
but they &apos;re going to get the job .
i know and i &apos;m sure that they &apos;re going to get the job , because they made from a series of hunderttausenden programs that have the job .
because their life is , if they did the job right .
i sat in a 747 article with marvin minsky , ale er , he er a card hervorholt and says , &quot; oh look at that .
there &apos;s one airplane that aircraft are made out of hunderttausenden , which is what they work on doing their words in order to make your words of your flight . &apos; doesn &apos;t do that ?
we know that a solar system isn &apos;t necessarily being too complicated .
so let &apos;s start to rely on computer , for a process , which is from the classical public .
it allows us to produce things with a much more higher complexity than it would make the normal methods .
and yet , we understand the opportunity to not quite .
so gewissermassen überflügelt is the technology .
we use this programs now to make the computer much faster , so that we can make these processes to be able to change .
so it starts .
it &apos;s going to faster and faster and i think that &apos;s why it seems to be so puzzling .
because all of these new technologies are inherently .
we raise light .
we are at a point where the people are actually developed as a einzeller-organismen .
so we &apos;re the amöben and we cannot see what we &apos;re doing now here at the heart .
we are in this übergangpunkt .
but i really think that , after us something .
i think it &apos;s very hochmütig of us to say that we are the beginning of evolution .
and i think we all have all of the creation of the creation of what &apos;s going to happen next .
now , the lunch thing before , and i think i &apos;m going to stop here before i &apos;m going to go back .
my story starts right here in the district , sometime about two years ago .
i was under the course of the desert in the desert mukhtiar .
we talked about it , we talked about nothing about the time of the ancient indian epos , &quot; mahabharata . &quot;
if we wanted to travel , we were going to go into a car and schwirrten über .
now we &apos;re doing this with airplanes .
at the time , the great indian kriegerprinz thirst had seen , he took a bow , fired in the ground and water .
now we &apos;re doing this with bohrern and machines .
we came to the conclusion that magic and magic were replaced by machines .
and that &apos;s really sad .
i was given something crazy to this .
i &apos;m afraid that i could lose the ability to lose the ability to get the full of that , without swimming and without a place of my friends .
i found that technology can be not going to kill us and not kill .
when i was a little girl , my grandfather gave me his little silberne .
this piece of 50 technologies became an magischste thing for me .
she became a goldener access to a world of pirates and verunglückter and to images in my mind .
i came to it as a hielten , our breath came to the uhren and put it down .
they kept inspired us to get it .
and so i &apos;m going to turn myself into the world of technology to see how i could use it to make a rather than that .
with 16 , i started to illustrate books .
when i saw the ipad , i saw it as a device , the readers of readers in the world .
it can know how we think it .
it &apos;s knowing where we are .
it &apos;s really closely and text and animation , and touch .
it &apos;s more sinne .
but what do we do it ?
i just go to a huge amount of ipad .
here &apos;s , &quot; put your fingers on every light . &quot;
and so -- here &apos;s , &quot; this next says , &quot; i write my names .
and then i made a character in the book .
and again , i &apos;m going to give up a letter to me -- and this was a ipad white , gps , i live in the course of the -- that &apos;s right in me .
the kid is really excited about this .
i talked about magic talking about magic .
i mean not magicians , and kites , but the magic of childhood , those ideas we &apos;ve had all of as children .
fireflies in a glass found i always found quite exciting .
so you have to be the ipad here , and the fireflies rauslassen .
and the air was going through the rest of the time .
another idea that makes me as a child is that a whole galaxy can put in a single murmel .
and therefore , every book here , and every world has a little murmel that i put here to the magic device in the device .
and this opens a map .
they had been kept maps , but these were static .
this map grows and avoid and women &apos;s guidance for guidance on the rest of the book .
it also shows you to other places .
i go .
it &apos;s also important for me to make something that is indisch is also very zeitgemäß .
these are the apsaras .
we &apos;ve all heard of feen and nymphen , but how many people were known to india , their indian colleagues , the apsaras ?
the poor apsaras were thousands of years in indras , imprisoned in indras , in a old age book .
and we bring them back to a contemporary history of children .
a story that stretches with new issues like the umweltkrise .
for the subject , a big problem of the last 10 years is that kids are sitting in their dorm , on their computers , no rauszugehen .
but now , with mobile technology , we can tweak our children in the natural world .
in a different interaction , you &apos;re sent on a quest to go and use the camera of the ipads natural objects .
as a kid , i had collections of stöckern , rocks and muscheln .
it &apos;s not a little bit .
this is a kindheitsritual . you have to do a photograph to tag on a photograph of a flower .
in another chapter , you have to put a piece of baumrinde and tag on it .
so you can actually put a digital collection of photographs that you can provide .
a child in london shows the image of a fuchses and says , &quot; oh , today i saw a fox . &quot;
a kid in india says , &quot; i saw a monkey photograph . &quot;
this creates a kind of social network surrounding a digital collection collection of photographs that you actually have .
there &apos;s a variety of opportunity to magic , and technology together to connect together .
next book we plan to plan one interaction in the front of the ipads , and by augmented , is a animation of elfen that will appear on a plant that is on a plant .
at a point , it &apos;s called the screen .
you have to do the sound of the decision-making , they &apos;ll be away and the rest of the book .
we all move to a world where the natural impact of technology is going to come and technology and technology .
we use the power of the sun .
we bring our children and we get closer to the natural world , and the magic , and the love of our childhood has a simple medium of a history .
thank you .
this is really a really honor for me .
i spend the most of the most of my time with people in untersuchungshaft , prisons or todeszellen .
i spend the most of the most socially loving in the sozial and in places where there &apos;s lots of hopelessness .
here at ted , here at ted , and i hear the way that it &apos;s really a lot of power .
in the short time , i became one of a clear , ted has a identity .
you can say things that have the world .
and sometimes , if something goes out of ted , it &apos;s a meaning and force it doesn &apos;t have it .
i say , because i think that identity is very important .
we &apos;ve seen some fantastic presentations .
i think we &apos;ve learned that the words of a wise visual , but the words of a dedicated is particularly meaningful .
as a doctor , you can do good , and as a doctor , you can do more .
and that &apos;s why i want to talk about the power of identity .
i didn &apos;t learn this by my work as a lawyer .
i &apos;ve learned this from my grandmother .
i was big in a family , a traditional afroamerikanischen household , who was a matriarchin dominated in the dominiert , and this was a grandmother .
she was a taffe , strong woman , she had to have .
she had the last word in every familienstreit .
it was also the most common family in our family .
she was the daughter of a sklavenfamilie .
their parents were born in the 1840ern in virginia .
she was born in 1880 , and the experience of slavery is very strong .
my grandmother was strong , but she was also very much .
if i met her as a young boy , she came to me and umarmte me .
they &apos;re so fortunate that i was not breathing , and then they had to go .
one or two hours later , if i got her , she came to me and said , &quot; oh , you feel my embrace ? &quot;
and if i &apos;m saying , &quot; i said , &quot; i &apos;m going to get me back . &quot; i said , &quot; i let me go .
she was something that was that you wanted to be in their close .
the only problem that was that they had 10 children .
my mom was the youngest of 10 children .
sometimes , if i wanted to spend time with her , it was hard to get her attention .
my cousins had gone around .
i remember , i have to be eight or nine , i woke up one morning , and i went to living room . all my cousins around .
my grandmother was sitting at the end of the zimmers and i was staring at me .
and i thought that this would be a game .
i saw her and i was smiling , but they looked very seriously .
it went like 15 minutes , and then she stood up and came to me . she took me to hand and said , &quot; come on , bryan . you and i , we need to talk . &quot;
i remember it was yesterday .
i &apos;ll never forget .
she took me to out and said , &quot; i &apos;m going to tell you something , but you &apos;ve got to promise you that you don &apos;t have it . &quot;
i said , &quot; promised , grandma . &quot;
she said , &quot; ehrenwort ? &quot; i said , &quot; yeah . &quot;
she sat me , and i looked at them . she said , &quot; i want you to know that i &apos;ve seen you . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you &apos;re special . &quot;
she said , &quot; i think you can do anything you want to do . &quot;
i never forget that .
then she said , &quot; you &apos;ve got to give me three things , bryan . &quot;
i said , &quot; ok , grandma . &quot;
she said , &quot; when first versprich me , you &apos;re always loving your mommy . &quot;
she said , &quot; your mom is my baby and you have to say that you &apos;re always taking care of you . &quot;
i said my mother , so i said , &quot; yeah , i said , &quot; yeah , i &apos;m going to do . &quot;
then she said , &quot; well , when i said , &quot; next to me , you &apos;re always going to do the right thing , &quot; do it becomes a hard thing to do right right . &quot;
i thought , and i said , &quot; yeah , i promise . i promise it . &quot;
she said , &quot; the last thing you &apos;ve got to think of promise , is that you never drink alcohol . &quot;
now , i was nine years old , and so i said , &quot; yeah , i was grandma . i promise it . &quot;
i grew up on land , rural south , and i have a brother , which one year older and a year younger sister .
when i was about 14 or 15 , and i came home , my brother home , and brought this sixpack beer with her sister and me and i was going to go into the forest .
we just went there as you do it .
then he took a drink , and offered my sister &apos;s one , and she took one of the time , and then she offered me one .
i said , &quot; no , no , no , no . i mean , it &apos;s just . i don &apos;t want beer to beer . &quot;
my brother said , &quot; well , we &apos;re going to do that , today we &apos;re doing , now , anything we do .
i had , your sister had what i did . go , trink a beer .
i said , &quot; i don &apos;t want to be . &quot; it just is her . &quot; do you just make your mind .
my brother was me .
he said , &quot; what &apos;s going on , &quot; what do you do ? now , what &apos;s going on . &quot;
and then he saw me , and he said , &quot; oh no , you don &apos;t know how to get crazy for the conversation with grandma ? &quot;
i said , &quot; what are you talking about ? &quot;
he said , &quot; grandma told them what was special . &quot;
i was devastated .
i &apos;ll give you something .
i should not do that .
this is what &apos;s going to be like this .
i &apos;m 52 years old , and i was feeling that i &apos;ve never been alcohol in alcohol .
i &apos;m not saying that because i think it &apos;s tugendhaft . i &apos;m saying that &apos;s because identity is power .
if we do the right kind of identity , we can tell us the people around us , they don &apos;t believe .
we can get them to do things , they couldn &apos;t do it .
of course , my grandmother all your grandchildren say , they &apos;re special .
my grandfather was during prison in prison .
my uncle died of alkoholinduzierten diseases .
and she believed that this is the issues that we have to do .
i tried to say something about our justizsystem .
this land is different than we did 40 years ago .
so , 300,000 was 300,000 people in haftanstalten and in prison .
today , it &apos;s 2.3 million .
the united states today is the highest incarceration world of the world .
seven million people are sitting on the table or mit strafaussetzung .
my mind was changing in my opinion .
in social weak and black parts of the population and hopelessness , because of that changes .
one of three male black black in 18 and 30 is in prison , in prison , in the prison , on the prison , or mit strafaussetzung .
in urban communities , from los angeles , 19 to washington , 19 to washington -- are 50 to 60 percent of the young young men young men young men , in prison , or mit strafaussetzung .
our system isn &apos;t just 40,000 , which is going to do with self-reflection , it &apos;s also going to be controlled by poverty .
we have in this country in this country that they treated much better when they smile and they &apos;re being poor and innocent .
fortune , not verschulden , nuclear power .
but anyway , we seem to be pleased .
one politics of fear and anger has convinced that these problems are not our problems .
we lost the contact .
i think that &apos;s interesting .
there &apos;s a few hochinteressante developments .
my home alabama , enabled them to the wahlrecht , if they &apos;re doomed .
here , and today , in alabama , the male schwarzen population is lost their lost .
we prognostizieren that in 10 years , the land of the aberkennung of the aberkennung of the aberkennung of the aberkennung of the aberkennung of the aberkennung of the aberkennung of the aberkennung of the aberkennung of the aberkennung of the aberkennung is as its vor .
the silence is ohrenbetäubend .
i adore children .
many of my mandanten are very young .
the united states of america are the only country in the world , the only country in the world , the most enterprising children in prison death in prison .
in this country , there are kids now ohne haftstrafen without any bedingte .
we &apos;ve got a lot of things .
the only country in the world .
i vertrete people .
the question of death is an interesting question .
we think because you &apos;ve been taught that the true question is : has a human crime for a guy crime ?
this is a very powerful question .
you can also think differently about how we see our identity .
the other perspective is not , somebody has a crime death , but it &apos;s : it &apos;s what we deserve to kill ?
i think that &apos;s fascinating .
the death penalty defines through error .
in the nine of the people we &apos;ve executed , it &apos;s one of one that we have to have innocent before , the entlastet and from the death penalty .
a remarkable fehlerquote . a population of nine .
i think that &apos;s fascinating .
we would never be able to fly somebody with an airplane if you &apos;re in nine planes , the abheben , one .
but somehow we can do it , we can do this problem .
it &apos;s not our problem .
it &apos;s not our burden .
it &apos;s not our struggle .
i talk about this question .
i talk about race and the question is , whether we &apos;re right .
and it &apos;s exciting because i &apos;m my students , history . i talk about slavery .
i talk about terrorism , the cut-off time against the end of the rekonstruktion dynasty , to the beginning of the ocean .
we don &apos;t really know much about it .
but for a while , it was a time of terror .
in many areas , they had to have people in the levels of lynchmobs .
or bombs .
it was the fear of terror that &apos;s life .
this older people come to me and say , &quot; mr , stevenson , &quot; you &apos;re talking to stop , we &apos;re talking to stop talks . they say that we should stop in history of our nation with terrorism : after 9 / 11 .
they say , &quot; no , say , &quot; you say that we grew up with that . &quot;
and then after the terrorism , the rassentrennung and decades of rassistisch motivierten and apartheid .
and yet there &apos;s been a dynamic piece of dynamic -- we don &apos;t like to think about our problems .
we don &apos;t like to talk about our history .
and so we don &apos;t really understand what we did have done in the historical context .
we constantly go back .
we always do always create new tensions and conflict .
it &apos;s going to take us hard to talk about race , and i think that &apos;s because we &apos;re not willing to be the truth and reconciliation .
in south africa , people realize that the rassentrennung is not too overcome without the willingness to be truth and reconciliation .
even after the genocide in rwanda , there were bereitschaft , but not in this country .
i &apos;ve got some speeches in germany .
it was fascinating , because one of the scientists said to my talk , and i said , &quot; you know , it &apos;s deeply troubling to hear them . &quot;
he said , &quot; in germany , there &apos;s no death .
and of course , they never give them more in germany .
it was very quiet . and then a woman said , &quot; well , with our history , it &apos;s impossible to be ever killing people .
it would be foolish of us , and then they &apos;re going to send people .
i thought about it .
as it would be done , in a world where the german state of people were ließ , especially when you were unverhältnismäßig of many jews .
it would be unerträglich .
it would be gewissenlos .
and yet , here in this country , in the states of the old südens , we put people in here -- here &apos;s the risk of being a victim , and here &apos;s the most risk of being black , 22 times higher , if the dissolved black is black and the victims of the country -- in the same states , in the way that the body gelynchter
and yet there &apos;s these mental abkopplung .
i think our identity is threatened .
if we don &apos;t think about what we &apos;re doing , with these critically issues , the positive and the amazing things also are .
we love innovation .
we love technology and creativity .
we love entertainment .
but then finally , these realities of überschattet , abuse , ausgrenzung , ausgrenzung .
i think it &apos;s important to unite .
because we talk about that we need more hope to do more and more engagement , more commitment to be able to live in a complex world .
for me , for me , to think , and talk about the poor , the ones that will never be at ted .
but think about a kind of a kind of thing that is integrated in our own life .
we all have to believe that we can &apos;t see .
we do this . so we &apos;re also so much as we estimate .
innovation , and development is not just coming from our heads .
they come from ideas , the driven will be in our hearts .
it &apos;s this kopf-herz-verbindung , which i think they &apos;re planning to come to us , not just be open for all the light and begeisternden things , but also for dark and problematischen .
vaclav havel , the great tschechische politicians , said she said , &quot; : , &quot; the great tschechische politicians , once said , &quot; the great tschechische politicians , she said , &quot; was she said , &quot; was saying , &quot; was saying , &quot; was saying , &quot; was saying , &quot; was saying , &quot; was saying , &quot; was saying , &quot; was saying ,
we wanted to solve all kinds of the oppression , we wanted to be a spiritual orientation that would be manchmal , sometimes the willingness to be sometimes in hoffnungslosen locations and witness .
this mental orientation is the core of what i believe is needed to engage the doctrines .
there &apos;s no way of technology around technology and design that allowed us to be human and true to be human and ears and injustice and injustice .
i want you to warn you . this kind of identity is very much more than if we don &apos;t care about them .
it &apos;s going to touch it .
as a youngster , i hatt the great privilege to meet pink .
woman came back to montgomery , the älteren women -- a tremendous afroamerikanerin -- and virginia durr , a white afroamerikanerin , johnnie carr , who had been submitted to montgomery , dr. king , dr. durr , dr. king vertrat .
so these women were spinning and they just kept complaining .
and then called the woman mich me and said , &quot; bryan , lady , woman coming in the city . we want to talk about .
do you want to follow and listen ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; yeah , very , very . &quot;
she said , &quot; and what are you going to do when you &apos;re here ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m going to listen . &quot;
and i just went over and listened to it .
it was always inspiring , so evocative .
one day i sat there and listened to this women , and after a few hours , i was sitting and a few hours , and i said , &quot; well , tell me what the most useful is right for human right .
what are you going to do ? &quot; &quot;
i started with my usual talk .
i said , &quot; we &apos;re trying to get injustice .
they want people to help people who were banned .
we want to be voreingenommenheit and discrimination in the strafvollzugssystem .
we want to be lebenslängliche haftstrafen ohne without children .
we want to do something about the death penalty .
we want the number of the global .
we want to be masseninhaftierungen . &quot;
i stopped my hand , and then she looked at me and said , &quot; mhmm . mhmm . mhmm . &quot; mhmm . &quot;
she said , &quot; this is what &apos;s going to do it , very tired . &quot;
then , then the lehnte lady came to me , put a finger on my face and said , &quot; and so they must be very , very tapfer . &quot;
and so i think the ted should be tapferer .
we need to ask to ask ourselves that challenges , this problem , this suffering .
because , in our humanity , our humanity , from our own country .
in my work , i learned things .
i learned a few things to learn .
we all have more than the worst thing we &apos;ve ever done .
i think that applies to everybody .
if somebody lies , it &apos;s not just a liar .
if somebody takes something that doesn &apos;t heard &apos;t it , it &apos;s not just a pile .
even who &apos;s somebody who kills it , is not just a killer .
and because that &apos;s so , there &apos;s a fundamental human dignity that &apos;s law .
i think that in many parts of this country , and security , in many parts of the earth , the opposite of poverty is not wealth .
i don &apos;t think that .
i think that &apos;s in many places of poverty is justice .
and finally , i think , even though it &apos;s so dramatic and inspiring , and so we end up with the end of our technology , we &apos;re not going to be in the things that we &apos;re developing , not to the things that we &apos;re developing , not to the things we understand .
finally , a society isn &apos;t because of a society , as you get your rich and powerful , but because of how they stretch to poor , the verurteilten , the inhaftierten .
because in this context , we start to grasp the right things that we &apos;re going to do .
i &apos;ve got to balance this . i &apos;m going to finish this .
i feel too much .
i &apos;m going to do , as we all .
sometimes , these ideas are thinking of our thinking in very important way .
i have these children who were very verurteilt .
i go into the wheelhouse and visit a lovely , which 13 or 14 years old , and he &apos;s considered the adult in court .
then i wonder how could that happen ?
how can a judge somebody in something that he isn &apos;t .
the judge ever see him as adults , but i see a child .
and i thought , i thought my god , if a judge judge can turn into something else , then he must have zauberkräfte .
that &apos;s exactly what judge judge has to be zauberkräfte .
you should also have to do .
and because it was late , and i couldn &apos;t really think i started to work on a antrag .
i had a 14jährigen , the black boy as a result .
and i began to deal with this . the headline was , &quot; antrag , 14jährigen , black mandanten demos like a privileged , white mandanten , white mandanten , white , ‌ topmanager . &quot; ‌ &quot;
i was explaining that the fehlverhalten of the staatsanwaltschaft and the police and the police and the police and the police and the police .
there was a crazy line of a time that in this country , there &apos;s nothing more rechtens that there is nothing else .
the next morning i woke up and didn &apos;t know , i woke up this crazy thing , or it was written him .
and i didn &apos;t just written it , but he was convicted of the dish .
a couple of months ago , and i just forget everything .
and then finally , i decided to court , i must be doing , i have to court and that crazy case .
i went to the car and was really overwhelmed .
so i was driving .
and i thought that &apos;s going to be so hard .
and then i got out of my car and then went to the court .
when i was the staircase to court , there was a elderly , black man , the janitors in the court .
when he saw me , he came to me and said , &quot; who are you ? &quot;
i said , &quot; i &apos;m a lawyer . &quot; he said , &quot; you &apos;re a lawyer ? &quot; &quot; i said , &quot; yeah . &quot;
he came to me and umarmte me .
then he looked at me .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m so proud . &quot;
and i have to say , i got power .
it &apos;s taken something quite deep in me , identity , the ability to do something , something that &apos;s a perspective of hope .
well , i went to the gerichtssaal .
once the judge was seeing .
he said , &quot; mr. stevenson , did you shake this crazy ? &quot;
i said , &quot; yeah . &quot; and then we started to discuss it .
in the middle of them , because they were angry .
i &apos;ve written this crazy stuff .
polizeibeamte kamen and büroangestellte and büroangestellte .
in the handumdrehen , the most enterprising was the gerichtssaal of people who were mad , that we &apos;re talking about skin language , about poverty , over time .
i saw the janitors on and down on .
he saw the window and i could hear the whole tohuwabohu .
it went on and down .
and then finally , this tall black man with a very mild gesichtsausruck gesichtsausruck in in the gerichtssaal and sat down right behind me , almost on the verteidigungsbank .
ten minutes later , announced a pause .
during the break , a polizeibeamter , which was that the janitors in the gerichtssaal was in the gerichtssaal .
this deputy ran to the older black .
he said , &quot; jimmy , what do you do in the gerichtssaal ? &quot;
the older man stood up . he saw the deputy , and he saw me , and he said , lose to this kid man , lose , lose , lose the goal of the eyes , don &apos;t give me on the point .
i come to ted , because i think many of you understood that many of you understood that the moral drugs that universe is far ausschwingt , but that it &apos;s justice zuneigt .
we don &apos;t fully fully fully fully fully developed unless we don &apos;t care rights and grundwerte .
our own survival has to be connected to each individual .
we &apos;re our visions of technology and design and creativity and creativity , compassion and justice .
and before , i want to show you that this is what you see , just don &apos;t get the goal from the eyes . don &apos;t it .
you &apos;ve seen this audience , this community , this community , that community , and i &apos;ve heard something to do something .
what can we do ?
bryan stevenson : now , there &apos;s all possibilities .
if you live in california , there &apos;s a volksentscheid where you &apos;re about to do a effort that is about to do a effort that &apos;s been about to do a anstrengung , which is to be the geldstrom of the punishment .
here , in california , you &apos;ve got a billion dollars for the death penalty budget .
and yet , two percent of all tötungsdelikte are not equipped with a verhaftung .
because 56 percent of all the vergewaltigungsfälle don &apos;t get court .
there &apos;s the opportunity to do something .
this is going to suggest that money will make money into more civilized and safety .
i think there &apos;s opportunity to be .
so , over the last three decades , the most primitive is in america .
this is a fact , a lot of time in a context with the erhöhten inhaftierungszahlen .
what would you say that it &apos;s like to do ?
now , actually , the numbers of self-interest isn &apos;t very changed .
the bulk of the masseninhaftierungen in this country was not really going to be in the class of the gewaltverbrechen .
it was the fehlgeleitete kreuzzug .
so the dramatic high numbers in the remote .
we have told us the rhetoric of the rhetoric of the punishment .
now we have a » « , which people used to be used for the gitter gitter , rather good for the physical geringfügigen , instead of taking them , instead of taking things that are attracted .
i think we need to do more , to help people who are victims of a straftat , not less .
and i think our landscape of our health is not rocket science .
i think that &apos;s what we need to change .
bryan , they really have a string to go .
they &apos;re a inspirierende personality .
thank you that they were ted . thank you .
suspense , one guy is going to be a strange gefahrenrisiko .
famine , famine in somalia , and there are one three : pfefferspray of police .
there are four : bösartige kartelle . five : dangerous troublemaker .
six 7 : gesellschaftlicher . there &apos;s no 65 .
sprecher . 9 : cyber-attacken . 9 : cyber-attacken .
different . tornado .
stillstand . stillstand . doomsday . sorry .
death . death .
oh my god .
so these are just a few of the clips that i &apos;ve been looking across the last six months -- but the last six days can be , or the last six years .
the fact is that the media is prefer to show us negative topics because our minds can make this stunning schenkt .
and there &apos;s also a very good reason for it .
every second time every second information day , our senses has more information on than our brain .
and because nothing more important is , as our survival , is the first sheet of all the information in the information that information is going to be part of our temporallappens .
so the amygdala is our frühwarnsystem , our gefahrendetektor .
it &apos;s got , and all the information that information is going to be aware of any andeutung of danger in our environment .
so when we see the news , we prefer to think of negative news .
and the old adage , if it &apos;s blutet , the demand , the demand is very true .
well , with all of our digital ones that are seven days to the week , 24 hours a day , is it not a miracle that we &apos;re pessimistic .
it &apos;s not a miracle that everybody is always going to be worse .
but possibly is not the case .
perhaps , is the reality .
maybe enormous progress , we &apos;ve done a series of forces , so that it &apos;s going to give us that it &apos;s going to be a three decades of the next three decades to create a world of abundance .
now , i &apos;m not saying that we don &apos;t have a big deal of problems -- climate , artensterben , water and energieprobleme -- that we &apos;ve been doing .
and as humans , we are much better in that , so we have to be much more likely to go , but they &apos;re going to be able to get to overcome .
let &apos;s see what we &apos;ve achieved is what we &apos;ve achieved in the last century , so we can predict the development of the development .
in the last 100 years , the average life expectancy is more than doubled , which is to the usual hemisphere , the world &apos;s largest durchschnittseinkommen .
child mortality is about a 10th .
it &apos;s coming , that the ernährungs- , elektrizitäts- transport- and a half a tree .
steve pinker has demonstrated that we have been currently in a very peaceful period of life .
and according to charles kenny , is the alphabetisierungsquote delta in the past several years of 80 percent .
we really live in a really extraordinary time .
and many people forget this .
and we kept our expectations constantly .
in fact , we &apos;re going to reinvent poverty .
think that a big fraction of americans , the poverty , the access to power access to power , water , toilets , refrigerators , kühlschränken , klimaanlagen , and cars cars .
the richest kapitalisten of the last century , the earth &apos;s imperatoren of the earth would never be able to be able to get these luxusgüter .
the basis of power of power , and these are growing .
my good friend ray kurzweil told us that every tool that will be a good thing to provide the curved of moore &apos;s law , and then the most 12 goes all 12 feet 24 .
so , the mobile phone is about the mobile phone in their business &apos;s best faster than a supercomputer from the &apos; 70s .
now , look at this curve .
this is moore &apos;s law of the last hundred years .
and watch things that curve .
first , how smooth it is -- in good like , in bad , war or peace , recession , recession and hochkonjunktur .
this is the result of the animal computers , the building blocks .
they &apos;re not comfortable for any of our big problems .
also , despite your logarithmic logarithmischen on the left side .
so the growth themselves is accelerating .
and on this curve , on the back of moore &apos;s law , we find a bunch of extraordinary technologies that everybody available .
&quot; cloud-computing , something that my friends called &quot; infinite-computing &quot; , &quot; sensoren and networks , &quot; sensoren , &quot; sensoren and networks , 3d , 3d , 3d , 3d , 3d , 3d , 3d , 3d , 3d-drucker biology , are impfungen and food , digital intelligence and artificial intelligence .
how many of you have seen the victory of ibms supercomputer , &quot; jeopardy &quot; ?
that was the number of it .
i &apos;ve been looking at the newspapers and i think , looking for the best headlines that i could find .
i love this : &quot; watson &quot; watson bezwingt . &quot;
&quot; jeopardy &quot; is not easy .
it &apos;s about understanding the understanding of language .
imagine that this artificial intelligence is every owner of a mobiltelefones .
four years ago , i launched a kurzweil , and i here at ted university called singularity .
we bring our students all these technologies in experimenting with what these are used to solve the big challenges of humanity .
and every year , we ask the students , corporations , products and services , which is within a decade , a decade that &apos;s going to happen by the other people that can be positive away from human human .
think about that a group of students can affect the lives of billions of people .
thirty years ago , this was ridiculous .
today we can put on dozens of companies that they did .
if i think , surplus to trade , i don &apos;t mean a life of luxury for everybody else ; it &apos;s about making a life of opportunity .
it &apos;s about making it all about making goods abundance .
but scarcity is kontextbezogen , and technology is a resource force .
here &apos;s an example .
this is the history of napoleon iii. in the middle of the 1700s .
he &apos;s the guy on the left .
he invited the king of siam to dinner .
napoleons soldiers were bekamen , napoleon selbst .
the king of siam were bekam .
at the moment , this time that was the most remote metal on the planet , and more than gold and platin .
this is why the dome was made of the washington-monuments from the washington-monuments .
even though aluminum 8,3 percent of the erdmasse is , it &apos;s not as a pure metal .
it &apos;s going to be connected by oxygen .
but then the technology of elektrolyse , and made aluminiumherstellung so cheap , we use it to our wegwerf-mentalität .
and then let &apos;s get this analogy to the future .
we think about today .
ladies and gentlemen , we live on a planet of 5.000-mal , more energy , we consume every year .
16 terawatt of energy all of the things are amenable to the land .
it &apos;s not about the population of scarcity .
and there &apos;s good news .
in this year , you &apos;ve been able to do it for the first time , the cost of solarstrom for the state of the household corresponds to reduce the cost of the diesel-stroms -- 8.8 to be compared to 17 .
the cost of solar energy is the last year .
last month , this has been a study that shows that the decade of this decade are the jahrzehnts of the decade of the decade in the sonnigen areas in the national income per unit of the national income per unit of the national income per unit .
and if we have a energieüberschuss , then we &apos;ll have water in the abundance .
let &apos;s talk about wasser-kriege .
remember , as carl sagan was the voyager-raumfahrzeug in 1990 , when it was saturn , back in the earth ?
he took a famous picture . how did it ?
&quot; a pale blue . &quot;
because we live on a wasserplaneten .
we live on a planet that &apos;s covered with water .
yeah , it &apos;s 97,5 percent , two percent are vereist , and we &apos;re going to fight around the planet , but there &apos;s also hope .
and there are new technologies , not in 10 or 20 years , but now .
it &apos;s new exit nanotechnologien on the road .
and from a conversation today , tomorrow today , this morning , you know , one of the innovators , i want to share with you -- his technolgie , the erlaubnis , the slingshot , the &quot; slingshot &quot; is that many of you may have heard of a kühlschranks in the studentenheim .
it can generate a thousand liters of clean drinking water a day out of different sources of sources , whether saltwater water , latrine water , according to two cents per gallon .
the president of coca-cola has just been doing a big test-projekt with a hundred units in the developing world .
and if all works well , and i &apos;m very hopeful , the technology is global , the technology in the 206 countries in the entire planet .
this is technologieunterstützte innovation that &apos;s available today .
and we &apos;ve also seen this in the wind .
you &apos;re my god , we &apos;re going to see the 70 percent of the abdeckungsrate of solar panels in developing countries to the end of 2013 .
think about it , that a massai-krieger with a mobile phone in the middle of kenya a better mobil-kommunikation has a better than president , 25 years ago .
and if you &apos;re trying to look at your smartphone on google , you &apos;ve spent more access to you and share a president clinton .
they live in a world that information and communicate in abundance , as it could ever predicted .
and it &apos;s still better , the things that you and i have several thousand dollars , and i think about medical , and you see , technology , libraries and music , technology for medical imaging -- now literally entmaterialisiert and cheaper in your mobile phones .
and the best part is possibly what makes us a health .
last month , i &apos;ve had this to be called the qualcomm-stiftung &quot; $ 10 million qualcomm x prize . &quot;
we need teams around the world , all these technologies in a cell phone so , you can talk to the device , because it &apos;s a random equipped , you can test reinhusten or your test test test .
and to win , it has to win a better diagnosis than a team of a team .
imagine this device . in fact , in a developing country where there is no doctors , but 25 percent of the krankheitslast and 1.3 percent of the collaborators .
if this device has a rna- or dna-virus , who &apos;s not known , it &apos;s just the box to the eruption and preventing a pandemic to your mind .
but now to the biggest force that we will have to be a world of abundance .
i call them &quot; the next billion . &quot;
the whites lines are for population .
we just did the 7-milliarden-marke .
and just by the way , the biggest absicherung against a population is a better upbringing and diet in the world .
in 2010 , we just had only two billion people online each other .
by 2020 , we &apos;re going to get five billion internetnutzer .
three billion new minds that we never heard before , the global communication .
what does these people need ?
what are you going to consume ? what are they going to desire ?
and instead of a stillstand view i see one of the greatest economic anschübe history of history .
these people are first identified several dollars that are going to be fließen into the global economy .
and they &apos;re going to be brought through the use of the tricoders , and they &apos;re going to be trained by the khan-akademie , and they &apos;re going to have the possibility of getting words and &quot; , and &quot; infinite &quot; button , and so much more productive than ever .
so what can of the growing billion growing , healthy , productive members members members of the menschengemeinde ?
how would it be called new , never before gehörter .
how would it be to the oppressed where they are , a vote to make a vote to make a aufmerksam and make change , for the first time ?
what are these three billion people ?
how about beiträgen that we can &apos;t even be able to predict .
one of the things that i learned from x prize is that little teams that are defined by passion and the focus and the process of conscious things , things can create , things that really large-scale businesses and governments are able to create in the past .
i want to finish with a story that really excites me .
there &apos;s a program that might have some familiar .
it &apos;s a game that &apos;s called a phantom .
it was developed in the university of washington in seattle .
and it &apos;s a game that &apos;s a game that people can take sequence of amino acids to explore as the protein will be .
the behavior of the behavior can we have the structure and function .
and this is very important in the medizinforschung .
so far , this was a problem for supercomputers .
and this game was played by the wild .
and there are hundreds of thousands of thousands of people that have played online .
and it showed that these days today , the human has become the proteins that they &apos;re doing the proteins better than the best .
and when these people came and looked at the best protein-ordner in the world was not a mit-professor , not a mit-professor , not a caltech-student , not a caltech-student , it was like the assistant of the geschäftsleitung in a reha-klinik , and at night the best protein-ordnerin in the world was .
ladies and gentlemen , what worries me is trust in our future is that we have more power than individuals to provide us the big challenges of our planet .
we have access to tools to allow us to donor technology .
we have the passion of a diy-innovatoren .
we have the capital of the techno-philanthropen .
and we have three billion new heads where we can work online to work on the new challenges , and to do what is necessary to do .
we expect a few extraordinary decades .
thank you .
i think we need something to a fundamental piece of medical culture .
and i think it &apos;s with an english , and i &apos;m so i.
and maybe i &apos;m much time in business , when i could make a piece of my own wrong wrong , to make this .
before i get to the actual theme of my talk , let &apos;s start with a little bit baseball .
hey , why not ?
we are the saisonende and moving us to the end .
we all love baseball , right ?
so full of times is a great deal .
and there are hundreds of you .
&quot; moneyball &quot; is soon to take statistics and to use this to a great team team .
i &apos;m going to take a clip of the hope that i hope most of you have heard of you .
it &apos;s the durchschnittsleistung of the schlägers .
we talk about a 300 , if you &apos;re going to get a bat .
that means that player is 10 to three times .
this is the ball in the außenfeld , he &apos;s coming up , he &apos;s trying to go to the first , , and whoever has been trying to throw the first base , couldn &apos;t get it and the apple &apos;s been in safety .
three million 10. .
you know how to do a 300ter in major baseball ?
well , really good , maybe a all-star .
you know how to call a 400ter iq ?
this is somebody in the rest of 10 , definitely .
wie -- like ted williams - legendär -- the last major league baseball baseball baseball baseball to a regulären season .
let &apos;s go back to the world of medicine , which i &apos;m going to feel about some more comfortable with some more comfortable , maybe a little less and less likely i talked about it .
suppose you have a blinddarmentzündung and you &apos;ll be a operateur , it &apos;s a operateur solution , which is 400 400 400 .
it doesn &apos;t work , isn &apos;t it ?
imagine it lives in a particular array of remote remote area and they have a great people with verstopften herzkranzgefäßen and their hausarzt überweist diesen to a kardiologen , which is a dessen that &apos;s durchschnittsleistung at gefäßdarstellung .
but you know what ?
it &apos;s much better . it &apos;s on the way down .
and they &apos;re punching .
it doesn &apos;t work .
but i &apos;ll ask you a question .
what do you think about how the durchschnittsleistung for a kardiologen or a nurse or a orthopäden , a rettungsassistenten , a rettungsassistenten .
1,000 .
the truth is that no one in the whole medicine knows what a good or doctor or doctor or rettungsassistent .
what we do is we &apos;re going to be every one of you to me , to look at the world , it &apos;s not perfect .
never , no one mistake , no one does listen to the details of the details of how this should be done .
and this is the message i &apos;ve been in the world .
i was a zwanghaft student student .
in high school , a mitschüler said that brian would learn to be a bluttest .
and it was also .
and i learned in my little dachstube in my little dachstube in the schwestern of toronto , unweit of this .
i learned everything .
in my anatomievorlesung , i learned the origins and ausläufer every muskels , every branch of every artery , which is from the ascending wegführt , obskure and ordinary differentialdiagnosen .
i was even the differentialdiagnose to klassifizieren renale azidose .
and i was going to know more and more knowledge .
and i was good , i closed schloss laude .
and i left the food with the idea that i knew all of the time , and all knew all of the time i knew everything , or at least as much as you can , i was doing it , i was doing it .
and it worked for a while , until i met a printer .
i &apos;m going to show you a lehrkrankenhaus in toronto , as a woman , i was in the notfallabteilung of the hospital .
at this point , i was the kardiologischen schicht was in the kardiologischen service .
and it was my mission to untersuchen the notfallpersonal rat rat rat rat .
and then i put it on my oberarzt .
i studied woman , and she was in atemnot .
and when i got her , she made her keuchende sounds .
and when i was her breast cancer with the stethoskope abhörte , i could hear a knackendes sound on both sides that said they were privately .
this is a state in the heart , instead of the blood flow on the entire blood , instead of all the blood , put a part of the helicopter in the lung , and vice versa , and they came out of these .
and that was not a hard to stellenden .
i hired her and made me on the treatment .
i gave her aspirin . i gave her medicine to take the pressure of the heart .
i gave her medicine that we call diuretics , water , so they were so the liquid .
and over a course of a period of a second by a second to two hours , they started to feel better .
i felt right well .
and since then , i did my first mistake ; i sent home .
i actually made two error .
i sent them without my oberarzt .
i didn &apos;t take the work on and what i would have had to have been on my oberarzt , so that he would have been a chance to do it so that he would have to have a own picture .
and he knew he would be able to get more information to her .
maybe i did it with good reason .
maybe i wanted to be the hilfsbedürftige doctor .
maybe i wanted to take so much as well as i was so sorry , and so i would be able to take my patients without wanting to get him without it .
my second mistake was worse .
and i sent her home at home , i &apos;m a quiet voice in me , &quot; ha , no good idea . &quot; don &apos;t do it . &quot;
in fact , i had so much as i was so much of selbstsicherheit that i asked the nurse , which was to take that , &quot; do you believe it &apos;s okay when you go home ? &quot;
and the nurse was thinking about it , and i was in faktischer , &quot; yeah , i think it will go . &quot;
i remember this was yesterday .
so i went out and get a krankenwagen and they brought home .
and i &apos;m going back to work .
the rest day , the night i had this nagende emotion in my stomach .
but i was working on .
and at the end of the day , i was constantly my stuff , the hospital and went to the car home , and went to the car home , when i did something i didn &apos;t do .
i went through the notfallabteilung .
and there was another nurse , not the woman who had seen a woman , but one another three words , and those three words most of the most notfallärzte who i know .
other medical fear , this is also , but the most favorite thing is particularly special because we see the patient &apos;s patients .
the three words , remember , remember ?
&quot; remember the patient that they &apos;re going to go home ? &quot;
the nurse is sachlich .
&quot; so she &apos;s back , &quot; she said , &quot; she said to this particular tonlage .
so she was back .
she was back and die .
so an hour after she arrived at home after i had to have been brought back at home , and the family called 911 , the rettungsassistenten brought back to the notfallstation with a blood pressure , which is a dangerous schockzustand .
they hardly atmete and blue .
all of the notfallpersonal .
they gave her blutdruckerhöher .
they are , they &apos;re going to beatmungsmaschine .
i was shocked and i was in the insides of the insides .
and i was taking this rollercoaster because they went to the intensivstation and i was hoping that she would recover .
and after two , three days , what was clear that they were never going to return .
she had no behandelbaren gehirnschaden .
your family &apos;s hidden .
and in the course of the next eight , or nine days , they &apos;re moving .
the day day , they went to -- woman , a woman , a mother and a grandmother .
you say that you will never forget the names of the versterben .
and that was the first time that i was .
the next one i did was i saved , and i was found myself first time to myself the full shame that are in our medical shame that are in our medical field , not the kind of shame you can &apos;t tell , because you can &apos;t talk to the colleagues .
you know all the psychology , if you &apos;re a secret of your friend &apos;s friend &apos;s friend &apos;s friend &apos;s friend &apos;s friend &apos;s friend &apos;s friend &apos;s friend &apos;s screen , even though this one is a terrible picture , and you &apos;re going to be able to get the bad and you feel that you never do a mistake .
if you go back to the mistake and the mistake .
that &apos;s the kind of lehrreicher .
the most elegant way i &apos;m talking about is that the way that you have sick in the heart of the heart .
it &apos;s one that tells you that one tells you badly , but you &apos;re really bad .
and that was what i did .
and it wasn &apos;t on my oberarztes , he was very happy .
he talked to the family , and i &apos;m sure he would be the wogen and sure that i couldn &apos;t go .
but i did these questions .
why didn &apos;t i ask the oberarzt , why am i going to go home ?
and then in my worst moments , how could i make errors mistake ?
why am i harbor in medicine ?
slowly , but it &apos;s moving .
i started getting better feeling better .
and then on a day , there was a hole in the clouds and the sun broke broke broke and the sun broke broke and i would say i can feel better .
and i was going to come up with me that if i had my efforts to perfection and never again a mistake that would the voice of verstummen .
and she did it .
and i was working on .
and then it happened .
two years later , i had a kommunalen hospital in the notfallstation hospital , from toronto , and i was begutachtete a 25 year-old man with gereiztem rachen .
it was much , and i was in a hurry .
he always showed here .
i looked at the rachen and it was a little bit weird .
and i gave him a prescription , and i sent him .
and yet , when he went out of the door , he showed up his rachen .
and two days later , i came to my next notfalldienst and my favorite chefärztin asked me to a conversation in her office .
and she said three words : remember , you know ?
&quot; do you remember , &quot; do you want to know about the patient with the gereizten rachen ? &quot;
it turned out he was a streptokokken-infektion .
he had a potentially lebensgefährliche of epiglottitis .
you can do that , but it &apos;s not an infection , but the top atemwege and causes the verschluss of the atemwege .
and fortunately he was not .
he got intravenöse antibotica and recovered , a few days later .
and i went back to the same side of shame and self-doubt , i felt that i was going to work on and went back to the work until it again and again .
in a notfallschicht , i &apos;ve just been a blinddarmentzündung .
there &apos;s a lot of things that you &apos;re particularly to say that you &apos;re going to work in a hospital that was only 14 patients a night .
in both cases , i sent them to home , and there was no imperfections in their treatment .
at a thought he was supposed to have .
i &apos;m going to ordnete the x-ray of the kidneys . when he was befund , my colleague at the unteren of the patient was a verhärtung in the lower right and the operateure .
the other had diarrhea diarrhea .
i ordnete fluide to him and asked him to my colleagues .
and this was he and when he did and he sektor in the right , he was a verhärtung in the right , he called the operateure .
in both cases , and it was fine .
both of me , fraßen me .
and i would say , happy to you , that my worst mistake was only in the first five years , what &apos;s going to happen in my colleagues , but i &apos;m sure .
some of my favorite things happened in the last five years .
alone , and without support support .
here &apos;s the problem : if i don &apos;t talk to my mistakes , and i can talk about the quiet of the mistakes that i &apos;m going to say , what can i find , how can i share my colleagues .
how can i teach you my fault , so they don &apos;t have the same ?
if i &apos;m in a room , like now , i don &apos;t know what you think about me is about me .
when you have the last time heard about fehlschlag sprach .
oh , yeah , you go to a cocktail party and you may like to hear about any other doctor , but you don &apos;t want to talk about the benefits of your own mistakes .
if i take a room full of colleagues and then ask them , and i would ask them to tell you what i &apos;ve been told you just about , before it really would really prefer to tell you , if someone would really prefer to do , if someone would be a joke , they would be given the subject and the rest .
and in fact , if i was , or my colleagues , i knew that a orthopäde in my hospital would be the wrong leg , then i would have to be able to see it .
this is the system that we live .
it &apos;s totally random .
it &apos;s a system where errors and the ones , which no one . those who are no one . those who are no longer and the ones that are not making a bad ergebnissen and the ones that are related to the bad results and the good ones .
it &apos;s almost a ideologische response as antibodies , which is a ideologische .
and there &apos;s the idea that if we can make mistakes , the mistake of the beginning of that makes us a confined system .
but there &apos;s two problems in there .
in my age about 20 years of medical sendungsbewusstseins and journalism , i have a personal medical study of medical school and wrong treatments for an article that i was given to my show star , &quot; white white , i was writing star style , &quot; white style , &quot; i wrote .
and what i learned is that errors is absolutely unumgänglich .
we work in a system in the days in a system where a day , where a day , a false or wrong , in the krankenhausinfektionen and they &apos;re still and more and more and more and more and more and more and devastation or even more .
in this state , about 24,000 fehlern in the state of fehlern .
in the united states , the institute of 100,000 is the institute of 100,000 .
both are strong untertreibungen , because we should not look at this problem as we should .
and it &apos;s the crux .
in a krankenhaussystem program where the medical knowledge has been doubling to three years , we can &apos;t keep it up .
schlafmangel is ubiquitous .
we cannot get rid of it .
we have cognitive error , so that we can take a perfect krankheitsverlauf for a patient .
then i take the same patient with brustschmerz , and geschwätzig and give it a slightly easily breath that &apos;s made a slightly easily breath and suddenly the story of verachtung with contempt .
i don &apos;t take the same way .
i &apos;m not a robot ; i don &apos;t always make it .
and my patients are not cars ; they don &apos;t tell me their symptoms , they always don &apos;t always know in the same way .
all of these are zusammengefasst at the heart .
so if you take the system as i was taught , and all the fehlerbehafteten , the fehlerbehafteten , it &apos;s nobody at the end .
and you know the most encouraging about people who don &apos;t speak about their own little good ?
in my show , white coat , black , &quot; this is my worst , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , blah , &quot; and then i &apos;ll
and then your pupils , they &apos;re going to be in front of the head , then look at them and get tired of your stories .
they want to tell stories . they want to share their stories .
you want to be able to be able to say , &quot; look , don &apos;t look the same mistakes that i &apos;m going to do . &quot;
what you need is a environment that they &apos;re doing .
what they need is a new medical culture .
and it starts with a doctor .
the new doctor is a person , white humanity , they accepted , &quot; they &apos;re not proud to do anything from them , so that it can be passed .
they also exhibit their experiences with others .
they supports them when others comes from your mistakes .
and they &apos;re showing other people &apos;s mistake , not to bloßzustellen , but in a liebevollen , changing kind of thing that &apos;s going to benefit .
and they &apos;re working in a medical culture that recognizes that people can live the system with life and if that &apos;s so much time to time .
so that the system has developed to create a system that will make a dahin backups , which is to create a lot of the public error and even do it , to create the spaces that make potential mistake , which requires the people , and it &apos;s also rewarded for people like me , the errors are going to be in the fehler of that reward .
my name is brian .
i &apos;m the new doctor .
i &apos;m a man . i do .
but i &apos;m also bedaure , but i &apos;m trying to learn how to make it different .
i don &apos;t know what you think of me , but i can live .
so let me close with three of my own words : i remember .
i &apos;m going to talk about a tiny , little idea .
it &apos;s um normwerte .
and because you can explain this idea in a minute , i will tell you about three stories to use time .
the first story is about charles darwin , one of my heroes .
you know , he was here .
you may think that he &apos;s finken , but that &apos;s not .
actually , he was going to be fish .
he described one of them as a very &quot; .
it was a zackenbarsch .
until the &apos; 80s , it was in trouble with huge style .
now he &apos;s got the red list .
this story , we have many times from the galapagos or other places , it &apos;s not very much .
yet , we still do it .
we still think they &apos;re in .
they &apos;re still sie to a untouched .
what happened here ? &quot;
the second story is to another concept , the veränderbare taillenweite .
because i &apos;ve experienced it when i was in a lagoon in a west-afrika .
i went there because i grew up in europe and i wanted to work in africa later .
i thought i was going to stop .
and i got an awful schlimmen , and i convinced that i really didn &apos;t really go .
it was my first sonnenbrand .
as you can see , the lagoon had palmen and von by a few mangroven .
there were tens of buntbarsche von of about 20 feet , a unterart of the buntbarsche .
the fischgründe of these buntbarsche were very ertragreich and the fishermen lived in ghana and verdienten in ghana .
when i was 27 years later , the fish was on half of its size .
more shit , they &apos;re five inches .
they were genetically engineered .
it was still fish .
people were still happy .
and the fish had been fortunate to be there .
so it has nothing but it changed everything .
my third little story about my university in the introduction of the schleppnetzfischerei in southeast asia .
in the 1970s -- rather than the beginning of the &apos; 70s -- förderte europe .
fischförderung , the already 100 fische , the industrial had been making this fairly ugly ship called the ziemlich 4. .
i was driving , and we made it all over the southern ocean and particularly in the javasee .
we had no words for what we started there .
i know it was the reason .
90 percent of our fangs were closed , other animals that are connected to the cause .
the most part of the fish that are paid points over there , the trümmerhaufen , were korallenriff-fische .
in essence , the reason it &apos;s the bottom of the ocean on the deck and then zurückgeworfen .
these pictures are extraordinary , because the reason is very quickly .
within one year , you start with the gewerblichen .
the reason is changing . it &apos;s -- in this case , a soft reason or soft corals .
that &apos;s a dead turtle .
they weren &apos;t eating them , they were dead .
once we started to do a lebend .
she wasn &apos;t yet .
they would then , they wanted to kill them , because you could eat them .
in fact , this mountain of advice are every time they &apos;re going to be able to drive in the areas that i &apos;ve never been going to be scanned .
it &apos;s not going to be dokumentiert .
we change the world , but we don &apos;t remember it .
we adjust our normwerte to the new level and calls us in the memory of what was happening there .
if you &apos;re designing it , it &apos;s what happens .
so in the y-axis are some good things : biodiversity , the number of orca , the green ihres , the wasservorrat .
and that &apos;s the time it &apos;s changing . it changes , because for people are their actions .
every generation of looking at the pictures that they &apos;re going to make a lot of your conscious lives , and then all of it .
the difference is then as a loss .
but they don &apos;t have to be true .
it can be a network of change .
and at the end , they want to get the erbärmlichen remains remains .
that &apos;s exactly the target now .
we want things to get things that are gone , they &apos;re not as they were .
you could think that the problem people who are sure that they are sure that they certainly were in räuberischen societies , and they just had some recycled generations , and they had done some generations that they did .
because obviously , a animal will be very often , just rarely , before it was .
so you don &apos;t lose anything like animals .
you make it always animals .
and that &apos;s why it &apos;s not a big loss .
and over time , we &apos;re focused on the big animals and the ocean , the big fish .
they &apos;re going to be because we &apos;re going to start them .
and over time , little fish , and we think that &apos;s the normwert .
the question is , why people are going to accept .
now , because they don &apos;t know that it was different .
of course , many people , scientists , they really was really different .
you &apos;ll be able to do it , because the evidence is , as you &apos;re in a previous form of the shape , not as they would like to be active .
there &apos;s an anecdote that the report of a kapitäns , who &apos;s going to be the bericht of the kapitäns , the area don &apos;t normally be used or not gewertet , because it &apos;s not &quot; scientific machines . &quot;
so we have the situation that people don &apos;t know the past , although we &apos;ve gone in the world societies societies , because they don &apos;t trust the sources of the past .
this is the enormous big role that can play a marine probe .
because , in the past we basically put the past again .
we can put the past again that people can &apos;t grasp people , because they have changed the normwerte and low .
so , that can be the people who are seeing a marine view and the ability to benefit the way , the normwerte of our lives .
what about the people who are not possible , because they don &apos;t have access to the people in the midwest , for instance ?
here i am , the art and the film , the gap , the gap .
this is the simulation of chesapeake bay .
a long time ago there was grauwale -- 500 years ago .
and the farbtöne and the -schattierungen remember they were to go to &quot; avatar . &quot;
if you think about &quot; avatar , &quot; you think if you think about why people were so used to be the pocahontas-geschichte , why were you so berührt ?
because it &apos;s something that &apos;s lost in a sense that &apos;s lost in a sense .
so my point , the only thing i &apos;m going to say , &quot; you know , students in the way that he &apos;s going to say &quot; avatar ii &quot; avatar &quot; avatar &quot; avatar .
thank you .
in the &apos; 80s , in communist , in communist , you had to push a typewriter , these ones in the federal government .
they had to be a sheet of acrylic with beispieltext from these organs .
the reason for this : the government could be established , where a text came .
they found a paper with falschem gedankengut , they could make the creators of this notion .
and we couldn &apos;t understand the west , as anyone could do something like that , and how would anyone do that the end of the speech .
in our own countries , we would never do that .
but if you &apos;re going to cut today in the year of 2011 , a new farblaserdrucker of the leading führenden buy , and a page , the page is bright yellow flecke on every page , in a pattern that &apos;s been pointing on and their printer .
this is what happens us today .
and this is what seems to be .
and that was an example of what kind of our own governments is the technology to us , the citizens of the time .
and that &apos;s one of the three successive of the days of the day .
let &apos;s look at what really happened in the world : we can split the attacks in the same .
we have three hauptgruppen .
there &apos;s online-kriminelle .
for instance , mr. dimitry golubow from kiew in ukraine .
and the total sense of incentives are very easy to understand .
these people deserve money .
they use online-angriffe , to make a lot of money , a huge amount of money .
there &apos;s several bekannte of online-millionären , multimillionären , that you have money by attacks .
this is wladimir tsastsin from tartu .
this is alfred hitchcock .
stephen watts .
björn sundin .
that &apos;s matthew &apos;s anderson , tariq al-daour and so on and so forth .
these people are being used online , but they did not have a chance to get cash out of our bankkonten , as we can &apos;t use our online-banking , as we &apos;ve collected our kredikarteninformationen , whereas the tastatur of the distribution of the distribution of the distribution of the distribution of the distribution of a infected computer .
the american geheimdienst vor two months ago , the swiss konto of mr. sam konto jain , and on this shell , 14,9 million dollars were frozen millionen .
mr. jain itself is on a freiem , the aufenthaltsort .
and i think it &apos;s today &apos;s more likely to be victims of a online-verbrechens , as a verbrechens in the real world .
and it &apos;s very obvious that this is just worse .
in the future , most crime will be online .
the second biggest angreifergruppe that we can see is not by money .
they &apos;re through something else -- the protests -- the standard of things , or by her audience .
groups like anonymous , over the past 12 months , and they &apos;re geworden to the field of the online-angriffe .
so these are the three main hauptangriffsgruppen : criminals who are doing the money to do because of what happened to do that resistance , but the last group are nations , governments , the attacks .
there &apos;s been a way to be connected as the von .
it &apos;s been beispielhaft what happens when governments of their own citizens .
diginotar is a vollmachtszertifikat aus -- that &apos;s what it was like .
last fall to it was insolvenz , because diginotar was hacked .
somebody was able to get the system in the system .
and last week , in a meeting with dutch regierungsvertretern , i asked one of the senior of this group , whether he was able to be able to be hielte because of the diginotar-hacks people were .
and his response was &quot; yes . &quot;
well , like , people are dying in the aftermath of a sense of this ?
diginotar is a zertifizierungsstelle .
they sell zertifikate .
what do you do ?
now , a certificate requires you to have a website with https , with a ssl-verschlüsselten , a ssl-verschlüsselten , for instance , for instance .
well , we all use , or many of us , a ihrer , or a your competitors , and yet , these services are particularly common to be more aware of the local anbietern , because they can trust more trust than local anbietern and they &apos;re verschlüsselt to über verschlüsselt , so that the local government is not in their living .
but can you do , if you have a foreign foreign system , if you have a foreign foreign system .
zertifizierungsbehörde hacken and gefälschte zertifikate .
and that &apos;s exactly what happened in the event of diginotar .
how much of the arab spring and the things that are in egypt ?
now , in egypt , the insurgent in april 2011 , the insurgent force in april , the headquarters of the egyptian geheimpolizei , and they found a lot of it .
in this records , a folder called &quot; finfisher . &quot;
and in this japanese , there &apos;s a in in germany , the egyptian government had a few of the programs that they would sell -- in very big frame -- any of the electric citizen .
they had this program for 280.000 dollars .
the firmenhauptquartier is right here .
so governments totalitäre governments could use their own citizens .
but western governments are also helping themselves .
for example , in germany , just a few weeks ago , was found , which was a trojaner , the von of german regierungsvertretern to bespitzeln their own citizens .
if you &apos;re going to be a kriminalfall verdächtigt , it &apos;s going to be sicherheit with you .
but today we &apos;re far beyond .
they &apos;re going to tap their connection .
they use resources like the staatstrojaner , to make your computer , bespielen that allows them to monitor their entire communication , their online-diskussionen counterparts , their online-diskussionen counterparts .
so if we think about things like things , the obvious answer is , &quot; ok , that sounds , you know , it doesn &apos;t sound , but it doesn &apos;t seem to be a braver citizen .
i don &apos;t have to worry about it .
i don &apos;t have anything to hide . &quot;
and this reason makes no sense .
privacy is privatsphäre .
masters is not the debate .
it &apos;s not a choice between privacy and safety .
it &apos;s a very well-known between freedom and control .
and as we today , in the year , in 2011 , our governments like , is , every law we &apos;re talking about .
and trust , trust , we also see a new person , a government , we might have in 50 years ?
these are the questions that we have to do the next 50 years .
it may seem strange , but i &apos;m a big fan of betonblocksteinen .
the first betonblocksteine was made 1868 , and entstammten einer is a simple idea : module module , the ones that fit .
betonbausteine became very quickly the meistgenutzte in the world .
they made us into the position to build things , the bigger ones , when we got buildings , a rock after the other .
essentially essentially , the betonbaustein of our time .
almost a hundred years later , in the mountain , he came out of lego .
it became the &quot; automatically called &quot; automatically . &quot;
and within a few years , he moved straight to every household .
it &apos;s been estimated that over 400 billion , or 75 stones , 75 stones for every person on this planet .
they don &apos;t need to be an engineer to create beautiful houses , beautiful bridges or beautiful buildings .
lego it was possible for everyone .
lego has basically the betonbaustein , the building of the world , and they made a building for our imagination .
in the same year , the next year , the next one was the next one of the next to the next to the next one .
the transistor was a little plastikeinheit that could come from a world of the world , aufeinandergestapelten building blocks into a world where it was going to be in the world .
like the betonblock , allows us to build much bigger , more complex , a rock after another .
but there &apos;s a hauptunterschied : the transistor was just experts .
i personally don &apos;t pretend that the baustein of our time was dedicated for the east coast , and so i decided to change this .
eight years ago , i was at the media lab , and i started to explore this idea how to do the power of engineers , the artists and the designers could be able to put .
a few years ago , i started to design a littlebits .
let me show you how they work .
littlebits are electronic modules that have a specific function .
they &apos;re vorgefertigt , light , motor and sensor .
and the best thing is that they are connecting .
you can &apos;t go wrong .
stone is farbcodiert .
green is fixed , blue is power , pink and orange is cable .
all you need to do is a blue and a green way and you can build quite quickly bigger kreislaufe .
they make a blue blue , and they can make light .
you can put a switch between a switch and they have a little dimmer .
take the switch out of the switch , the pulsmodul , this is , einzufügen , and they did a little blinker .
they put this buzzer for a zusätzlichen effect for a zusätzlichen and they exercise it .
i &apos;ll stop that .
just over the simple game , is actually quite powerful .
instead of replacing programming , verdrahten or löten , to allow them to simple , intuitive gestures .
so to accelerate the problem , or slow , she &apos;s just going to slow down and he makes it down and slow down the box faster .
the idea behind it &apos;s littlebits is that it &apos;s a growing library .
we want to put each other interaction on this world in a gebrauchsfertigen rock .
lichter , töne , motors -- everything should be available .
we &apos;ve got littlebits to kids and they see it .
and it was an unbelievable experience .
the most beautiful thing , as you start to understand the electronics you surrounds surrounds them in the everyday studies that they don &apos;t learn to school .
like , for example , a nachtlicht , or why the doors of the aufzugs offenbleiben , or like a ipod .
we also have littlebits auch .
so we had to be designers with no experience with no experience in electronic things that have been starting to play with littlebits .
here we see , with filz , paper and water , like geordie , like geordie ...
a few weeks ago , we gave them a few weeks ago , the first thing gave them some designers who had no technical experience -- just to be , wood and papers -- and they said , &quot; what makes me . &quot;
here &apos;s one example of a project that made them to do a bewegungsgesteuerte konfetti-kanone .
but wait , this is really my lieblings-projekt .
it &apos;s a hummer of play-dough , who &apos;s afraid of the darkness .
for this nicht-ingenieure , littlebits was another material , electronics just another material .
and we want to do this material for all available .
so is open source source .
you can go to the website , all the designvorlagen , and they make themselves .
we want the world of the creators , the inventor , the inventor , the mitwirkenden , because this world , where we live in , this interactive world , is ours .
so , they go ahead and start to invent them .
thank you .
