now , why does this matter what the human health ?
here &apos;s a diagram of dolphins in the sarasota bay .
and i remember how i was sitting on my desk and i thought , &quot; now i know it . what &apos;s a wonderful scientific discovery . &quot; but it was so terrible .
they &apos;re going to be closed around the world , and more and more of the same reason , and i think we should let us start .
i started showing you how strong we &apos;ve seen the ecosystem of monterey bay , through pollution and the konservenindustrie and all of the problems .
hhhh -- hhhhhh -- hhhhhhh -- hhhhhhh .
about the same time he had asked him , &quot; know you know the book of michael morpurgo ? &quot;
we really had scared .
craig , here &apos;s a head moving .
you would have the skeleton .
we also have this ability .
it &apos;s got our modern kind of thinking about something very strong , but i think we should also recognize what price .
clay shirky , this great chronist of all these , has the premise that are put on the prüfstand , in such a wonderful way .
today , there are so many new foundations , the schenkungen and investment , the people together , together , together , together , in a greater context .
and i &apos;m hopeful , because not just the philanthropy , also , other parts of social networking and business technologies are fleißig to the business of the social networking .
i &apos;m going to go to this photograph near me . it &apos;s in my office . because i &apos;ve always felt a mystic connection to these two men , i &apos;ve never seen both of them .
my own research and internettelefonie zeigt shows that 80 percent of all the calls in the calls are actually going to four people . 80 percent .
whenever you have a moment , they &apos;re going to continue to interact .
and with the modern bureaucracy , a very rationaler approach , where there is a clear disconnect between the private environment and the public environment .
we worry about that , texting , texting , facebook of zwischenmenschlichen intimacy , but stefana broadbents , the kommunikationstechnologien forschungsarbeit reveals how the kommunikationstechnologien deeper relationships can promote relationships to convey all the way around the distance and arbeitsplatzregularien .
one of the things we &apos;ve developed in the lab -- we &apos;ve developed several vehicles -- is how we believe , the first autonomous world of the world .
for example , the brain &apos;s brain is to generate a lot of alpha-wellen .
no challenging task .
at the time , there are about $ 60,000 of 60,000 in the year for a person to go to jail .
her family lives in a city in a city called whitesville , west virginia .
yeah .
we can create these local markets and incentives to use recycelte materials as a commodity for manufacturing .
and we all need to invest in this .
and he won sometimes , you know , you know , it &apos;s hardly , in a rennbahn rennbahn , a reason to love l.a. , back in the 1940s .
i started to help the company to help communities in the country to help their own potential to improve the entire quality of their people .
and before you don &apos;t have kids , you &apos;re not going to understand what i mean . &quot;
this deaf thing is the deaf in the world in the adulthood of the adulthood . &quot;
it takes time .
and true that &apos;s just remembered from a straftat against a person , and somebody with the black person is not a person . &quot;
at the end of the people , it &apos;s not far beyond .
but i found myself that i &apos;ve been born , i have the kids that i &apos;ve been born , so i &apos;d like to imagine a life without you .
he wouldn &apos;t have his legs right now .
i come from a privileged family . i &apos;ve been lucky .
it &apos;s about two weeks old , and there &apos;s them .
this is beginning . my son -- who is here today , many of you are familiar with , and went to cambodia -- and has built a lot of us , just as she was connected to the internet .
remember , because there &apos;s other people like bill gates , who said , &quot; man , you &apos;ve got a real computer . &quot;
now latin , i think , too , quite rare . let &apos;s see some languages .
and guess what ? we have won .
we have this because we have no more zusätzlichen to integrate the prices down .
for a gemüsepflanze , my apartment is about as much as we &apos;re in as much as much as the space .
and we can take care of the issues of neuankömmlingen .
and to speak from one fiscal cliff , i was told to be too parteiisch , although i don &apos;t know any more or the party .
wealth is going to be entrissen people who are not supposed to call a unproduktiv .
in the subject of taxes , there &apos;s bigger disagreement .
none of these important theories was a full success .
we fear that the world is coming .
and as a lot of these work , we found something , or i found something that really fascinated , maybe you can remember it .
in fact , it &apos;s just going to happen here -- from light to darkness in six seconds .
i see my faces very carefully .
that &apos;s not a expression of joy .
this lady here has actually a particularly assymmetrisches face , and both sides of them are beautiful .
this thing here , it &apos;s flackert light when you move , so it gets a kinetisches object , although it &apos;s still steht -- just like how brilliant that is made by the reflection .
i had to move this part , but only about a millimeter .
and that , what i showed you before , of course , was a very complex .
it &apos;s going to win or lose in this moment .
the emotional volume between this object and you to shape them , is a elektrochemikalischer partytrick , which is happening before you even think about it .
i don &apos;t think we need to meet this choice .
it &apos;s also a thought that we forgot .
i think it &apos;s necessary for necessary to return to the predigt .
we don &apos;t think of thinking .
and at the end of the gespräches , they all stand up and say , &quot; wait for the sake of plato , &quot; are the shakespeare , you know , jane austen . &quot;
the other thing is that art should not explain that artists shouldn &apos;t reveal their beweggründe , because if you verrieten them , it destroyed the magic , and we might be able to do it .
art would be one of the tools we can improve our society .
we may not agree with the überein that religions teach us , but we can admire the institutional kind of kind of reasoning with which they do .
absolutely . i &apos;m meeting , how many of you , people say , &quot; isn &apos;t something bigger than we all , something else ? &quot;
because you &apos;d be too 90 percent , because you have a similar view of many things , and you think of other things , you &apos;re still thinking about another other way .
and so he made me from places like chile -- the atacama desert in chile -- to siberia , in a professional mines , in the japanese alps , in north america , to antarctica , to antarctica , and even the south pole .
it &apos;s the largest lake in the world . it &apos;s 800 miles .
and they &apos;re not going to believe it , but that &apos;s the unermesslich telescope called the big telescope .
this is actually made by robert falcon scott and built his men when she came to antarctica , on their first expedition for the south pole .
think of this whole wiring in extreme cold , in unter-null temperatures .
this is an interesting statement , i &apos;ll come back to the end .
what people are doing first is the book of the book that you can look inside of the book , and that &apos;s fun .
there were a lot of people there .
but how do we scan them ?
we &apos;ve reached the 10 cents a page when we work with big volume .
i &apos;m not sure what exactly did .
a day , about two or three bands .
with 15 dollars a hour and about 100 to 150 dollars per hour , we can put material online , online , and it &apos;s in the net .
the question is : is the world that we want to live ?
flowers are going to be eintreffen .
we all know that the earth has problems .
after the form of spores , they verfaulen .
when you go through the landscape , it schnellt up to their shoes and try to respond to the creation .
all across the landmassen of all the internet .
some of these mushrooms are very happy .
this is a remarkably rare seltener .
i did something that nobody would have done different .
the box of life -- you get a dvd by ted conference -- they &apos;re spending earth and water and endophytische , and they have endophytische fungi , as well as the spores that the von mushrooms .
i &apos;ve lived in biosphere 2 .
we wanted to know : is life enough to be adaptive ?
i kind of have been sort of a constantly kind of constantly .
and the doctor &apos;s examined around us to make sure it really well well .
and everybody was going to me .
eritrea , the one part of ethiopia , is one of these places , the amazing and incredibly karg , and i have no idea how people do it .
this , this beautiful picture , that &apos;s the amazon .
this is actually a auengegend .
i had to think about how to näht and weight , but also how to make the right person who comes into a op-saal .
you start off the break , you took blood off , you put blood on , you put it under the microscope , the culture , the culture , the antiserum .
but we need a boxencrew , pit pit for patients .
and so , the medicine is sometimes .
we looked at the baufirmen for us , we looked at the luftfahrtindustrie , and we found that they have technology and education , and then they have a little checklists .
and it &apos;s hard to do .
so that &apos;s really quite a lot of bees , and that &apos;s very significant .
so that means that your dead peoples can replace very well , and that flow of the loss of the base .
they take their hives , and they siedeln their families to twice a year .
honeybees are in the minority , but in minority .
take a cave in new york with a bestand of 15,000 bats , now it &apos;s still 1,000 . this is like san francisco in three years , the population of half of the square of half .
now , not all of us , or the lawn we can transform , and then , of course , you can always anpflanzen a meadow in a jar of a jar .
and i also did an holy night in my wife &apos;s family .
and to defend my title -- like judoka and other people -- i thought , i &apos;m going to bring it again , and won .
that &apos;s very promising .
why ?
the blue whale , the largest living on our planet . that &apos;s wrong , completely wrong .
while night , they roll their leaves and reduce the movement and the day , the petals will open -- then there &apos;s a lot more movement .
he wrote a very interesting letters of his friends , j.d. hooker , at the time of royal society , the greatest scientific authority in the u.k. , which he talked about a pflanzengehirn .
so far , the human face is just going to be inspired by the people , and they &apos;re inspiring to the animals when he &apos;s a robot .
they don &apos;t know they &apos;re filmed .
and then , as it became a common experience , it was fun and something that you could laugh .
i was inspired by it .
this is in 2005 .
they erwischten two of my guys who had hidden cameras in reisetaschen .
it &apos;s a wonderful way to spend a wochenendnachmittag to spend in a stadion stadion .
the idea is still in the early days , but it looks like this .
this is ted .
and this is the bann that i want to break .
now kids are not yet mündig , they &apos;re a special case .
they &apos;re a kind of ektosymbiont .
the study of natural selection are brilliant , incredibly awesome .
that &apos;s what we &apos;ve done on this planenten .
the ant is not alone .
you &apos;ve just heard this man .
i really appreciate it .
well , i don &apos;t think i don &apos;t .
now maybe we should take it metaphorically .
it &apos;s the devil of the devil . &quot;
so they &apos;re actually a chord , each of you is a very efficient chord .
and most of them , if you don &apos;t understand this from this talk , it &apos;s trying to listen with expansivem listening and you can change your relationships .
the third problem with the headphones is the deafness -- lärmbedingte schwerhörigkeit .
klangheilung is a wonderful technique .
i &apos;m going to leave you with the weiterem that is very good for you .
he said , &quot; i don &apos;t know , but i can show you . &quot;
look at what &apos;s in the middle .
they look at this direction , so i close it here .
we &apos;re looking at this guy , materials , that type of materials .
it &apos;s actually about seven billion händepaare that all of their own passion , and all of them together , and all of the world is coming together , and build this world -- in their hinterhöfen and in their own analysis .
and yet , black holes are listening , even if they &apos;re invisible , and the reason is that they &apos;re playing on space-time like a drum .
our sun is not going to end up as black hole .
now we have never seen a shadow of a black loches , but black holes can hear , even if they &apos;re invisible .
we can predict how that sound is .
it &apos;s also meant to give a mission for the space station that hopefully will be in the next 10 years , and it &apos;s called lisa .
it comes closer and closer -- 40,000 years ago , we have gemalt höhlenbilder .
trees have been a standstill .
that &apos;s what i think .
we &apos;re critical to the west , the view of the west , which is our identity -- the picture that &apos;s going to come from us about our women , about our politics .
but instead , i found a country that was completely grown and i don &apos;t have any more wiedererkannte .
that iran was a weltliche society , and we had a democracy and we had a democracy , and that democracy was stolen by the american government and the u.k. government .
i &apos;m here to say that the iranian women have found a new voice , and your voice is my voice .
so on this self should be a size , a wholeness , focus , you know , a wholeness , you know , a wholeness .
there is no american compassion .
maybe the swami is right .
they &apos;re learning swimming through swimming . they &apos;re learning a bike ride through bike ride .
the fossil record of this animal will be found in this area -- a nice clear field here -- and in this part of africa .
you just look at these videos . if you get bored , you just go on .
but i was ecstatic and so on .
the khan academy of video games are also there .
this is the largest supply chain , and reflect with functions .
red means that they &apos;re festhängen .
a lot of the efforts of human beings focused on the student , to teach the student .
and the collaboration that they had with los altos , how did it come ?
is it ready for the big toss ?
a few months ago , i got a call from a pflegeheim i work .
but it &apos;s very silent , like a stummfilm . &quot;
she said , &quot; who &apos;s this charles bonnet ? &quot;
for example , when his enkelinnen went to him , he said , &quot; and who are these gutaussehenden young men ? &quot;
and then , if you were standing , the young plötzlich , the young senkrecht , up to top , 30 meters tall , and disappeared .
these properties of a dialogue , there &apos;s not these charles-bonnet-halluzinationen .
there is a section in the part of this dynamic , and the eyes are being represented and eyes , and this part of the fusiform is activated when people have the entstellten hallucinations .
&quot; kermit means &quot; no . &quot;
sometimes i find them interesting . and i have a lot of pictures of this in my notizbüchern .
edith widder : i made this footage with a special camera that is the sensitivity of the darkness to the dark of eye .
and this crab , for example , sondert biolumineszierende materials in the water , just like a squid or something that creates a tintenwolke .
this is what a plant is like , but it &apos;s actually a animal .
there &apos;s something that &apos;s a little bit of that that &apos;s reacting .
it should attack the hunters of the kalmar .
a approach would be to draw a picture .
if we put the double helix into their two strains , you can see that these things look like teeth .
it &apos;s packaged and aufgewickelt .
one is a sausage driver .
again , this is all akkurate , scientific ableitungen .
you keep your eyes open and the head in motion .
the ability to create concepts , concepts with images and processes .
if the themenbereich is very thin , and you can get the experten and hard work in the world .
i &apos;m here to commit to you , to support us that way of people and other creatures , and other creatures .
didn &apos;t cross through the druckpresse , but it enabled an collective act of collective action .
the other major narrative of social media is the tragedy of the allmende .
toyota , instead of gegeneinander the zulieferer gegeneinander , treating them like a network and training them to produce better , even though they &apos;re going to train them to produce better for their competitors .
thank you .
thank you very much .
we &apos;re doing two different things here .
in fact , everything is about frostbitten and difficulties at the walking and atembeschwerden -- cold , the cold conditions .
first , we have a little experiment where we put people together and they asked them to build something .
and if they said , we gave them a new given , and as you aufbauten this aufbauten , we have the other one they &apos;d just built , again , apart .
there was a very beautiful relationship between the love of lego and the number of the gebauten legos .
and i think the ceo of the ceo doesn &apos;t really understand how important sense .
but i should point out that by the way that the shredder would have killed people .
people didn &apos;t want them .
and we had two types of people .
now , think about children .
and i think that in industrial revolution , adam smith was more than karl marx , but really , we have umgerüstet . and now we &apos;re in the knowledge .
this is in modern conflict , normal , because children are getting very easy to live in the war .
my mother was so bad to make our story glaubwürdiger , all boys and girls gave new names .
afghanistan is one of the poorest countries in the world , and 70 percent of the population are illiterate .
they didn &apos;t want to do it . it &apos;s just going to happen . they lost control .
and 70 percent of their lives will stay back .
i think that all of me has been given me .
that &apos;s the european average average of neuwagen .
on the right , the same energy consumption has bahrain the same energy consumption , in about 300 light bulbs per person , but the population is higher than 1,000 people per square kilometer .
if you want to get a lot of solar cells , you have to take the traditional bayerischen of übernehmen , where you don &apos;t just have the roof , but also the landscape as solar cells .
and a third option is nuclear .
i tried it . it works . some call it nennen the way of the lifestyle .
as a boy , since the years , since the years , i wanted to be a musician and god was very much , i &apos;m also .
he &apos;s a boy from a community that his kontrabassstunden kontrabassstunden in the juniorenorchester of the sans agustin .
that &apos;s encouraging them to dreams , new dreams and advances in the different opportunities to offer music .
this is a verstohlene technology that helps you in the simple task , the right pill to the right time .
as we say , what we call simple , unterbrechende technologies , and that &apos;s the first of five sentences that i &apos;m going to talk to this talk .
this is this year . she went to the frühruhestand .
is the first word &quot; doctor . &quot;
many of these generation will not push the button , even if you have a notrufsystem , because they don &apos;t want to drop others to the burden , even if you paid for a long 30 dollars in a month .
the color is different spaces in the house .
i &apos;m going to show you some of the latest and fiesesten innovations of cybercriminals .
if you want your memory to go to your memory , you will get it .
how do you get a usb-stick to get into a company ?
so let &apos;s imagine that our attacker we call a great parent hackers , something fieses out there .
there &apos;s another other interesting little bit of the contributions that have been uploaded to the cybercriminals .
now , you &apos;re probably asking , what happened to these people .
at 761 , i could identify the hotels where they were , it was , was to be a punktgenauer precision on the globe .
thank you very much .
the alttiere can see the juveniles that can be able to recognize the alttiere .
and you &apos;re in something else , what probably the veins of the bones that go through the bones .
we all know that these bones are broken and if you don &apos;t even stick in the acid , should not be left .
the nichtvogeldinosaurier are the big , schwerfälligen , which are extinct .
transgenese is really cool .
a friend , a colleague , dr. hans larsson an at the mcgill university of atavismen .
people always say , &quot; why do you do this ?
and i started writing my book to do the world &apos;s health care , to do this , and this shows a chart of the individual nations after the geschätzten level of talent in every country in every country .
so imagine this nine kekse that i found in the trash , represent the global essensversorgung , ok , ok ? at the beginning we have nine .
this farmer has invested about 16,000 pounds in the growing growing growing in the growing growing , which he doesn &apos;t have a sheet because a little grass , the kosmetisch are not perfect , they &apos;re not perfect , they &apos;re not perfect at the pigs .
it &apos;s a living organism , i cut a piece of off , put it in a vase and it was still another two weeks .
and if you use these things , they don &apos;t need to make it soooo .
i &apos;m going to go through a few .
on the left to thymiamata .
we have to change the stuff .
here &apos;s einstein , niels bohr , the great fermatsche sentence , and i &apos;m not sure whether the james coburn or richard harris &apos;s harris .
and you can see how the icosahedron in the dodecahedron is disappearing , and then they merge them together .
what a gutaussehende cat .
before the horse before the horse before the horse .
&quot; 10 milligrams , 20 milligrams . &quot;
so , i said , if i &apos;m a circle , what you see is what patterns come out , and boom , the red system .
you have to be exactly , it &apos;s about measurements , rural rural .
at that time , there were only two other dannys on the internet .
i &apos;ll come to speak later on that .
i mean , everything on &quot; off , &quot; which would be like a call of your kabelanbieters , but for the entire world .
it could definitely be made by people from the audience .
for instance , for instance , we had to have a chance to have been in tedxparis , we &apos;d have been talking about the momentanen innovations of the military , which is the massive festungen of the militärs , and we would have a era of stability in the world or in europe , and in europe , in europe , to live in europe , and in europe
now , in this environment , where you don &apos;t know whether the potential enemy is vorbereitet or attack or attack and whether the weapons of the african economy is , what most of the things that most is most of the most beautiful , a conflict .
it &apos;s a huge blue area .
so you should have imagined that in the time , in time to see how a dinosaur looked like this , looks like this dinosaur .
it can &apos;t always shoot and shooting all their threads ; she needs to let the pants down .
he never seems to be able to niederzulassen at a certain girl .
but what i did was a abenteuererzählung .
you don &apos;t have to worry about the readers in unglauben because if you already have a redenden shark , letting you back on the front door .
you will see a kind of urgency , much like possible , as possible as possible .
my stellenbeschreibung was wonderfully vague : begutachtung of the wilderness and öffentlichkeitsarbeit .
that means that i love my love for math and the magic of mind , to make something that i call &quot; mathemagie . &quot;
audience : 17 .
audience : 987 .
audience : seven of them seven . seven .
good . then i try to see the impossible -- or at least .
audience : november . the world ?
of course i could make a answer , and you wouldn &apos;t know it . i &apos;m prepared .
ok , oh , ok , ok , you have a 10-stellen-rechner ?
let me explain what that is .
i &apos;d love to talk about astronomy , but i think the number of people who are struggling for strahlungsübergänge in nicht-grauen atmospheres and lichtpolarisation in the upper atmosphere of jupiter &apos;s number of jupiter &apos;s number of people who fit in a wartehäuschen .
no , if you want to know how society will be in 20 years , ask a kindergärtnerin .
just two weeks ago , i &apos;ve got a little , little , medium , and big kleinflaschen for the exhibition .
my mentor . he came up and spent hour after i was doing an hour at hour .
i &apos;m going to take away .
right ? that &apos;s simple physics .
if you nachschauen it in the book , it &apos;s actually 343 .
and i think , ah , right , the square of length is proportional to the periodendauer .
you would think , with all this extra space , we have plenty of space for all of our stuff .
it &apos;s time that i &apos;m trenne .
would it be a little bit more freedom ?
north of the lessons , manitoba , there are in october and november , not the ice on the hudson .
it has been gekostet by personenbezogenen untersuchungen , before i really started seeing that i really didn &apos;t really understand it .
frank wilson has wrote a book called &quot; the hand . &quot;
so what does this play is doing the play ?
this has been really long taken -- i had to runterkriegen homer and ihn and spect durchs and mehrfache durchbekommen and mehrfache , but as a stubenhocker , he has a schrumpfhirn .
their own personal spielgeschichte is unique and often nothing about what we &apos;re particularly thinking .
it &apos;s characterized by a sense of energetischer fokussierung , complete vereinnahmung and success .
as you can help that media is going to interpret their work or the science of the work that your work now is now , like the mozartmetapher , like , &quot; oh , the mrts show that that play is steigert .
the difference between our nachos and the landläufigen nachos is that our actually are a dessert .
br : and then , after a short tauchbad , in liquid nitrogen to get this perfect brateffekt , we really have something that looks like , tastes and behaves like the original .
for example , the ipcc in paris , his report to the von of people .
alisa miller gives us a message about the news .
it allows it to be the negative forms that you &apos;re looking at , while you &apos;re nachgeht your everyday verrichtungen .
for this project , we &apos;ve evolved a kind of intelligent simultaner .
no matter where i am -- it &apos;s all over a process that tries to pinpoint my eyes .
inside , it &apos;s a 400 pounds of schwerer that i &apos;ve seen myself , from a friend .
there were thousands of people , we believe that we were infected with hiv .
: erzaehler : deep in a remote region of cameroon , two of their prey are in their prey .
but they will ask you another question .
if we were to doerfer in these laendlichen , we found that nobody had not had tv to that his face .
now , to say that these viruses in the past probably probably are likely to be able to be able to get extinct in these laendlichen societies .
you &apos;re telling what you &apos;re doing with 140 characters or less and people who are interested in this updates .
we &apos;re using a programmierschnittstelle , which means that programmers can write software to interact with twitter .
&quot; ... &quot; give people more information , and they follow your intuitions ted ted . &quot;
so , what i read about , the people i read , were convinced that the people were infected , i was convinced that books had to be made of nature , and they had to have to have things that i couldn &apos;t identify with .
all i &apos;d been about to be heard about her , how poor they were , so that it was impossible to see me as any of the things as a poor .
and slowly , i realized that my american roommate had different versions of the single versions of this single story , and i had to have had exactly how this professor , who told me that my novel is not &quot; authentic . &quot;
you start the history of the north american native native native native native native americans , and not with the ankunft of the brits , you &apos;re told a whole different story .
i always felt it was impossible to do right with a place or a person , if you don &apos;t deal with all of the stories of this place or that person .
i &apos;ll give you every summer in lagos , and i find it amazing how many people feel like many people are necessarily writing about how many people want to write to tell stories .
in a recent recently experiment , when one group of adults have been in a fmri scanner -- while the people listened to their experts .
why did my doctor got me when i was surgery , &quot; mrs. hertz , did you get no hyperpyrexie ? instead of just how they could say , i must be looking for sure , not a high fever .
my father is to develop alzheimer &apos;s .
and reading is how impossible .
even though it &apos;s difficult .
so we have to take us to the physical and economic bounds .
and then we &apos;ve been taught our promise of our promise .
if you have trouble , the medicines patent for the average consumer in the united states in the world &apos;s current environment is actually : &quot; the current environment .
if you want a fish , you get a woman and when you need a woman , you get a fish . &quot;
and if it &apos;s going to be a longer ride , you can still change the battery and keep on the island .
this is after a clean state of u.s. military
in india , you don &apos;t understand where the problem is because most indians , every single time you just take two or three gallons .
all we need is 10 percent of the feedback of the generated energy .
we don &apos;t put it right now . maybe we &apos;re going to freely freely and keep the slaves .
the argument &apos;s what id are the same features that have been argumente and over again , since darwin &apos;s time has been to the day of the day .
the darwinsche natural selection is so incredibly elegant because they &apos;re the problem , the complexity , in the form of nothing , of anything .
now the next one : &quot; the president of the royal society has to let a powerful belief , &quot; -- &quot; -- &quot; -- that an asteroid killed the dinosaurs . &quot;
it feels in a belagerten minority , but how do the american atheists are actually in the u.s. atheists ?
i don &apos;t have any pay for topwissenschaftler of other fields like history or philosophy , but i would be amazed if you were different .
darwin was that the atheism crisis was right and good for the intelligenzija , but that the most people who are , the most people who are , the most people who are , quote , &quot; not how to be . &quot;
when people like &quot; stephen hawking and albert einstein , they use the word &quot; god , &quot; of course , it uses it as a practical metaphor for these deep , same part of physics that we don &apos;t yet understand .
and the launch cost about 500 dollars , about the $ 100 of 10,000 dollars today .
in fact , in fact , in fact , in the past , the one of the people in the license , you &apos;re going to be übertrug in a field and it had to be entschieden whether this was on license or ownership .
because it &apos;s just a sense of me or whether you &apos;re a lot of acting on the way wikipedia , you &apos;re a certain sentence of social relationships .
i don &apos;t have slides , so they &apos;re going to have to be begnügen with me .
one research company for africa has shown that there is an awareness of aufwärtstrend in 28 african countries .
the state should not be in the production of goods and service , because he &apos;s inefficient and inkompetent is on this area .
but what it immediately revealed , the variation that we have , the variation that we have , the economic development -- that &apos;s when the oil prices was high , our economy grew very quickly .
the same thing we do in the versicherungssektor .
otherwise , i would have thought i &apos;d been comfortable with that .
he called her &quot; massiv fatale , &quot; which means that they could kill 100 million people in the next 50 years .
until recently , we didn &apos;t know how a vaccine would have exactly .
the main challenge for those two viruses is that they &apos;re constantly changing constantly .
these drugs are not cure , but they &apos;re providing a huge triumph of science , because they &apos;re the automated death sentence by a hiv-diagnose of the diejenigen that have access to them .
but you know , the research that has been happening in hiv has been very much to helped us with the progress of other diseases .
this was a slow , mühevoller process that was dependent on hühnereiern , and millions of years of hühnereier .
and the radical gestiegenen production and the enormous kosteneinsparungen of the e. coli , for example , the riesigen , i &apos;ve been talking about -- look at the time -- that &apos;s what happened in gerettete .
so the challenge is ahead of a full force .
the question is just : why ?
do you think african union will organize a conference ?
there &apos;s some things that you have to know .
the speaker that was standing on stage here , idrim muhammad , deutete , deutete , that we had hundsmiserable leaders in africa .
by holding it by the leidenden people .
traditionally , africans , africans , africans , they hate to .
they decide what they &apos;re doing .
he doesn &apos;t get any help of government , and he &apos;s building a second , grösseres boat .
something that would connect us all together .
scott &apos;s results were full of it .
and the challenge for algorithmic filters , this personalized filters is that they &apos;re doing these balance , because they &apos;re going to go and click on , what you first do first .
it &apos;s to us about new ideas and new people and fremde perspectives .
and the man replied , &quot; all very beautiful abstieg , what ? &quot;
i know you &apos;re waiting for more bad umweltnachrichten -- i &apos;m just making fun -- but now , you &apos;re just going to draw a quick repetition and then i show you a new material over possible solutions .
to the fillmstart , it &apos;s a update on version 2.0 , where you can get directly to the purchase of ausgleichseinheiten .
all of the republican here , it &apos;s not about walking to parteipolitik .
what was really striking to me at the gulf of the gulf is really the most impressed , is that they &apos;re ausgesprochene .
and there &apos;s no nobody else to do that , there &apos;s no more people to use a few people that are trying to use the beach .
we have heard that bacteria eat oil ?
these tunfische durchschwimmen the entire ocean .
when the japanese pearl harbor pearl harbor bombadierten , she looked at least at least .
what the saeubern of the birds , i don &apos;t want to do a abfaelligen bemerkungen , people who are clean .
okay , people who call themselves conservative , if you really wanted to really conservative and really patriotisch , then they should send these korporationen to the hoelle .
it &apos;s about right and wrong .
and i developed a system to produce medical isotopes .
all right : &quot; i &apos;m more than my genes -- all together .
i didn &apos;t ask you to skandieren it because it &apos;s true , but to remember you .
they contain a molecule that we know as a human being .
and this is just a mäusegehirn . it &apos;s much smaller than a human genome project .
well , nerve , as trees , can grow new branches and old .
and we can actually speak from the bewusstseinsstrom .
if you put this number , you can easily make it easy to make a big potential for fehlverbindungen in the brain .
potentially , this technology will be able to be able to make ourselves through the auseinandernehmen and together in our own brain .
he &apos;s mostly interested in music and commercials with his company , the directors bureau .
so we have a rapid experiment to show you that .
ks : no .
while he did that , he noticed it a unexpected thing .
ks : so how does this work : there &apos;s a matrix of färbemitteln .
ridiculous , right ?
and a few months ago , a friend of mine sent me a link to this guy , eduardo sousa .
a huge scandal of a few weeks .
but he still did .
so his yard is incredible .
and then he found these wild plant , which is lupine .
and then you fly in the circle , and then you fly in the circle , and then you fly in the circle .
i finally came to try to try and went before i went to .
no salt , no pepper , no oil , no spices .
what &apos;s going to hell that hell is called this ?
at least , at least . i think it &apos;s anyway .
farmers who rely on nature to find solutions to find answers , instead of the nature of the solutions that are solutions solutions to solutions .
and from the old fire to switch , two great stories about oil and electricity , who both have two fifth of fossil fuels in the air .
our fuel is about mobility to three fifth three years .
you can make it calm it up , it &apos;s tougher than titan .
trucks and airplanes can be realistic or fortgeschrittene biofuels .
also , better light and büromaterial and so forth , the maximum kühllast to a third of the third .
in about 20 us-staaten , private installateure is billige billige solar system without cash loss , and lower so .
and what we also do is it also replace it , it &apos;s about the same trillion dollars in kapitalwert -- we &apos;re going to buy more of that , and we &apos;re going to buy more of them , or a new nuclear power , or sogenanntes clean , or renewable zentralisiert , which are more or less .
so , on results , not to focus on , can be able to focus on , and conflict , conflict , conflict , the vereinenden solution of america &apos;s solution .
later i just noticed that what i had eaten , two tagesrationen of his family .
this simple überlagerung shows that the donors in areas where the kids go to school , no schools don &apos;t have a schools , and this is a new questions about it , whether we need those kinds of aid that you need most ?
two years ago , at eight years , i called my father .
i &apos;m not trying to design the toothbrush .
we remind us and can this in any book of my zehnjährigen , that life was formed four billion years ago -- four billion of the two billion .
so similar , i &apos;m not quite sure .
there are risks , there are traps . one trap : the vertical .
you have time to think time , you have time to do anything else , to speak about art and stuff .
you go back to the future , back , back , back .
they all come from families where often the most people are only a person at home , mostly the mother or grandmother , and they come to their education and their structure here .
we get them to turn on and turn on on the left and so they can get to the bottom , and the consequences that they &apos;re going to do is kennen the consequences if they &apos;re leaving orders .
let &apos;s go online . &quot;
it &apos;s done .
they said , &quot; that &apos;s enough for regierungsarbeit .
then you can support us . that &apos;s the job of you guys . &quot;
but i have to have my hotdog .
you can listen and &apos; market .
take for example , for example , beispiel .
if you think about the concept of wikipedia , you think of the content on the content , and you end up the largest encyclopedia in the world .
there are a lot of people who have the same dream .
a website became built .
there was no leader .
extremism has become a tolerance to tolerance .
the modern tools of neuroscience show us that what happens there is an incredibly complex process .
we can be laute of our own language , but not the world languages .
we reviewed that by the american babies , which never heard a second language at the beginning of the critical phase .
it may seem like a haartrockner of mars , of mars , of mars .
science on one side has a very rational approach to their environment , while art in the other side , usually in the other side of its environment .
now i have a live-demonstration over here to show you .
let me show you this over here .
the dalai lama once said , &quot; love and compassion are notwendigkeiten .
the stofffetzen were abgewickelt by a little girl whose body was burned .
it &apos;s part of every human lebewesens .
and if compassion is so good for us , why don &apos;t we choose with compassion ?
the wound of the maden was maden .
imagine you like , squares , and honestly , who doesn &apos;t like you ?
we start with a 1x1-quadrat , and then we &apos;re going to see another 1x1-quadrat .
then there was still aron kader , a palästinenser-amerikaner .
i said , &quot; he &apos;s already dead .
&quot; i have a verbockt ! &quot; i don &apos;t have an memo . what &apos;s going on ? &quot;
i said , &quot; what do you do ? &quot;
so i went to the lobby , and i saw that indian guys .
marco tempest : if you asked him to deception , he said , &quot; magic is the only ehrbare profession .
where is the queen ?
i &apos;m going to show you how exquisitely terrorism is connected to our daily lives .
at the time when i interviewed the red brigades , i discovered that their lives didn &apos;t have to be ideologie and politics , but from economic constraints .
i think many people kept me in a little bit of a little bit .
but most importantly , they were stiegen in serious geschäftsbeziehungen with organized crime .
this money was thrown in koffern and containern hinausgeschafft -- in bar , they understand .
nobody wants that the us-finanzaufsicht and his geschäftsbeziehungen to überwacht his geschäftsbeziehungen .
now some of you may think , &quot; wait a minute . it doesn &apos;t necessarily look like a hochsee-ruderer .
i was going to realize , but i wanted to leave my wohlfühlbereich , but what i didn &apos;t realize was that it &apos;s an individual ungemütlich , that it &apos;s extremely extremely ungemütlich .
and i really learned that the greater the challenge , the bigger the feeling of a special performance when you get to the end .
now , i thought the atlantic was big , but the pacific is really big .
but that didn &apos;t go without no missgeschicke .
it &apos;s this little green layer on the horizon , which she makes very nervous about the rising seas .
we can start , better , more klügere , more decision , more decision .
roz savage : why i &apos;m about the pacific the pacific ocean .
this is the world trade trade trade on the cover .
why ? why ? why do you want to do that ?
he doesn &apos;t see any of the cost . it doesn &apos;t use extra time .
they were able to make it happen .
and the final thing is about comfort , it &apos;s about the comfort , it &apos;s about you feel good at places that they didn &apos;t feel good .
and that &apos;s hard if you don &apos;t know who you are .
and i wondered , how can it be so easy to give my dreams ?
it &apos;s not so hard to hereinzulegen someone , and one day before the school i said , &quot; oh , you can go to my homework , and i gave him the wrong answer that i had written on the night .
we both have been in the back benches in the class in class , so we wouldn &apos;t be able to deal with papierkügelchen .
maybe you have your prellungen and zerbrochenen teeth , but never told you , because how can you say you &apos;re going to see you underneath you ?
this is french science .
well , well , then there &apos;s .
if you look at these trucks here , it &apos;s the biggest truck of its way in the world .
it &apos;s one of the reasons why it &apos;s the largest and fastest-growing growing einzelquelle of co2 in canada , and it &apos;s also why , why canada now is the number three , now , the number three is in terms of per capita per capita .
and as a father , i can &apos;t imagine what the world &apos;s soul .
by doing that , we remove a large part of our largest kohlenstoffsenke and replacing them to most greenhouse gas oil prices .
the hauptgegenstand of their work is the bindi that you can buy in any store , and you can put it on a store every day on your forehead every day , and it &apos;s a ritual , which is intimately connected to the institution with the marriage of marriage .
raqib was born in kolkata , in kashmir , in kashmir and in london .
i hope you can convince you that complex and complicated is always the same thing .
the eingekreiste knotenpunkt is the one that we want to affect -- the public support for government .
i proposed to my first tedtalk that we should spend a planet 21 billion hours a week of video .
only seven minutes per day , a significant improvement for a significant improvement and langfristiger increase in joy .
why a game ?
how could a triviales game so much of this kind of a huge effect in this case , sometimes situationen situations ?
there are four kinds of strength , or resilience that are beitragen to post-traumatic growth , and there are scientifically things that you can do everyday , to build these resilience and build it doesn &apos;t need to build a trauma .
through more exercise that is empowered .
here &apos;s another secret for you : if you shake your hand for six seconds , then the oxytocin-level will be erhöht in their blood , which is vertrauens-hormon .
and in this project , we actually have hundreds of thousands of people around the world and make this with us . actually , are thousands of people involved in this project , many of his different aspects .
and then a few people came out of chicago and saying , &quot; the motto of the chicago humanities festival is the global warming festival . we have a 3,000-square-foot quadratmeter gallery and we want them to fill them with your reef . &quot;
and wolle and nässe are not just two concepts that fit .
euklid asked , &quot; how can i define parallel lines ? &quot;
infinite . they captured habens . it &apos;s very much .
so , we have , from wool , duch domestic silly employees , the proof that the most famous postulat is wrong .
and their individual notions of ideas , and their employment with this mathematical technique .
this particular rekursive trait -- the self -- i think , is the holy grail of neuroscience , neuroscience , neuroscience , and eventually , we will understand what &apos;s going on .
this person is otherwise verstand and intelligent . but if he sees his mother , his delusion , and he says it &apos;s not his mother .
so if this area is damaged , you lose the ability to recognize faces .
and chairs and chairs -- nothing like humans , just like in normal people , but if i show him a picture of his mom , the elektrodermale activity is low .
he knows that his arm is not there . nonetheless , it &apos;s a überzeugendes , sensorisches experience .
maybe you can get the phantomschmerz that are verkrampfung in phantom limb .
and my pain disappeared . &quot;
he said , &quot; no , the last three days i didn &apos;t have phantom and the letzten , no more phantomschmerzen , no no verkrampfung , no phantomschmerz , no phantomschmerz , all my pain are gone .
cis is blue , the green is green , a other sound may be yellow .
that &apos;s the key .
which is kiki , which is buba ?
your sexualverhalten is too menschenähnlich , which most of us don &apos;t deal with .
that &apos;s kanzi .
none of the things you see in this video are antrainiert .
well done .
he learned that when he benützt both hands with his gezielten streifenden , much more much bigger and schärfere .
a frame is a hut in the woods .
does it look like where the sound comes ?
because we think it &apos;s not the biology , but the culture .
and some stars die in spectacular supernova-explosionen that are so zurücklassen .
on the right-hand side , gravity . einstein explained this .
and beyond that , they &apos;re making it new kinds of change .
it was too early , but he was a moral guide , a inspiration for scientists who were concerned about the control of the weapons .
suppose we have außerirdische creatures , we &apos;ve seen our blassblauen point from far outside the cosmos and not only for 40 years , but all the time for the world .
martin rees says , is this our last century ?
and it &apos;s going to even worse , &quot; then i would make a picture of it and make a dozen hochglanzabzüge .
now , these are students , so they gave a lot of money for things like ohrringe and make-up .
and then we asked them again , how happy they are .
but enormously different incentives .
these are verkaufs-teams verkaufs-teams in belgium .
the teams that we gave money to spend on the way to spend the way they spend more teams and get a dominierten in the end .
if we hear today from the kriegsgefahren , from high levels of redekunst , we often believe that this is one of these unlösbaren conflict of the middle east , whose roots are as old as the region themselves .
ironically , this was a time when the hauptinteresse of iran was in washington with washington , and not the destruction of the destruction .
this is an analogy that &apos;s based on the ground that &apos;s abzielt , diplomacy . is diplomacy that &apos;s inevitable , is inevitable .
you can look at certain solar panels , or you can look at the different regions and compare it .
the map of all port au-prince at the end of 2009 wasn &apos;t as good as they could be , not as good as the map of california .
the trick is : the trick .
and the explanation she said , &quot; he was not a environmentalists . &quot;
this system wants to take the status quo , also the status quo of a government government .
so it &apos;s not about that my topic is most important . that &apos;s not .
we can &apos;t do anything . &quot;
lawrence lessig : we , the citizens , have to have to have the republic of the citizens , the republic of the republic of the republic .
for example , some people are going to be in this room with a scholarship to a year .
that &apos;s the one on my pen . &quot;
everybody is just a little bit of a little bit .
i don &apos;t want to say that the law isn &apos;t right , it &apos;s right .
here you see the attack of the raubtiers .
if you see in north america , then the way many things are in the united states , you &apos;re in the united states , and they ignore each other .
each of their herzschläge depends on this critical region , the sinusknoten , which is the sinusknoten of the 10,000 economic cells , a electronic rhythm , a elektronischen , a high tension -- a low -- a low -- a low -- a low -- a low -- a low -- to send the ventrikeln to pump a signal to pump .
they were a while , drifteten , but apart apart .
so i want to show you a couple of interviews with people who were on the opening on the bridge and describe what happened .
now , you don &apos;t usually think that &apos;s not for a while , but we all run -- we &apos;re going to go back and forth .
am : this is just a few tons , so you &apos;re going to go pretty fast .
but the höchstgeschätzte scientists in his field .
i didn &apos;t say what the list was , but she was in alphabetischer , and i told you , they should look at their name , their familiennamen , or the mädchennamen of her mother .
and also , maybe this fowler-apfel may or perhaps a weizenart , which is not worth economically , a resilience or pests or pests or another trait that are useful for climate change and the other .
we &apos;re going to see children in the television world .
the idea was to know that it &apos;s cold , you have natural temperatures under the gefrierpunkt .
and if anything happens , then you can come and pick it up .
thank you .
watch your posture ! this is not right .
maybe some kind of lady , a lady ? thank you .
you &apos;ve only tried two ideas -- two in the u.s. and one in the russians .
so , i &apos;ve got to talk about innovation -- the things that are developing , there are lots of activity , and then they &apos;re going to die through something else and die .
i can &apos;t tell you when it comes to , because i don &apos;t want the competition to my schedule .
i mean something really interesting to happen here .
ok , let &apos;s talk a little bit about the commercial development of the bemannten .
it &apos;s like the air .
after a few years , he &apos;s ready to give up , but one day he has a enlightenment .
institutions are called &quot; naked , &quot; and if you &apos;re naked , you know , the consequences .
the fourth importance of openness and the fourth principle is machtgewinn .
the toothpaste is from the tube .
you know that bees and fish in the city .
around us , we find a medical revolution , a revolution that will help us , some of the worst diseases that are helping us to defeat our societies , cancer with including cancer .
this is a tumor , dark , gray , a unheilbare mass , wachsend in a brain .
and you can see that the ring of blood blutzufuhr after treatment .
but the question is : how good work that are going to work in practice ?
here &apos;s what happens when we add a erdbeer-extrakt . it &apos;s prevented by angiogenesis on very , it &apos;s going to be very , very angiogenesis in very much .
but more interestingly , it &apos;s more interesting about the study that the men who have developed the prostata-krebs , which is the more tomato sauce that they have had less blood vessels that have their cancer .
albert szent-györgyi once once said that &quot; discoveries are discoveries of what all already have seen , and think that nobody else has . &quot;
i &apos;m an rätselkolumnist magazine .
it has to be fun , different as a common problems that honestly don &apos;t really seem to be particularly well .
one is the background of the other .
you may not be able to do this , but on a computer , it &apos;s going to be a computer , and over to the computer , over the computer .
i wanted to do a sequel .
what &apos;s going on , in which direction are the right way ?
so there &apos;s games like the brain , &quot; for the nintendo legal system , a riesenhit .
looks like a black character . where is this ?
i really believe that a girl is so powerful that we all had to train to be so .
i remember , for instance , my father , who was very , very violent , was struck .
we &apos;re so used to the mädchen of the anspruchs , protagonistinnen of their own life that we actually made them to objects and have them turned into it .
and she looked at the eyes of her babies and said , &quot; of course i love my baby . how could i not love my baby ?
when we were there , they did a ritual , where you &apos;re girls , they &apos;re weggelaufen , with their families .
and i &apos;m going to be on your rest of your life . &quot;
i love that i don &apos;t want to take things slightly easily .
why should they want me to be abdrehen , zusperren ?
so , in the actual process , all six teenagers , they said , they had made the identifizierungen that they did in the photo .
but the incident of the january in january , on the northern hemisphere , to seven o &apos;clock in the evening .
this is 10 feet away .
and what does this example -- what &apos;s it about to keep it important for us to keep us in memory ?
he was a very religiöser man .
i got a fullbright-stipendium , and i traveled from africa , where i asked people to build fractals , why a great job is when you can get it .
and that sits in some villages to the smallest scale .
it &apos;s not really a mathematical knowledge .
he said , &quot; if i lived in the jungle , i would spend a long time to use it , because it &apos;s very fast , and it &apos;s very cheap .
just for odd odd odd .
we have a pilotprogramm in ghana .
the bad news is , but the bad news is .
instead of having friends or your friends , they looked at the davids .
today , agile development is angewandt in a hundred countries , and it &apos;s to the chefetagen .
the fear of everybody , is going to lose . &quot;
we put some rules on the way , and they &apos;re stuck on them .
that &apos;s going to be better . &quot;
just as i was here tonight to come here to come here , one of my daughters began to come .
and we developed 10 .
i was a teenager , when i first went to the first time , &quot; anna ersten , read , &quot; all happy families , &quot; for me , happy families , each other .
i want to show you how a little bit of unsichtbares as beautiful as well .
if i take this into the water , you see a silberne beschichtung , and this beschichtung is the luftschicht that &apos;s the water coming from the benetzen of the paddels . it &apos;s dry .
and plato with all the young women in his cave . sweeney : uuuuh ...
i &apos;m going to show you .
but tesla , the success was not about duration .
one of the things that i want to do is to be clear that no neurochirurgen can carry cowboystiefel .
we can take them up , or turn it or turn on .
he &apos;s one of five children .
i showed you that we can apply it in the circuits of the mood .
we &apos;re starting to understand what these circuits are and what parts of the clinical trial and symptoms of the disease are responsible .
evolution works in reality , actually , more like a tüftler than an engineer .
that &apos;s enough !
what we discovered is whether you looked at the leg of a human being , or a krabbe or a crab or a crab , the relative beinsteifheit of this feather is equal to all of us .
okay . the point is , it &apos;s really hard to say , right ? it &apos;s amazing , it &apos;s amazing , they tried it and they couldn &apos;t say it .
he does this with a druckempfindlichen glue .
what we do is we take the hair as a model , and they put together with a different colleague of berkeley .
and that showed that by the verheirateten gehobenen , two-thirds of the verheirateten men , kids , but only one third of women &apos;s women &apos;s women .
at monday , i left san francisco , my heimatort , and flew to this conference .
and we go out at the end , looking at us and say , &quot; how did it happen ? &quot;
there &apos;s a famous study that harvard business school business about a woman named heidi .
and i took my hand again and i fell in all other women and then have you thought more questions , just by men . &quot;
a woman contacted me in and i looked at them -- she looked a little young .
thank you very much .
they don &apos;t do it as so they should , but they do it .
so not fear , so the bestimmende factor was the factor of factor .
but it &apos;s true in the middle of the black .
i want to talk about this to talk about how we spread in this country , how we get to information .
so they &apos;re in verständlicher , klarer language , and that works .
we tell them that everything is okay ; it &apos;s good .
this patient is to be the 50 , we can really tell the very accurate , how large his risk is to get hurt in prostate cancer .
they don &apos;t need the educational of the audience in this room .
and this bee had taken , &quot; i &apos;m going to take this apfelbaum , this flower , i get to my mind , and then i get off . &quot;
and when you talk about nature that &apos;s when the author of my favorite movement is , how is the idea of the aldo-leopold-test ?
well , we &apos;re all equally hochentwickelt .
the only technology here is the cheap elektrozaun : pretty new , an , even at a autobatterie , even i could put a koppel of 10 ar in 15 minutes .
if a wiederkäuer grast , the grass of this altitude , on this gekürzt , and it &apos;s going to happen something interesting .
and now i &apos;m saying that i want to build a game of the games of the world , but that &apos;s not quite true , because it &apos;s already in development ; it &apos;s already happening .
if not , is the pity . there &apos;s nothing that they can do .
come to a certain amount of time , they get their getränke to the cost of the cost .
and then you can really get really good .
and it &apos;s powerful .
digg is a flexible dynamic that tries to find the best news that the most surprising stories .
we &apos;ve talked about the last time that last year years ago , to you .
you also see , if i turn around this around here -- hopefully i &apos;m not going to be too much .
you can see , here &apos;s what it started .
this is one of our engineers .
mendel , who would actually teach students to teach the law of the vererbung , just like a hobby .
put your hands up .
that makes it a place where it makes fun .
and so this is something that we work on , and we even have people who are excited about it and crazy enough , they &apos;re working on it , that &apos;s really her target .
thank you very much .
what &apos;s what he said to do , as he said , to his passengers was the experience of the landscape .
what does life do is easier to do more ?
in part , they do this by building a great new building plant , the basement of a hospitals .
today , the industrial systems have been brunels for the time , and we &apos;ve been in part of the current problem .
and how we can , by looking at the systems we have a larger effect .
from my persistence , from my persistence , is a little kellner to the waiter with his boss .
mark lipper , and i &apos;ve tried to answer a series of studies , which is to answer this question .
but , it &apos;s exactly what the american paradigm is needed .
but for the osteuropäer , the sudden availability was availability of all these konsumprodukten on the market like a sintflut .
the americans themselves themselves , that unlimited choice is more attractive to the theory of the times as a practice .
französiche parents would be more likely to say things like , &quot; noah was just for such a little time here , but he has a lot of us .
robert frost once said , &quot; it &apos;s poetry that &apos;s lost to translate . &quot;
&quot; well , it &apos;s a very elegant nuance of pink . &quot;
the three problems have one : they &apos;re menschgemachte problems that controls from the forces .
so ... thank you .
it &apos;s supposed to replace competition by collaboration .
and then we &apos;re building a sechs-meter-version that we can test with the maximale of machines , and so we can , very , very quickly .
girl 5 : no .
and so i realized that the techwelt is not a geschäftszyklus , but as a geschäftszyklus , it &apos;s as a heilbringende movement .
the nuclear bomb enters the stage .
and then the 92 nuclear power that would give the energy , the rest of los angeles comes up .
then you take it and then it matches the screen to the screen of the screen , and it &apos;s about the inside of the brain .
if you replace the word to the word or the internet network , it &apos;s very right , that his perception is very serious , and we &apos;re going to hear it in .
i think it was the exchange that led to the wheel .
ph : i hope you understand how subversiv that &apos;s subversiv .
eventually , the race has been running around the future when the world population unterging .
mm : because it has a role that has given a role to do something .
they produce things for 1,500 and 800 dollars a minute .
and where television has abgekriegt , which is what &apos;s built , is a very exciting kind of communication , and we have the zusammenschluss of two industries and a new way of thinking about it .
this is an spanish architect and designer .
so , color , simple blocks , simple materials : if i go through new york , i think .
it gave me to give me a lot of these -- maybe there &apos;s a yellow day in san francisco , and we all talk to us and build some installations .
the use of the city for the public space &apos;s room , is a bedeutend , almost a international model .
even the bits of the flugzeugs had french names .
he said , &quot; well , the first is there there &apos;s more girls . &quot;
and that was , i was , like i was looking for some hochs and tiefs , and the design of the chair i &apos;m going to show you about .
he said , she &apos;s got one of the new chairs , better chairs .
or they &apos;re going to the position of the position .
i knew from experience , and when i put myself into the offices , where there was no bürostühle to the idea that no one would come to the idea , zurückzugreifen , to turn it on a knauf , and the headrest to bring them in position .
and the way the agency produced in windeseile spreads .
two days ago , or yesterday , i can &apos;t remember that in a reuters-meldung , that madeira has been vermeldet the first dengue-erkrankungen of vermeldet , about 52 registrierte cases , about 400 wahrscheinlichen cases .
we need something that really was really drosselt , so that it doesn &apos;t spread the disease .
here is a typical situation : males are true , plenty of offspring .
so , frachtkosten are not our biggest problem .
&quot; why ? &quot;
and most of all time i &apos;m not talking about , although i &apos;m a weitgereister .
look at the data data .
now , our mobile phones can now build a story of our wohnorte .
bill davenhall : their health depends on where you live .
that &apos;s my grandfather .
from the simple reason that nobody else talks about it .
like the earth declared , they move phosphorus from water out of the ground .
here &apos;s one of a remarkable article from a 2009-ausgabe of &quot; nature , &quot; which is the discussion of the rise of the phosphorus crisis .
80 percent of them go to the same time .
and instead of a dose of 100 percent , we &apos;re going to take a percent of 25 percent .
we have a functioning technology and one which is used in korrekter use some of the most druckpunkte that we &apos;re going to move on the most remote world .
and he was a sogenannter teratologist : he watched all the missgestalten and mutations to find rules and laws , rather than seeing the norms .
and in this example , you see that the individual stages , but they &apos;re being repeating the ohne without being modular .
as an architect , i think only about relationships between the parts and all the whole , but in terms of the produktdesign , it will always be a matter of business .
we &apos;re näherten on the level of the typologie of the building , where we could build the five separate towers , but they should all be able to merge on the 60 floor .
and again , we come back , a few years later , 2003 , and we will see that this landscape is actually gesagt by schleswig-holstein , and it looks like a rainforest .
and the difference is in bewässerungsanlagen in bewässerungsanlagen , or maybe golfplätze in scottsdale , whatever you want .
there is a lot of toxic waste , a lot of things that are illegal to criticize , and now to be the air .
we have the amount of nitrogen and phosphorus in the world , just by fertilizers that are causing massive problems in the water quality , and in rivers , and even oceans , and it &apos;s also the most important einzelfaktor of the artensterben .
but we can do that , and there are opportunities to do .
irrigation is the biggest wasserverbraucherin on the paneten .
you have to work together .
so -- what is the main animal for the story ?
we want to see our products in the store .
the whole world is not able to drive .
we &apos;re interacting with the world of our hands .
what do you do ?
we use biological verstärker to enhance these nervensignale nervensignale .
this is what this looks like .
we &apos;re deinnervierten , or schnitten the nerve , from small parts of the muskels and the other pristine unberührt that gave us our hoch-runter -- signal , and two other ones that gave us our hands -- the signal .
ak : it works good .
but i can &apos;t take a electrode and say , &quot; there . &quot;
and that &apos;s our target -- something more clinically anwendbares to have .
that &apos;s jesse , and he &apos;s a schaumspielzeug .
so thank you very much .
sub-saharan africa has largely , there &apos;s 22 million people living with hiv , that are about 70 percent of the 30 million people who infected the world .
governments have to be able to make a wirksame prüfsysteme for ethical things in clinical trials that are going to be authorized in the different world , and the ethikkommissionen are being produced by the government and the finanzierern of the study .
the basic problems we face is to be an high school , and too many people .
so they &apos;re all the criteria that people would like to do .
so you can see this electricity , who goes north -- the humboldt-strom in this case -- the until the galapagos is enough to light , and that tiefenwasserstrom , the cromwell-strom , the cromwell-strom , the galapagos to the galapagos .
we also know that not only galápagos-pinguine threat , but they &apos;re just as magellanic and other people .
i want to show you that penguins are going to attack in mitleidenschaft .
turbo &apos;s turbo sich , with his schnabel to the door . we &apos;ll put it in the door , and he comes in there .
and then there &apos;s another one , the most comfortable comfortable kommt .
now , here &apos;s a fundamental problem that we don &apos;t solved , we &apos;re not solved the fundamental political political .
the two parts of a long time .
again , as mongolia , china doesn &apos;t have the erobert russia . it least .
for ärmere countries , china reduziert its zölle , so that laos and cambodia were selling their food cheaper and exporten by china .
what i want to do here is to give you a day i call a day day .
these two arrows form a bow , a bow of pendelzügen and other infrastructure that connects the west bank to the gaza .
a lot of them .
so what is next ? how does the future of the european union ?
53 countries and at the most people are often linien lines of lines .
this dream exists to be its urzeiten .
it &apos;s bad ? it doesn &apos;t seem like this .
okay .
and the hormone receptor promotes growth of growth .
so , how can a hormone finally ended the speed of the car ?
we think that insulin and igf-1 are hormones , specifically in the specifically of vorteilhaften circumstances -- in good times -- if food is really there , and not much stress in the environment .
we don &apos;t know the details about how it works , but we know that foxo is affecting a impact on life expectancy of people .
you could see the genes .
so it &apos;s possible that the process i &apos;ve been talking about , which is very quickly , which is very quickly , which is a very quickly , a different normal sollwert , like a bird , so that the bird can live much longer .
you never will see such a display , because nike wants to buy your shoes .
they all show heroes , the auserwählt .
it &apos;s like trying to run a backsteinwand .
this view is that many ausgestellte medikamentenrezepte like prozac like prozac in the form of the brain is to change the chemistry of the brain , as if the brain would be the brain of a chemical soup .
and my namensgebender colleague seymour seymour believe that too .
and by the way , we found that a mutant , much longer to move forward to the luftstößen , and when we were able to prüften the genes that were played in that mutation , we could discover a dopaminrezeptor .
this question has been asked for a long time , but at flight , we can actually test it .
so , as you find , mosquitoes is going to find us in the dark by sie us . they smell us .
just so you can see it &apos;s cheese .
people have told me that they &apos;re like to be bitten by mosquitos .
in großbrittannien durchführte .
and every time i felt the schaurigen of the eyes of the eyes of the eyes of gefangener .
and as herrausstellte , is fat one of the best sources of information for adult stem cells .
as we speak , we &apos;re going to run around about 117 clinical trials on the study of stem cells .
we &apos;re very happy because we have the ability to have the ability to have this angels in the world . not only in our country : venezuela .
so what happens when you don &apos;t happen ?
but here you see what really comes up .
and i can &apos;t tell you about it , because i &apos;ve stopped left with the headline .
jenna mccarthy : what you don &apos;t know about the marriage of the marriage we know about the marriage ?
but how ?
it &apos;s even better . it seems to be that we can make these receivers , with help that the dna is encoded .
the animal jumps up , it &apos;s got its wings out of , it vibriert , but it doesn &apos;t really pick up , because the fly &apos;s fly &apos;s fliege trapped .
for a intelligent creature like ours , it &apos;s not the rule in stone , but it changes when the animal learns in experience .
and many of these trials were able to get the identity of the critic , to 12 cells .
there are some ideas in the computerwissenschaft and the artificial intelligence , how you could do that , but we still haven &apos;t solved a single example of how intelligent behavior from the physical interaction in the physical matter of matter .
here is a libby , or actually a ultraschallbild of libby .
ed : okay . tb : okay . a little bit of nach , a little bit more to the middle .
from their own experience , i know that hospitals can be a very dangerous place .
here &apos;s a picture of my abschlussteam from the gulf .
one of the things i &apos;m saying is this kind of pflegeanpassung that involves everything to their goals , the bahnbrechendste will be in our lifetime of our health care system .
they don &apos;t use a lot like a velcro or glue or glue .
here we have the robot .
marc raibert built the hüpfroboter uniroo .
what would happen if you were going to the bottom of the bed , and it would get a böe , or we would shake the sheet ? &quot;
and so wirs did also , and he &apos;s doing this .
of course , totally different than you would see that in a naturfilm .
we &apos;re going to see the rising seas .
and i would say that people are working in the oceans and think about the goals , we &apos;re going to be a lot of lower .
this is the ship that i was the last three months .
if this ice melts is melting , sea level rise to be six feet .
what was the cause ?
in both cases , the bad news are the bad news for the corals of the galapagos islands .
you have the relation to the population .
but then , at the end , you see the thermometeraufzeichnungen in black .
we have very interesting possibilities in the atmosphere of the atmosphere , and we &apos;ve only done this in the process of eisbohrkernen , but in this case , we &apos;re going to go back to 20 million years .
and this is the task that turned to einstein : figuring out how gravity works .
einstein had room and time and time , warps and curves and curves around gravity .
but deep in the structure of the space , the idea , could give it more dimensions than we see there .
and just like the strings of a cello , can be vibrate in different patterns .
not yet .
is this only an interesting mathematical experiment that may be able to explain some of the most compelling characteristics of the world , or can we actually bring these extra dimensions of the extra dimensions ?
so we have two pieces of data on it with colorful dots .
now , can irgenjemand the predator , what &apos;s going on , which is what &apos;s going on ?
and what happens to sensory information , is true of the general thing for all information .
and we &apos;re looking at about 30 seconds on what a hammer is in a 18 minutes .
why ? because if the cylinder in this shadow would be in the shadow , and the same amount of light would reflect on your eye , like the kachel outside the shadow , they would have to reflect more and to laws after laws of physics .
where do you know ?
and it comes into the hive , find a blank honigtopf and übergibt -- and that &apos;s honey .
he finds him . insane , right ?
voices ? yes ?
often there is no right or wrong or wrong or wrong .
in 2010 , in new york , not so much .
we also are a species of storytellers .
now some things : understanding of the risks that risks , the dangers of the risks , how they work .
but in a modern and complex world , they need models to understand the many risks we face .
think about cancer , bird flu , swine flu , sars .
there was no new insights , but less fear .
and there &apos;s another cognitive bias : i call it bestätigungsfehler by taking data to accept data to accept our glaubensatz and data to our glaubensatz .
i &apos;m familiar with another group of other group , whether my airplane was safe to fly around .
this is the people who people are .
and he was found in the near the stanford .
they had good teachers with their teachers , students .
let me ask you some questions to ask you about finding out how that &apos;s a good choice . &quot;
i took them to get somebody who was going to get to get them to maintain , to save it , and i could see an volunteer , but i found that nobody did something .
we opened the first section of 2009 .
robert hammond : a park in the sky , in the sky , building a park .
and groups were very often immediately immediately .
they need a einschließenden process that can be the core of this very complicated society with his problems .
it &apos;s probably the first time in history to the first time in the history of the arab world , a revolution in the world is a volksrevolution .
it &apos;s that the vorletzte decade was so vielversprechend . and that &apos;s why you have a main reason .
and on one occasion , they have no longer their slogans on the streets -- they took them in the negotiations of the negotiations , to part because they vertraten the victims of these weapons .
thank you very much for your attention .
but i don &apos;t think that &quot; monsteret is a good thing .
so this was completely smooth .
it &apos;s a little crazy , to work on a new nuklearreaktor .
and i try to use a very scientific approach .
they said , &quot; well , you know , this curious rich man in the movie ?
it &apos;s a big tooth . &quot;
and the last day , the sun comes out , the orcas come , they come directly to the boat . it &apos;s fantastic .
i &apos;m going to admit that i &apos;m going to be a little nervous because i &apos;m going to tell you a couple radical things about how we &apos;re thinking about cancer , a lot of people who contains a lot more than that is a lot more than i do .
part of the genome that we can read is the list of ingredients .
it &apos;s a huge amount of information in genetics , by simply comparing the genetic sound .
and i &apos;m like , &quot; okay . at least this guy &apos;s good . &quot;
so we basically measure each other than a eigenes .
if you have malaria , we give them chinin , or some of them .
where we really need to be educated , is the process that &apos;s underway is just in the level of the proteomischen activity , and the level of the body doesn &apos;t heal itself , how it does it ? &quot;
danny hillis : cancer through proteomics , verstehen through proteomics .
they &apos;re all members of tribes .
it &apos;s not enough to just give these people .
because at stage three , most of us are .
that &apos;s their lobby .
there was no plan . never have a chance to try to have a lack of a lack of paper .
in fact , martin luther king was bekanntester sentence in stage three .
so i &apos;m sitting here in this chair and do nothing . &quot;
and suddenly they got the papierzettel out , and tried to figure out , &quot; how to we ask the population of sub-saharan africa ? &quot;
so we schnippen the little bit of plastic on the top .
these are the flame or zweistöckigen konstrukte who designed to be so much to erwirtschaften the taxes that they are , they were not as permanent building .
they duchschauen the stability and security that can offer the lap of a uncle , you compare them to the wackeligen construction of a neurotischen niece in a high school .
but from my perspective , compassion has a problem .
and it &apos;s the erbauendste form of sofortiger gratification .
i can &apos;t really explain it , and he doesn &apos;t .
stories like this , the symbols of the symbols of the world that is , in a world that turned out to be compassion , the übermäßigen images of suffering that could otherwise otherwise überwältigen us .
gandhi was a really fehlerhafter person .
and the first day , our gruppenleiterin judgment was to us and taught us our slogan that we had to deliver every day for the rest of the summer , to give the gemeinschaftssinn .
this is one of two or three of their known .
here are some examples .
it turns out that we can &apos;t be part of a group without being able to imitate and imitieren the opinion of others .
so that &apos;s the world where we live today .
and so i &apos;m trying to learn from my grandfather &apos;s &quot; my grandfather on my own way .
okay , number two : go into the wild .
and imagine this , you &apos;re going to do an inner picture : i was born in a very small village in mexico , unfortunately , very ärmlichen , and my parents had no higher education .
and so we believe that through all the changes that happened , that we &apos;re now going to be incredible today today .
it &apos;s a initiative that &apos;s on simple , erreichbare , and menschzentrierte solutions .
we have now followed up to 30 different technologists in 18 different countries , and we were able to connect millions of people , to learn to learn what this particular particular segment of the particular market is needed and demands .
and my father came to me and i said , &quot; you know , i remember that every generation it &apos;s better than the previous .
i know a lot of people who are very smart and yet , &quot; why can i not solve my problem ? &quot;
i started 1980 with a different family .
don &apos;t think we have the responsibility to take the environment ? &quot;
i still used to see the same four years old as before .
but that &apos;s not a good life .
that &apos;s what he &apos;s praying .
whether you believe or not , don &apos;t make any difference for me .
and he said , &quot; what are you going to do in your hand ? &quot;
what is this in your hand ? &quot; -- i said , &quot; it &apos;s a basketball , and this basketball repräsentiert , that &apos;s what they &apos;re in .
when my kids were little , i always went to her room , sat down to her bed , and i looked at my children in sleep .
it &apos;s less than i had vorausberechnet -- i &apos;m rechnete with three to 10 million -- but yet it &apos;s a very significant number .
in a village , we have 100 laptops , each with a different collection of 100 books , so that the village suddenly all of the time has been a thousand books .
right , the famous chinese characters of rastplatz characters for rastplatz characters .
they answer the question : how does it feel like you &apos;re going to be ?
we &apos;re really learning this really bad lesson .
think for a moment , as it &apos;s like it &apos;s to feel right now .
and unlike all other animals , we &apos;re obsessed with it , to try to figure out .
and i have to tell you that i &apos;m thinking about this incredibly nerdige book about a theme that everybody was going to hate to have a audience that would never be .
the effect of it is not just wogender goldener wheat , but it &apos;s mountains of grain .
in 1986 , they came from vietnam america .
the answer was that , &quot; that &apos;s yes . &quot;
our personalfluktuation sank on a third of the durchschnitts in our industry , and in the five years , our betriebsgröße has tripled our betriebsgröße .
and bhutan , for which it doesn &apos;t know , is the youngest democracy in the world , only two years old .
it &apos;s actually that we &apos;re often hunting in the west , as a happiness we have to get , a thing , or maybe , maybe several things we have to get .
and we ask 10 simple questions -- that &apos;s the simplicity .
what we really need to learn as leaders is that we can manipulate the qualtität of production by creating the right conditions , so that our employees can live their ability to live .
bl : okay . one , two , three .
in deck , you &apos;re going to tell you the innenohr , you move your eyes , but the eyes are moving in the position of the boat , and say , &quot; i &apos;m still quiet . &quot;
amy , come on , please ?
the way , what did you do ? the result : what did you observe ?
i just read a one .
real scientific education should give people a voice and they empower to express this , and that &apos;s why , i think , amy will have amy the last word in this short story .
poor people have not the capability of choice .
we were zurückgeworfen into the 70s .
and to come up there , we have to realize that the principle of a wegwerfkultur is not just the species we talked about , but our society .
today , 60 years later , i can tell you why it &apos;s possible .
i &apos;m sure somebody who already asked them , &quot; yes , great things up there -- but how do i get there ?
i was a professor at the u.c. davis system , and i got a lot of attention , and that allowed me to fund the launch of the program .
we have eight motors in this vehicle .
thank you .
they fall apart , they &apos;re like , you &apos;re like , and they end up here .
i mean , people wonder , whether you &apos;re cell phones safe .
you have a coil .
because , remember the original idea of dr. soljacic : the piepende cell of his wife .
and for those of you who can &apos;t read : it &apos;s like it &apos;s like this , it &apos;s actually a kind of kabelloser technology . &quot;
green or natural growth groups , where not einbalsamiert , is a step in the right direction , but they &apos;re not taking care of the existenten heart disease .
first , a beerdigungsanzug , angereichert , angereichert , who was mushroom death . &quot;
it &apos;s months later , who i was really .
i &apos;m looking for a cure .
i say , &quot; hold it down , if you can . &quot;
even with this eindeutigen paper in our hands , we &apos;ve been definiert the hope again .
it &apos;s a feature .
suddenly , he knows that he was defeated .
to give you this , we have to put them back to the driver .
we beflogen the area , we photographierten it , we send people in , we photographierten the building , the katastrophengebiete , and we helped the first einsätzen , and the rescue .
if i do this , i &apos;m not losing the original details , in the contrary , i could write history here .
you will be zurückgehalten by the public opinion .
that &apos;s not very well .
and that is a democracy , which is a democracy , a democracy .
here is the question : which country cut up better , china or india ?
because the indian man has been in activist for a advantage of two years of age two years old .
what political change is organ , they have dorfwahlen .
so , china , i think , has still , i think , has some extraordinary , ungeschliffene grundlagen -- particularly in social capital , public health , public health , public health , public health , public health , public health , public health , public health , public health , public health , public health , public health , public health , public health , public health ,
it was a place where people with verschiedenster heritage and with different wissensgebieten zusammenkamen and sich .
and now they have the problem that they spent all the money to do this with this , with this advanced electronics in these countries and now everything is unbrauchbar .
a little bit of a chaotic environment where probably many ideas came out of new , interesting , unvorhersehbare , unvorhersehbare , people , people have been different .
about a or two decades ago , a wonderful stipendiat stipendiat mit to the name howard gruber , and i read darwin &apos;s darwin &apos;s notizbuch from this period .
they &apos;re erkundigen at their colleagues , but everyone said , &quot; no , i didn &apos;t think it .
also that &apos;s going to be the other way ?
in the 1970s , that &apos;s the one percent of the national income in the united states .
many of these political factors are in the category of kategorie , &quot; capitalism , the political force that help us with each other with each other insidern , but really don &apos;t really good things for us .
as you can just see , how globalization and technology revolution can create this global sovereignty in money , it &apos;s much harder to rate it .
and so they &apos;re investing in unprecedented amounts of time and mitteln to get their children .
we created the modern sozialstaat , created the modern sozialstaat .
that &apos;s his little hand .
one of them will be dead .
this was a huge disappointment for us , because we had believed in a new development .
i think that in places like oregon , where you can take away to a giftige and actually generate a toxic dose , only half a percent of people ever done .
so long talk : they come to canada .
but i also heard cancer as most of the most famous illness of our time , how to fit the good and the bad thing ?
and some papers go even so far to say that skelettmuskelgewebe resistent is against cancer , and beyond that , not just cancer , but against that we spread out in skeletal muscle .
16 percent ! that &apos;s there that these nadelspitzengroßen tumors were in skeletal muscle , but only 16 percent of the actual metastases -- which is that skeletal muscle may be able to control angiogenesis , capable of controlling the tumors that these blood vessels for themselves .
this is a very far hergeholte idea , but i really think that &apos;s possible .
after that , after that , i left me my translator .
she was the girl who &apos;s going to be in the breaks of their team .
and the same thing i wrote about this is a letter to my best friends in atlanta , georgia , who had a 11 year-old son .
&quot; what did he say ? &quot; i asked the translator to the translator .
so the two came to lunch , and we got thrown out of the restaurant .
he had children in her life and he was interested in the other way , and he found families for her .
they have a lot of time about the dictionary .
so i open the window out , looking out out , and see how flames is the site of the man in the height . the hotel burns .
so we ran into the bath , and we took them and they thought it was about our faces and the children .
until the adoption is , a year ! what does that mean ?
that &apos;s their kochlehrerin .
this is sydney , who &apos;s going to be three days in a few days .
but there was no evidence .
there are little planets , there are bigger planets , there &apos;s big planets , okay .
but there &apos;s a lot more to do .
so the question is : is this chemical phenomenon of the chemical form , or is it something that depends on the coverage ?
and this deep , underlying the point is that the science is that the science is that we know , how we know it .
okay , we say , this is the size of the observable universe , with all the galaxies , with all the stars , with all the stars , all right here .
thank you very much .
you see , as uganda absinkt and zimbabwe absinkt , russia was on a percent .
you find the highest hiv in the world in the world in african countries , and yet they find in senegal , here , the bottom line in the united states .
look at this .
it might be that it &apos;s something else , and that &apos;s why we have more common .
we know that about 106 billion people have ever lived .
that was not just a economic story .
and the result is even more divergence in a shorter period than it was in germany .
it &apos;s the same as the same as well as it is .
you have to give me to eat . &quot;
he was wrong .
now , i want to end with three questions about the future billion , and in front of 2016 , when the united states is losing their place to china .
no , we &apos;re going to have durchhalten , regardless of the giant schuldenlast that we have , regardless of the evidence that we &apos;ve lost our mental health and other parts of our historical historical .
niall , thank you .
there are many types of spider silk .
spider silk is completely composed of protein .
the fibers that make one spider spider , are quite diverse .
also , spinnenseiden have a high potential for the ability to address .
what i want to do is not the meerjungfrauparade , so they may be , but they &apos;re in the photos .
you have to have a physical structure .
there &apos;s more photos . there are more photographers .
this sounds alien in our ears , but what &apos;s happened is that 80 percent of the mitwirkenden have contributed to a lot of hiv .
the first thing that happens when you &apos;re a problem , is that the first goal of the institution immediately will change the way to the end of the institution .
the inventor don &apos;t know what the invention is .
there are people in the states who are trying to figure out whether or not blogger or not .
it was created by using their kommunikationsmuster , the use of these tools , analysierte , and undoubtedly , in fact , the world &apos;s intelligence agencies today , the same work that the attacks was in the last week .
you have kleie , which is probably the most part of the bread , or the fibers , because it &apos;s just a simple fibers , because kleie is from fibers .
everything is about its place . first stage .
we call it &quot; gare . &quot;
but let &apos;s look at the different steps , under the gesichtspunkt of the possible level -- my search is a quest to answer the answer to the question , &quot; what is so special about bread ? &quot;
that &apos;s transformation , two different things .
and if you &apos;re shaped , you go back to prove to prove to prove that they &apos;re alive and character .
if you make this bread , you can use any kind of analog of any kind of bier .
it will be a kind of refrain while we &apos;re working through this talk .
it takes very long , this kind of scores , and i &apos;m working on a piece of partituren , and it &apos;s a great part of my life , and i &apos;m privileged to me .
it &apos;s going to be von by brian mcwhorter , who is an extraordinary artist .
that gives you a little vorgeschmack of the play .
what we did -- betty rapacholi , one of my students , and i -- we gave the babies two bowls with rohem broccoli , and we gave a bowl of leckeren goldfisch-kräcker .
i mean , last day , if we look at babies at the babies , they seem quite useless .
and our babies and children are much longer from us than the babies of every other species .
the befund is it causes them to change the hypothesis .
now there are two things that really interesting about it .
boy : that &apos;s why .
our minds is about extremely bright and vivid , and it &apos;s all the other things going to dark .
&quot; babies and young children are like the research and entwicklungsabteilung of the human species , &quot; sagt alison alison alison , and their research is investigated , how babies do in the play and making decisions .
if i could wait for a little bit of a demonstration , to show the difference -- because it &apos;s actually quite trivial .
and then you repeat this process , and over again , to something brauchbares , and in this case , the figure is to figure out , like me , go to .
what we really wanted to really wanted was the entire human body .
you can &apos;t do that .
here &apos;s a couple of simple scenes that &apos;s going to stop .
i &apos;m not sure why , but we did it anyway .
now some of the studios already have our software to do that , and we &apos;re going to get some of our stuntmännern in a few major filmproduktionen .
we thought that he just would hold the balance .
here you learn to go to the töpfchen -- as most of you know .
but i have to say , i &apos;m never going to forget what happened when i was 13 years old .
i &apos;m convinced that art and creativity is perfectly essential to develop empathy .
if you &apos;re ever lonely , they &apos;re writing a new york times , then you get hundreds of emails , and most of which me now are erreicht by frustration .
some stories , but just as a matter , and yet , as well .
it versank . nobody bought it .
there &apos;s a limit that we don &apos;t want to cross . what is the solution ?
this is microsoft word , ok . if you want to make a new document in word , you could have a vorkommen .
i think there are actually two microsofts modes of .
the other products have been made by microsoft , instead of shipping by an open standard model , instead of building standard standard of standard standard .
and genause , if somebody &apos;s a hassbrief writes -- what happens every day -- i say , &quot; gee . &quot;
but when i looked at the mächtigeren technologies , nanotechnology , nanotechnology , gentechnologie , and other people in the plants , of digital technologies , i made very big worried about the missbrauchspotenzial .
and to cut the danger of these new things , we have to eventually letztlich the ability of individuals who are in principle to access to the access to the power .
i think the challenge that we stand -- i &apos;m very sure that this is going to happen -- the challenge is , we &apos;re going to be able to develop this bildungsmaterialien with the background that will be made us from this device ?
and if you build a three-dimensional structure , for example , for example , they have all kinds of incredible properties .
and to give you a sense of the last of the last six years -- he &apos;s belief on 400 million dollars , which is quite substantial for us .
and if you use the concept of a living , you can have a much more mächtigere -- the entity of the market -- to provide feedback .
12 years ago , caves started to faszinieren me , and i always threw my research in this direction .
so wonderful and grim things .
there are ice below the surface .
so they &apos;re a langsamere form of life .
it &apos;s actually so much energy in this cave in this cave , that there is actually a large number of numbers .
we can see them .
we noticed a few years ago that caves have many properties who were used by people and other organisms as we used to be used as a result .
whenever you &apos;re anvisiert , you have to put some of his own belief in your own way , some of you will be .
and so it &apos;s like archimedes , the great greek mathematician .
so they &apos;ve been gemalt , and it was suffering from the principle of self-interest .
that means before we could start to digitize the archimdes , we had to take the book apart .
and this is what it looks like .
but by the way the electrons fly around the speed of light , they &apos;ll give you the speed .
this was a bad idea because philipp of the mazedonien had a son named alexander , and she lost the battle of chaironeia .
because , in the moment , there are the data that their data with urheberrechtsbeschränkungen and so forth .
the original fiber press , one of the most enthusiastischen weinliebhaber of the 18th century .
i wondered : 160 dollars for what ?
she has four balconies .
a wiederkehrendes scheme is that many of these things came from japan -- they &apos;ll notice it .
i mean , a freihändig toilet .
there was a object that i couldn &apos;t get into the fingers , and that was the 1947er cheval blanc .
and i can &apos;t -- call my taste of a banausens -- so it &apos;s not necessarily important that i wasn &apos;t impressed , but i wasn &apos;t the only one there with this reaction .
at the beginning of this year , a virtual asteroid sold for the 330.000 dollars .
the really interesting thing about virtuality is that you can measure them .
now , i could develop a game with the name of piecraft by taking only a million pie , or thousand pies .
if it &apos;s real , we cannot do much , but in a game we say , &quot; ok . &quot;
this is absolutely critical and the very virtuality is gorgeous .
and i want to tell you a quick story , so in 1999 -- there was a video game called everquest .
it &apos;s about how the individual engagement can be transformed through the psychological and neurological insights that we get when we see people playing games .
it &apos;s a kind of versteinerter zahnbelag , which is officially the officially as a zahnstein .
i &apos;m a ellen , and i &apos;m totally obsessed with food .
there is definitely hunger in america , 49 million people , almost 16.7 million children .
and their farms are big .
it &apos;s the 30th anniversary of genverändertem grain and the big gulp , von mcnuggets , hochkonzentriertem fruktosehaltigem , hochkonzentriertem fruktosehaltigem , the landwirtschaftskrise in america and the change of the way we are agriculture .
this is a bauhelm that i &apos;ve given two years ago , which was one of the biggest projects i &apos;ve been involved in and my company .
but i &apos;m going to start to start the start of the process , three pedantische .
if we are so good , what we do , we shouldn &apos;t be able to create a architectural manifestation , which is absolutely reibungslos through the kunden- and projektseitigen engpässe ?
the architectural marriage was gesagt , simpel .
and this is the actual reward of the trouble .
the second technology we were using , we use things that you know from the seitenbühnen of an opera .
here you see the ebenerdige configuration .
i &apos;m going to talk about how you &apos;re collecting stories , in a way that exist .
one of those projects is about a year .
these are the images that automatically automatically .
as long as i was awake , i had the camera around the neck .
you can see a timeline , which shows you the exciting moments of history .
it &apos;s bartenwal . well , further .
a 28-jähriger inhaber of a handy-geschäfts .
a 80-jähriger farmer , umherziehender farmer .
what if you found a year after just one year , what would you do the next 35 years ?
&quot; money make a business plan , &quot; was the indian straßenarbeiter .
and when he had told them that he wanted to be , and he had given me a about zweiprozentige performance .
don &apos;t get me wrong , writing has been a benefits .
with the hand , it &apos;s almost impossible , except in steno , and then the communication is limited .
very funny people , if lol is that .
you don &apos;t make it .
if any of us were seen a black board of 1993 , the slang would have been a little different since the time of &quot; love &quot; , &quot; but he understood what was there .
i &apos;m about the zeitlimit , i wanted to say if you &apos;re in new york , you can see my work on the whitney biennal , and also in the bitforms gallerie in chelsea .
afghanistan is not a existential threat to global security .
and the same thing is true for the troops .
instead , there was a litanei of erstaunlichem optimism .
diplomats , in botschaftsgeländen .
and finally , we need to understand that the secret of what we did in bosnia and kosovo , the secret to the big part of our success in our humility -- in the very vorsichtig type of our own intuitive .
rory , they &apos;re erwähnten libya .
so here you see two examples .
this is an example of the same system , on a finger to show you how it looks .
there are also teststreifen , the eingetaucht , but if you use these teststreifen , they &apos;re used to use this kind of different kind of urinanalyse .
the selektionsproblem . this is a tough problem for reasons that i &apos;m not going to be erleutern .
there is another , very interesting connection . and this is that what you want to do is to lead to lead to lead to lead to lead to lead a bad information about a bad information .
so , i think it &apos;s the minimal of the minimal , that we can probably achieve in making things .
and we decided that we should not be thinking about that in terms of the cost , but in terms of simplicity .
there is a book called &quot; what &apos;s the matter of the kansas ? &quot;
so we have to ask ourselves why .
but nonetheless , you don &apos;t interact with people who are not as you are .
so we can think of things like the straßenverlauf .
i &apos;m joking , but only half when i say you &apos;re in the hospital nobody will believe if you arrive with a missing glied , and you can &apos;t get off the previous cat-scan , mri and orthopädische konsultation .
and then , in the way , bell of his students .
within a few years , in the late 19th century , early 20th century solved a doctor who tried to ask a diagnosis of a diagnosis .
between the perception of the patient and the physicians in terms of the best medical care is a real dialectic .
another experience i made in texas before i went to stanford , and i was left to stanford .
the bad news : the exact same cause of us don &apos;t know . see ? that can do that , we can do that . &quot;
i remember many , many many , ausgehölte , verfolgte eyes that i &apos;m going to aufschauten with this ritual .
some call us entlarver , a rather unfreundliche stake .
in this case , we have the baseline .
for you , here , here , &quot; then it happened .
and there was no way to 1655 .
religious ikonographie .
harder is it &apos;s to move the dead to a answer .
my friend simon would be , a teilchenphysiker , nunmehr dozent , wrote the book &quot; the book &quot; and &quot; so &quot; the big bang &quot; and &quot; so &quot; so &quot; the big bang &quot; and &quot; so &quot; so &quot; the big bang &quot; and &quot; so &quot; so &quot; the big bang &quot; and &quot; so &quot; so &quot; the big bang &quot; and &quot; so
and now you &apos;re open your eyes .
you can open it up , and it &apos;s wasserundurchlässig .
but it has to think about that , this guys , most of the people , most of them , most of them , you know , what they do for a living .
everybody thought that was impossible .
you can create a lot of change . you can build the streets .
and that &apos;s something that people want to do .
you don &apos;t need everyone .
hugo chavez has the unzufriedene arbeiter- and middle class in venezuela , and he just led them .
and that &apos;s what it goes on .
they connect people together .
the reason that today &apos;s modern medicine used to be a 60 years .
there is another one , but there &apos;s another catch .
it makes it 168 times faster , over 26 times more times more time , and over 400 times more than our aktueller standardtest for pancreatic cancer .
and my experiences with islamic world are very different .
and so , there &apos;s something called the character .
and why does sex , like babies , and why is babies in relationships with erotic disaster ?
because it &apos;s the secret of the top .
specifically , in this description of the other , or my self -- that &apos;s the same -- particularly interesting , that there is no bedürftigkeit in the desire .
this is your dreh- and angelpunkt , which is biology , the natural instinct .
and then the demand that demand , and this is a curiosity , neugierde , entdeckerdrang .
you know there is a place of space that &apos;s been listened to everyone .
other places in the country had similar rooms .
in a gothischen cathedral , this kind of music is perfect .
ok , ok .
that &apos;s going to play mostly in smaller places .
so early hip-hop-gruppen are some of these places .
so i asked myself , ok , is this a model for design , that those of the time that we practice ?
thank you very much .
and then he turned to me and said , &quot; there &apos;s me to me , &quot; there &apos;s me !
how do we solve the following three problems that i want to bring to language ?
albert einstein -- i &apos;m going to tell you with somebody when i was in princeton , and i met mr. einstein .
what &apos;s going on ? why am i here ?
i never read a talk or a lecture or a lecture .
and there were about 300 people there .
he talked about his personal experience .
a french historian said two centuries later , &quot; rarely has a powerful mind with great geist with so great humility of jesus christ . &quot;
or he was what he was doing .
i &apos;m not going to have neither about the ermordeten of the selbstmörder .
but for that , they have to go about 10 minutes and a woman in the arm that isn &apos;t there .
i was never in .
harvest harvest , baby-zähne , harvest .
with tears in the eyes , i said , &quot; no . &quot;
2010 : a young woman who &apos;s president sirleaf and says , as she and her siblings , her siblings died in war .
we go in rural areas and everything we do in this room , we create a space .
i failed .
i want to look back at 20 years of looking at the look and see that there &apos;s another girl , a ghanaisches , nigerianisches , äthiopisches girls on this ted .
lg : like a number .
licklider erkannte realized computers can do the necessary routinearbeit to make insights and choices .
each interaction is recorded by more sensors : your phone , your mindset , your credit , your computer , and it &apos;s a lot of data and we get the opportunity to understand our value .
this records were human bezugsformate .
by a verbesserter process , which is going to be introduced , which is a task for 40 people over three months , to a simple task for three people in 40 hours . it &apos;s all the siege of the mensch-computer-symbiose .
we should stop looking at the outside .
for dinner with my wife and the kids go home .
because people say , &quot; shit man , i didn &apos;t have time to become a time to become a time ; you want to do it .
she became a much larger dog than i thought .
these effects affect us .
the boom of the national autobahnbaus is to help us solve our problems .
think about fahrradläden , getränkestände .
in the era , in the era , we still have more in the era .
and they all have done that , and if you don &apos;t , you will have to .
help me to make green green to the new black , help me to make sustainability sexy .
so i thought this would be an opportunity to use scratch to make an interactive map for my mother .
but i &apos;m skeptical , what &apos;s going to be in the terminus .
in this case , you take a bewegungsblock , put it on a stack , and you see the stack of blöcken , the behavior of the different characters in a game or a story , in this case , the big fish .
when you learn to code , you can program to learn .
when kids create these projects , they learn about important concepts like variables , but that &apos;s just the beginning .
what i want to talk about today is to give you a little bit of a background , the idea that the cars are art .
i want to talk to you .
and i think that this thought that great cars is a soul , very decent , and you all know that . you see a car with soul , and you know , you know , you know , how strong it is .
this is one of my favorite features that really describes our relationship with cars .
right ? and they decided that it would be cheaper , instead of having a studio and six or seven apartments , to rent in the malibu house .
there was a lot of dialogue .
i think we felt very close to this day , very close , we unnötige the unnötige , and we schmiedeten the concept of true creatures of true teamarbeit and creativity .
we didn &apos;t bring him to boston .
because i just have a little lab , i just have a little lab , one of the lab .
now we have a clinical trials in four maus-modellen of this disease .
we don &apos;t have a team of verkaufs- and marketingpersonal that can be the arzneimittel on the market .
100 billion is the only number that you need to know .
what you have to think is that we have to do it with a universe with a hundred billion galaxies , with a hundred billion stars .
what he didn &apos;t explain was why the entropy has ever been low .
unlike the low entropy of the early universe , although we don &apos;t know the answer to it , we have a good theory that can explain this theory , and that the theory of the dark energy .
and so , although the universe is going to be long , and the universe will be ewig and ordinary matter and radiation , there are always a certain amount of wars , some of the thermische fluctuations , even in empty space .
but we also give you great fluctuations .
it &apos;s cools down .
it &apos;s a rücksichtslose fact of the universe that you accept and not question .
i had never used a computer .
it was a future that i couldn &apos;t accept .
now i want to take some of those there like me , say to the africans and the poor who are struggling with their dreams , and fighting their dreams , to fight with their dreams .
no matter what i did in my real world was just using my little device in the digital world in the digital world , and eight years ago , in 2000 .
i took this very literally , i took my fahrradhelm , and put him a little schieff on the projektor good gut .
the camera is not only doing it , not only my motions , but it &apos;s able to understand what things i think in my hand .
and why is just comuter ? we can just play with games .
all the work you saw is a dreht about my learning class .
this is juan carlos , king of spain .
this is going to be the drittgrößte park in rio , june .
again , you don &apos;t have to dig deep down below the earth , to build a subway .
i &apos;ll give you a quick example here .
almost every year we have these terrible erdrutsche .
we &apos;re going to be under the average of the average of the city in the city .
a city of the future is a city that nobody &apos;s in this great community , which are cities .
the best answer is to try and try to create an darwin &apos; darwinian entstehungsgeschichte of our artistic and aesthetic preferences .
so the trick of evolution is to make it beautiful so that they &apos;re kind of ausstrahlen , so that it &apos;s joy to you , they just look at it .
and some of them are too big to use it for butchering .
our strong reaction on images , to the phrase in art , the beauty of music in the night sky , is going to be in us and our offspring , as long as human race exists .
now , it &apos;s a pretty complicated system , but let me try to explain it , and maybe i can simplify it .
so , you can see here , as the computer looks like this , and since they can &apos;t see the vibration , we &apos;re actually going to get the drivers to be the drivers of red leds so he can actually see what &apos;s going on .
and see if mark mark it can avoid .
or for blind people , in day-to-day devices , in daily people in the household , in education and the office .
a subtle konditionierungsprozess had begun , the implikation that ordinary people don &apos;t listen to voices , and i heard it was something that was not comfortable with me .
my brain gesundheitszustand was a catalyst for diskriminierungen , and sexual übergriffe , and i was told by my psychiatrist , &quot; eleanor , with cancer , they would better better because cancer is a schizophrenia . &quot;
to paraphrasieren chavez : if the social change can be , he can &apos;t be more aufgehalten .
and that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing right now .
so what i &apos;m proposing is that it &apos;s going to be looking for life , more than mars , although mars , obviously , a very much more violent place and more interesting place .
and the usual astronomers were the voller of contempt .
because it &apos;s bedeuete the kind of life that can live out there , it has enormous benefits to the life on a planet .
there was another object , this high möbelstück with creatures and wasserspeiern and naked -- pretty gruselige things for a small child .
the first projects were modest , but they took technology and they would have to use it in things that people are using in a new way , and perhaps a new functionality .
the other thing is , the humanistisch is jawbone , is that we decided to wegzulassen the whole gadgets , this whole nerdzeug , and tried to do it as beautiful as possible .
so we called it the y of that . so that &apos;s another example where everything together is happening in a space : the three-dimensional design , the ideas that are the creation of brand , it &apos;s all tightly linked together .
this is my researcher anthony , in switzerland , he had the laptop for a afternoon , i had to rebuild it again . it was hard .
yves behar about the design of objects , which tell stories that stories tell you about the stories of objects that tell stories about .
thank you .
my aunt , an incredibly wortgewandte and brilliant woman , was early witwe .
she was the entschlossenste fürsprecherin for women that i &apos;ve ever heard .
look at this young girl who went to school after acid in their faces , &quot; acid , in their faces . &quot;
the world that had been given the layma was a world in war .
then , it will have the location .
you have to negotiate .
it &apos;s the people from my generation that is in a world where everything is papierlos and in the number of our best conversations have happened on a screen .
ultimately it could mean that they could print your own medicine .
and if you &apos;re a little bit about why this thing is interesting , then you must look at the rest of saudi arabia because it &apos;s the streng between the geschlechtern .
maybe some things are bad and they need changes .
let me give you an example : in turkey , where i come from , which is a very fancy republic , we had something that i call säkularismuspolizei , which was the universities to protect the universities .
if i would be the only person that thinks that &apos;s how we would think we have a problem .
in the 19th century , as muslims as an example , they were unabhängig , they were independent .
so the european process , the efforts of turkey , the e.u. , the e.u. , the e.u. , in turkey , in turkey , whereas einige nationen , whereas einige nations were against .
there &apos;s a very large nose that &apos;s not going to be the lucky part of the reason that she would connected to anything .
when scientists today , a century later , you want to do neurons , and then you leave them from the inside , instead of having them to be .
carl schoonover : glimpses of the inside of our brain in our brain .
but that trend is less clear .
but for many parts of africa , it has a colleague of mine like this , &quot; the class was just going to be right at the right time , so that the genocide was going to start . &quot;
and instead of having the opportunity to have the local and international leaders , they were willing to be moving , and they were lifted by the second intifada , the events of the 09 , september 2001 and the wars in afghanitsan and iraq .
institutionelles design requires a strong focus on the problemfragen , innovatives thinking and kapitalkräftige .
the stromatolites are the heroes of my story .
in flat oceans , life is already early on , here &apos;s more complex in more complex .
flamingos , across continents . the great military military started .
some of the mammals in the water comes back to water .
every man should have a little bit of luxury .
but there was nothing for this purpose , so we &apos;ve got schnurrbartwachsen with prostate cancer , and then we created our motto , which is , &quot; the face of the man &apos;s health . &quot;
mo bros from canada , from the united states , and england us and calling us and said , &quot; hey , there &apos;s nothing for prostate cancer .
and i say , &quot; last year we had the happiness to have 450 promi-botschafter . &quot;
this kind of entertainment , men of men , in every age , is so critical and important , and i think , much more important than the funds we collecting .
he could see what his forest was happening , because his grandfather took his fittiche when he was two years old , and he started to teach him about the forest and the way of life .
when i was thinking about this , i wonder what our grandchildren and our own responses would be asking when you ask the same question .
we need new models of a leader and human world of our world .
they work with people like murali krishna .
for a life , through everything , through the cultural revolution and everything that came after that , he collected over eight million parts in his museum , the contemporary chinese history .
it just happens .
&quot; my world &quot; is subjective .
or maybe he was a yogi that was sitting on a rock and the sky , and the sun and the moon .
and if you lived a extraordinary life , you get to the elysium , or the french call it , the champs-élysées -- the sky is the sky .
and so , it comes to this great little , where big bildnisse is built for the muttergottheiten and for 10 days , and you will be ... ...
see , what is business because other than a result of the market and the behavior of a organization ?
you see , this is india today . the grundauffassung of reality is based on a zyklischen .
you know , he &apos;s got the biggest kaufhauskette , she called &quot; big bazaar . &quot;
&quot; why i chose these way to be the abläufe , i just get me out of that , please . &quot;
devdutt pattanaik opens us to a new look at the myths of india and the west coast of india and the west , and why these grundverschiedenen systems of the gottesglaubens , the umgangs of the death , and the jenseitsvorstellung us help us bring us back to the konsequent .
but you know what ? it &apos;s almost 2012 and the world , &quot; i &apos;m totally and absolutely competent , &quot; is , to vernichten itself with the schwächsten tower .
you &apos;re interested in compared to what ?
your friends and family are going to be under the cemetery and there , on your grave , there &apos;s a tombstone , on the written , &quot; here lies a great engineer , which was invented . &quot;
they &apos;re thrilled . this is the conversation that mothers and fathers want to hear , because your child is good in math and you know what &apos;s next .
that &apos;s because they -- you know what they &apos;re .
i don &apos;t have patents and i &apos;ve never received money from a medical school system , and i &apos;m not sure that they choose me .
so how do you know whether your breast density is dense ?
ultrasound has more biopsien to the episode that have been unnötig in the relationship of other technologies and it &apos;s not very common .
if you find a tumor , as long as it is less than a centimeter , the überlebensrate is about 90 percent , but they &apos;re going to have massiv with increasing tumorgröße .
the picture of the mbi shows a lot of body , just like a second tumor , that &apos;s going to affect the patient &apos;s possibilities .
it costs a radiologists to spezieller , to become an expert in a single place to tell a normal detail from a besorgniserregenden .
some women who get breast cancer , many years later , and luckily , most of them survive .
there &apos;s dum da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da vinci there there , there &apos;s a lot of power .
we gather these physicists in los angeles convincing what they build .
you know .
they slept in this schulstunde geschlafen .
this is a umwerfende vision .
it &apos;s a question of consequences .
so let &apos;s get to the point .
what did i do ? i &apos;ve heard my belly ?
it &apos;s interesting . that &apos;s a different way of thinking .
the homunculus is basically a visual device where each part is proportionate to the surface , which is the brain in the brain .
this is white noise .
and it &apos;s probably going to roll in your direction .
i just did that to make money .
thank you .
and he told me that after a long silence , &quot; i wonder , &quot; i &apos;m going to see whether people don &apos;t have this exact same diagnostic , as my videos . &quot;
that &apos;s why i &apos;m talking about david edward , a scientist from harvard , a object that can absorb the toxic elements with these plants .
no , no potatoes , but tomatoes , herbs and so on .
the tragedy of other people can take easier than the own and i want to be a little bit of the spirit of that conference .
according to malcolm gladwell was &#91; the &#93; kokain-derivat &#93; of the crack version version of the innenstadt version for the downtown .
he was a really interesting sight .
he went back to the second cane , and he said , &quot; hey boys .
like this , it &apos;s like mcdonald &apos;s .
let &apos;s think about other lebenssituationen , where you can expect a very high risk .
the second reason was that the gang brillant brilliant brilliant of the marketing and fraud was .
economists talk about the game theory -- that every game has a nash-gleichgewicht .
skysurfing is skydiving with a board at the feet .
extremsport at the same level level , as here is possible , if you &apos;re going to get to step out of step , if you really get very much physically and work on it .
ue : no . that &apos;s just smoke .
occasionally , i meet scientists .
so i had hope that by putting some natural elements , a little bit of fog , i could make the space .
and that is , it &apos;s that it makes a difference , whether you do something or not .
the great mountains in the distance are moving .
how do we create a idea that is both the towards individuality and also to ask the question , without the two different directions ?
i talked about new kinds of ozeanerforschung , one , the animals , instead of verscheuchen them .
but more incredible , the material was to travel out of the triton-u-boot .
they take from the dead and take the dead and take them from the dead and take them off and take them from the dead and to take them off and take off the dead and take them off and take them from the dead and take them off and take them off and take them from the dead and to take them out of the dead and take them
at this time , he taught me the classic of the trinity college .
natalie merchant singing old poems about life on life about life about life .
fremdartiger , as a dolphin goes to .
when i was adult , when i was about the amazing findings of penny patterson and night , sue and panbanisha , irene pepperberg and alex , hearing , i was hearing , i was going to be part of me .
vint cerf : ng , like this .
we &apos;re in the national aquarium , we get to herausragende for the research , for the research and the preservation .
but we realized that we &apos;ve created a system that connects people together with each other .
today , this is the first time you &apos;d talk about this issue .
this is a picture of me and my daughter on the one we think we have a israeli flag .
&quot; because it works , make a poster with me . &quot;
and they came and they were so many . one day , i remember that michal spoke with a journalist and said , &quot; who will see this ? &quot; and he said , &quot; everybody . &quot;
it &apos;s not the israel-liebt-iran-seite . that &apos;s not my side .
and sometimes it &apos;s war , but sometimes , with a little bit of effort , we can avoid it .
and what we &apos;re doing with &quot; yes is &quot; to try to try to try and try to make sure that the architectural avantgarde is always defined by the architektonische , and that &apos;s against who we are .
and we saw this guy , haibao , haibao .
and slowly , you start to think that sustainable lives is less fun than normal .
so they &apos;re going to go on the expo , and they get a dänisches bike , and drive to the other ständen .
it was interesting because they were in the morning from nine to 11 , and how many billions they should invest in the rescue .
this is a standardprodukt from switzerland . in switzerland , there is a national need for diagonalen .
we often do small films with small films .
what i like to talk about is that these are the biggest problems in the world .
but it &apos;s a problem , of course , if you &apos;re to focus on issues .
so what i &apos;m going to do is , i really think that we have a very long time , a situation where we &apos;ve had a number of choices .
and then ask why , why economists ?
but it says that what we can do is very little , very little , too much cost .
the neuerkrankungen an in malaria dress in a few million infected a year .
what happens here is that we think about our priorities .
it &apos;s a good movie that i want to see him , that i want to see him , but not expect to be from emmerich in his next film , brad pitt of brad pitt like it in tanzania , or something like that .
they had all the same material , but they could have been able to leave the frame of discussion and they made it safe to aufzukommen their own lists .
his power , wealth and greater freedom is unübertroffen . &quot;
second , china has managed to bring the ungleiche income , without changing the political framework .
it turns out to be entrepreneurs found that , although 50 percent of all countries are now , 70 percent of them are repressiv , that people have no rede- or reisefreiheit .
because the question is the question that we &apos;re going to imagine and seven billion people on this planet is : how can we create wealth ?
the serife is not so much of their place .
we &apos;re going to get that out of what we really care .
it was published before six months ago , and it &apos;s just been getting in germany , in germany , incredible attention .
you have to make a kind of optimal temperature .
i think it looks slightly like a human skin , which fascinated me .
but i think it could be a quite smarte and sustainable , sustainable , ergänzung , to our rarer .
chinese workers won &apos;t become fabriken in factories because of our unersättlichen demand for ipods .
because one person is that you spend their time with it , a piece of something called it doesn &apos;t mean that she &apos;s going to get to a piece of something .
it &apos;s got a sister turned to him and said , &quot; some people just understand . you don &apos;t understand anything . &quot;
this is the coach-portemonnaie , which was the long min of me in the family .
the taliban do the taliban to take place for their school .
if any child grows to break this rules that &apos;s going to be bestraft .
if i &apos;m looking at the age of the war than i , or i &apos;m in my age , i feel like this .
and that &apos;s going on on the back , there &apos;s no way on enceladus , and then , in fact , hopefully , in the middle of the city , hopefully , in the middle of the city , are actually equipped in the middle of that question .
is the internet is actually a place that you can visit ?
and the landscape changes . three years ago , when i started to do with it , was just a cord on the african west coast , shown here in this map of steve playing a black and white .
and that seems not right .
this data is going to send the data in layer of the device , starting with the base of the product , and puts the material in layer by layer upon the new copying in a additiven process on the old layer .
it was made by ablagerung of layers of schichten .
a cause is going to be a little bit less likely .
you can just make it directly right in place .
here &apos;s the product that the product is made .
without any doubt , i think this technology is going to be able to create a revolution in manufacturing and the produktionslandschaften how we know them .
he was worried that when he called her to this name , particularly outside , you could think , you might think , he would be a ladens of jihad .
they use his rhethorik .
the good news is that it &apos;s not going to be that way .
but many of these factors that played a role , now even stronger now , and half the work is done .
i was with my friend susan meiselas , the fotografin , the mathare valley in the mathare valley .
she said , &quot; you know , poverty wasn &apos;t the bad , it was the ultimate and the embarrassment of all the thing . &quot;
do you think i &apos;m going to miss the violence or the drugs ? lack of privacy ?
first of all , instead of getting the flight of the day , and i will forget that time was very much .
but it &apos;s less likely to stay .
and then in my first year , i started my company on .
it &apos;s even going to say that more energy is needed to create a solar cell , as they &apos;re going to bring in all their whole funktionszeit .
solar cells , but four hours long .
and they &apos;re also under great pressures , and they &apos;re dangerous .
this is a wärmekraftmaschine .
it &apos;s just a little cylinder here , who &apos;s the generator and all the kabelage in it , and this is the hot cylinder on top -- this part is hot , that &apos;s cold , and it comes out of electricity .
you don &apos;t have to use the hot water , it can also take it .
so here we have a map of the united states .
and we don &apos;t have a geburtsrecht to use this energy as fast as we do in the moment .
we blow it up and we start to look at the pieces .
it &apos;s a flying laboratory with the measurements that we did in the region of this molecule .
but i have tried bad poetry , and he never hunted the mathegebäude in the air , but he went to cuba .
so , from unverständnis , tolle can come -- -- -- from which i &apos;m going to land a picture of that in my work .
i work for the new yorker , and i &apos;m doing titelseiten , and then the 9 / 11 , and that was , in the 11th , and that was , a völliges end of the world as we knew them .
and then , &quot; ugh , unclear , is ungebärdig ! it &apos;s ungebärdig with the tongue , but that we understand it . &quot;
&quot; and he decided that his topleute had to be extinct . &quot;
this man is angry because somebody else all around the staircase is distributed around its staircase , and basically , you know , there are zwiebeln seem to be here .
and she &apos;s also ausgegangen with george gershwin , so i don &apos;t think it &apos;s not .
td : since my youngest childhood , i &apos;ve taken me many different from many , and when i was young , i was always able to get my way back .
that &apos;s beautiful , but we should remember that a similar process is also going to work on a innerer level .
td : lakshmi worked incredibly hard , even for my invitation , let alone what they &apos;ve done , and i was quite resistant to that , and i was very nervous during this week , too .
in these two examples , we &apos;ve seen machines that have learned in the simulation , and other people who have learned it in the reality .
if i say , &quot; we &quot; , i mean , i mean the advice for aussenbeziehungen .
but nobody thinks that it actually will be very effective if there is a real outbreak .
the biggest part of the ausgaben in the administration is actually more likely to be more in relation to the anthrax and the threat of biowaffen .
we know that the virus is going to be , it becomes another virus .
but in the scientific community , there is a hitzige debate about what percentage of the grippeübertragung between people and coughing , and how much more about the hands of hands .
some of the poorer countries who have most experienced have been with h5n1 , have the lowest full of drugs that have already been around .
and i think even our leaders would say that we have a lot to do that we have a lot to do .
i &apos;m happy to answer your questions .
our centers for krankheitskontrolle have a corresponding test tests -- as a rapid diagnostikum .
and in the middle of the people in humans , they were similar bacterial infections , also not a problem .
don &apos;t just notice how much fun you &apos;ve been doing , but also how the appropriate x-ray form completely changed the way that the way of san francisco is to interact with .
please put me to me with me a schweigeminute .
i &apos;m going to be a young juggler , and i &apos;m going to sell a force of a force , and he willigt to me three clubs .
since my childhood , i played with seilen and climbing , so the case is done , so i &apos;m 16 ; i &apos;m going to be a drahtseilkünstler .
don &apos;t get a lot of times more .
so i &apos;m not supposed to be straßenjonglieren , right ?
i &apos;m standing in the middle .
she became one , i was going to be a triumph of triumph .
because of the überhängenden leaves and branches it is very dark and very quietly .
i and my colleagues of baumkronenforschung are interested in the dynamics of the baumkronen-pflanzen that live in the forest .
we &apos;re advising with media about baumkronen-fragen ; we have a baumkronen-newsletter ; we have mailinglisten .
and then the students have come in our aufnahmestudio , and they took their own rapsongs with their own beats .
and our new project is that the inmates and we learn to grow the frog rana pretiosa , who is a hochgradig of the aussterben , which is the hochgradig endangered of washington , and oregon .
he said , &quot; look , what you hid in front of you . &quot;
so we &apos;re seeing a rising demand for informationszugang , and that &apos;s why , and so , why , therefore , and so , why , therefore , and so , why it &apos;s why , and that &apos;s why , and so that &apos;s why , and so that &apos;s why , and so that &apos;s why , and so that &apos;s why , and so that &apos;s
they &apos;re not magician . they &apos;re not our parents .
you have to believe me . trust me . &quot;
and i learned two really important things about this day .
so the deeper we go under water , the higher the pressure is the pressure .
so i started about 15 years ago .
the air goes into the ausatemlunge , and you get the air out of the einatemlunge .
each of these computers can run the whole system , so if two of them are , there are reserves .
but this is what it looks like , and this is always going on , over many miles .
so sharks are not quite as dangerous as most people are going to .
when we found him , we were not even sure the family he heard , so we called him the dr.-seuss-fisch , because he looked like he &apos;s got a little bit of his books .
the sauerstoffvergiftung is a krampf , and he ertrank .
that means that every one of them , and each of you can see at least a child knows that &apos;s suffering from a entwicklungsstörung .
and his communications and social interactions is to imagine that he could visit a normal school and even a karate-superstar .
it &apos;s like life like life : if you &apos;re just once in the way , you can &apos;t again .
i know you &apos;ve never heard of him . but then you &apos;ll notice this day , one day you &apos;re going to hear about him , because he &apos;s a fascinating man . &quot;
nk : no , he has died 25 years ago .
he had a lot of love , he loved everybody .
we all , we &apos;re all of us , what happens when a ursuppe comes out of hydrogen and helium so long as they start to ask about their origins .
this extremophilen evidence that life can exist in many other environments .
so you have to do the diversity and the incredible scale of life on this planet to profoundly appreciate that in order to connect with a live in all of the world .
it &apos;s going to be as much as important as aluminum , and we &apos;ll extend it to make it up on 350 antennae so that it &apos;s sensitive to the moore , and the moore &apos;s law of increased cancer .
and then we would like to improve the automatisierte quest to improve human rights .
many say , it &apos;s the best place to study the development of climate change .
every cylinder is a parfait of time .
while she was hantieren , they wärmen a extra pair of gloves in a oven , so they can put a new pair of pair , if your arbeitshandschuhe gefrieren and their finger stiff .
i think that &apos;s a little bit more wirtschaftsgeschichte .
and our soldiers are not straight straight into the pipelines , pipelines , if you actually helped the service to beschuetzen american buerger .
you can take that further , and the efficiency is almost verdreifachen with some funktionstechnischen improvement and so to double the gross spediteure .
we could build the cars of cars , which is to do the security , but you should be easy to be .
but instead they sell it to china and japan because we have the protection of our maisbauern and the other .
and that is the militaer step into the schritt mass of this kind of materials , or in this case , to the manufacture of ultraleichten , as good stuetztechnologie , and the militaer stuetztechnologie , can make it as much as it would have the bottom .
it can &apos;t just be handeln around a giant conspiracy .
there were two types of negative feedback that we received .
let &apos;s hope that it &apos;s really stable .
hoppla , i &apos;m wrong .
and he ended up with a kunsthändler , a dutch kunsthändler van meegeren , who was sold a wonderful vermeer , and today , about 10 million dollars today .
according to his biographen , he looked like he had discovered the first time that there are bad in the world . &quot;
&quot; it comes on . what is it ? &quot; is a good answer .
but how attractive they find them , how much they sexually , or romantic move , is critical about what you think they think they &apos;re looking at .
but each of these three objects has a value beyond what it brings to a story of its history .
but i don &apos;t want a copy , even though i can &apos;t see the difference .
so he got joshua bell , his millionen-dollar-geige to nehmen in washington d.c. to provide a corner and see how much money he will be .
the second shock hurts , less because you &apos;re used to a little bit .
and if you look at the weiterlesen , you can see that maybe maybe a kind of political wertigkeit .
they prahlt that they &apos;re a zertifiziertes , professionelles member of the american verbandes of ernährungsberatern , which is very glamorous and exciting .
and what you find is , of course , people who eat vegetables and olive oil eat , fewer hautfalten .
the placeboeffekt is one of the most intriguing things in the entire world of medicine .
it &apos;s a vorgefasster , if you put a drug in a such high dose , that it &apos;s going to have more side effects , and that their new drug will look better .
the great trials are closer to true answer .
this is a problem , for that , there &apos;s no solution .
and very soon they would start to get this charcoal , tonne abzutransportieren , tonne around zugwagon , bootsladung to bootsladung , back to china and all over the world .
can you imagine how they would feel if you would be in my place ?
it &apos;s only about oil ; you know , all of this stuff .
there is this thing , the militarisierung of the world , and the texas is right from the united states .
and what do you see ? they &apos;re christians .
man , the americans , they &apos;re kind of like , &quot; ah , kreuzzug .
these christians are bekloppt .
they generalize . it &apos;s wrong .
and the soldiers are chinese , and they &apos;re the chinese .
imagine that maybe one of them at the morning , maybe one of them at the morning , he &apos;s down to his child , and he &apos;s got to go and said , &quot; honey , i &apos;m afterwards .
everything has changed .
and all this has been created a tremendous implications in the world .
i think thomas jefferson has really been very good at words .
for the hollywood-menschen , in the audience , you can actually explain why action-filme has a bigger budget than a greater budget , because that &apos;s because of action-filme easier to other languages and cultures , so the market is to look at this movies .
but it &apos;s going to happen within this century .
this is not the pro-kopf-bip of the united states , which is about a million , but the gdp of the world per capita -- 200,000 dollars .
also , like everybody knows -- it &apos;s about energy , not oil .
my choice is the pinnacle of a lifelong commitment that started to grow up on the gulf of the gulf .
one of our acts on this planet that are focused on our living environment , are just by faith and guess .
every one is all over thousands of years or millions of years .
we have to calm together before we ruin the planet .
e.o. wilson about saving lives on the planet earth .
another schlüsselart is the famous european language .
the genome of the passenger pigeon contains 1.3 billion .
the de-extinction of the de-extinction is falling in that category .
real falcons plants from easily hühnern .
so , in fact , it &apos;s a program to öko-tourismus , which is just brilliant .
this is an emotional topic . some people are up .
my grandmother was a prisoner .
i took my own comics that was another way , telling stories , telling the words and images through images .
and we just sat there , in silence , and he told me , &quot; you &apos;re really passionate . &quot;
it &apos;s using your own style . draw it doesn &apos;t tell you .
&quot; rather than , i have received your postkarte .
i &apos;m going to take a quote with the title , &quot; platypus police squad : the frog who . &quot;
sound affects us continually , psychologically , cognitively , cognitively and verhaltensbezogen .
this is a 32 million pounds of pounds , bedeutendes , das , which was built in england , designed by a british stararchitekten .
but it &apos;s not just kids who are affected .
people who say , don &apos;t leave the team next to this team because the noise like noise and the other quiet .
&quot; upwake &quot; tells a story about zero , a contemporary businessman who &apos;s going to be in the suitcase with his life , and the between reality and reality and not capable of enträtseln both sides .
344 frames and a half years and a half years later , what was a solo-show , a gemeinschaftsarbeit of neunzehn actors .
i know that theater connects us .
now , the time we can use to create the diversity of our talents to create a smart and , create the range of the bedeutendes and the process .
if you look at the bathroom , you see , again , a couple of products , like shampoo , spülung , anti-falten-creme , körpercreme , but also .
injizierbares collagen -- or , since the &apos; 70s , collagen -- it used to inject it in folding .
in fact , i found 185 products .
and i said , &quot; my love , i &apos;m afraid , you &apos;ve got a long and beschwerliches year . &quot;
i told you , you should be hinsagen , &quot; i &apos;m somebody .
they gave me the feeling of being somebody in a time where i felt like no one felt like no one felt like no one felt like no one felt like no one felt like no one felt like no one felt like no one felt like no one felt like no one felt like no one felt like no one felt like no one felt like no one felt
they &apos;re working on the ninth copy , so they &apos;ve been able to have in the neunten , and now the letters of the letters .
hundreds of verbs can be behaved .
you can see that as the language of the thought , or &quot; mentalese . &quot;
so the puzzle is , why is , the bestechungen , is going to be , in the end , is going to be a big requests , ersuche and drohungen of the time ?
you can try to imagine what would be if language could be used literally literally .
and the other puzzle is that i don &apos;t have a problem with that .
here &apos;s my argument . is it practical ? is it good ?
it makes it gegnerisch . it &apos;s polarisierend .
what realization did you have this gewonnen out of that ?
all of these different roles . can you imagine a argument that you &apos;re going to join , but also in the audience , and you &apos;re going to see the debattieren ?
and -- and this is the most important part for me : we want to take us into the world of nature , and we bring the masters of food industry in nature that could inspire us .
that changed all . it didn &apos;t have any engineers into the boat .
here &apos;s the opposite -- here &apos;s how we make things .
this is the sandia national laboratory .
that would be hochinteressant for fuel if you could rely on with fuel .
that &apos;s not easy , because life is just a subset of elements in the periodensystem .
and then , it &apos;s a lot , feedback is very important .
what you don &apos;t see is not counting .
my first business was a schneiderei . i started under the taliban .
in south asia and indonesia are nearly half a million companies in women .
because , as the weltwirschaftsforum bemerkt , smaller geschlechterkluften in direct terms , to verbesserter economic growth .
and in all the world , they &apos;re not exceptions .
people jubelten whether this entzückung and this thing .
i have a klecks bio-joghurt of fröhlichen , himself had cows cows on my arbeitsfläche and i &apos;d like to use a paper around it .
first , we got it first .
what does that mean ?
when i started to do with them , i realized that they have incredible good .
but the researchers had a problem .
and then finally , after all , and the campus and the campus -- and certainly glad there were gone there -- and some time later came back and realized that the crows still continue to continue .
we found that they really are smart , and they can teach each other .
in squirrel , for example , would come back to the peanut , and go back to the peanut .
but there were three problems , three mysteries i could not solve , and i want to talk about it , but i &apos;ve got to see a lösungsvorschlag .
who would ever hire me ? &quot;
and imagine what could happen , because every region has something .
let me make the connection .
you know that there is the massenpublikum of the future . you have to understand that .
that &apos;s a lot too much .
oh , yeah , i &apos;m going to be the johnny appleseed of the sound .
about about 10 million phagen .
and over here we see the words of the radiologists , israel israel , &quot; how the hand is the penis in a way that &apos;s remembered in masturbationsbewegungen . &quot;
and she said , &quot; yeah , but i &apos;d rather to eat the end if you didn &apos;t have anything . &quot;
i said , &quot; you should make an experiment .
he had a line in his book , the supposedly that &apos;s been angeblich out of the habsburg-monarchie . there was an kaiserin maria theresia , which had difficulty with the conception .
so now you have a evolutionary excuse .
she said -- i have to read you what she said , because i think it &apos;s so beautiful .
i find that very unfortunate . not because i would have been able to use it . i wanted to see him .
and that &apos;s actually the beginning of our history .
now i would have thought to that moment that in age 50 , one of the the skills i really had , was my shoes .
first of all , i have to tell you that i &apos;m not from here .
yeah . the artist doesn &apos;t seem to be so true to the way that he &apos;s going to be hinmalen the different colors .
but i can see in your faces that they &apos;re still a little bit skeptical .
it &apos;s called &quot; unbenannt &quot; and i think that &apos;s appropriate .
after a while i decided to have something fun , and before i left the room , i got a few things in the room .
and now they &apos;re all in there .
my father was one , my youth was a huge interesting .
the song as a mere fact .
i &apos;m going to be , &quot; wait , well , it &apos;s good , i &apos;m going to put the wheels , and i built them up , and i built them and -- you see them , and i could have my sonderbeleuchtung ?
it sounds like , but i think we &apos;re in our society and culture with the absichtlichkeit have a riesenproblem .
he designed the sonden itself , and he was really proud of it .
human , i love this thing .
the consequences of a planet that is already living in seven billion people .
and it was very proud of the bequemen seat , the very bequemen seat he &apos;d been verliehen his triumphwagen , and on the beautiful stofffransen around the seat .
intent -- a life with intent -- but i lived with the original better than that .
i saw the healthy mass of a left , and i trauerte that she was lost , trauerte all the way that i hadn &apos;t done , but not more possible .
and then i started asking many times , how many life would be , how my life would have been something if this man didn &apos;t hurt me when my genes had a different side of experience .
i was , but i was now a gehbehinderung of a gehbehinderung myself , and i suspect , i &apos;m so suspect i &apos;m making myself .
i had a much simpler to hoped : this drawing dessert against four words and to do my way back to my way .
he spent six months in prison , lost his lkw-führerschein for a decade .
yes , contrast .
we &apos;re working with the machine lab laboratory at the university of california , san diego combined .
first of all , perception of people . and second , a natural interface , a natural form of the interactions that the interaction is going to be intuitive for the robot .
and yet , i made this idea .
after i &apos;ve realized that economic danger , i thought we have to find a solution to this problem .
some have even referenzen to the speakers that in nathan art , or the one of tim ferriss , who is a gelegentlich als .
i don &apos;t know any tedtalk that involves .
this time i was paying 25 cents , because i found the assignment was a little harder .
and yet , there was one of the things that everybody had to be sure : the expansion of the expansion to slow down .
keep the mystery of the dark energy in mind , because i &apos;m going to call three main information now to the string theory .
the kandidatenliste went down to about 10 .
and he was working on this number to explain this number , but he didn &apos;t succeed and know why .
every one of these universes has extra dimensions .
because the astronomers of today by mächtige mächtige , they &apos;re discovering a handful of hochinformativer photons -- a kind of kosmisches telegramm , billions of years .
now i &apos;m going to be honest with you and tell you that most of them is just a trick , but a trick that actually works .
remember it &apos;s the first time you hit it . we want to do it , but really do you want to do it and even more curious .
he said , &quot; go , milo . &quot;
pm : that &apos;s dimitri that really is right in wettbewerbsstimmung .
we don &apos;t know anybody here .
the next moment the phone doesn &apos;t have any longer , the television , with arms men , there are bewaffnete men .
it was a very düsteres meeting the reporter that was working in war , the staff of ngos , and of course , the bold people , of the mutigen themselves .
if i &apos;m going to ask me why i &apos;m going to keep pushing on , why i &apos;m going to stay on the reason that i &apos;m going to be .
but it &apos;s my profession to be this peculiar zeugnis , and this is the krux , the core of the thing that we think about .
even before a goal , which you can see with the joystick gesteuerten cursor versucht versucht trying to find the target , no matter where it is .
basically , we trainierten the animals so that they learned to control these avatare and objects in the virtual world .
in an experiment that we did a few years ago , we went to the limit .
so we start in china .
so the dai manju was done the unterstufe .
please raise your hand .
the last reason to do that women are part of the solution , not the problem .
in the u.k. , one of seven women at birth to one of the child &apos;s birth .
she became part of the solution , not the problem .
larry summers , when he fungierte the world bank , once said , &quot; it can be good to be good in the developing world , in the developing world , the highest rentabilität . &quot;
this is bill easterly &apos;s book .
and that was the feder of a bird .
this whole gyre to be a single one of our wesensmerkmale tells us there is a klärungsbedarf .
and even this image is going to have the suspects to be zurechtgebastelt -- like something from the barnum &amp; amp ; d circus .
one of these ways that we could actually predict in little familiengruppen .
you lay down your arrowheads and say , &quot; i want to share this arrowheads by finished arrows . we share 50 to 50 . &quot;
there are places on this island where they all can hit three or four miles on a new language .
when 27 individuals to the table , their 23 languages sprächen , they sprächen their 23 languages , and then you just say you &apos;re going to need a armee to be a army of 253 übersetzern to be prepared for all the paarweisen possibilities .
but it doesn &apos;t tell us that she was also about language .
and what i &apos;m interested in most is the invisible space between a text and the corresponding picture , and how the image is changing by the text , and the text is moving through the image .
this is transatlantische unterwasser-kommunikationskabel that are going to be the bottom of the atlantic ocean and north america with europe .
they turn the negative to the negative .
but through the impression of phantombildern , polaroids , fahndungsfotos , fahndungsfotos , and gegenüberstellungen can change the change .
larry youngblood is eight years of a 10 years of a 10 year-old haftstrafe , in arizona , in arizona , for the kidnapping and wiederholten mißbrauch of a 10jährigen boy on a jahrmarkt .
before the people are left themselves .
and they have them here for texas .
and now you drive with the eye you engaged in this moment .
it &apos;s just the vast amount of the standard that it makes it look like this than anything .
so , you &apos;re going to just go out to a sense of , the pursuit of happiness and human design .
now , part of the legacy is freuds , the pursuit of happiness for the happiness effort for vergebliche , it will be driven by infantilen aspects of the individual and in reality .
a hauptpunkt in the science of happiness is that happiness and unglück don &apos;t have a endpunkte in an geschlossenen .
it starts in the ventralen of ventralen .
here &apos;s a three weeks .
in the animal kingdom , there is only one possibility to increase the status , that &apos;s dominance .
i want to close with a few quotes .
why should you choose rats ?
once the rat has been understood , we get the job to do a little bit .
you can actually cure them , even in humans , the hiv-positive are hiv .
with the knowledge that a patient , the microscopic unentdeckt remains to 15 people -- 15 healthy people -- a year , they can be sure that we have saved a lot of lives .
here we see neurons .
so that &apos;s important for imitation and emulation .
now , the question is , if i &apos;m just simply touching the other person , as a different person is not going to be confused and have literally this berührungsgefühl of the bare bloßen , how someone will touch ?
thank you . i have two missions here today .
i don &apos;t actually go to the pflanzenvermehrung , but to the pollen itself .
all these pictures were taken by a rasterelektronenmikroskop aufgenommen by the way , in the lab of kew .
even every single one of us has a story to tell us a story of the pollenfingerabdruck to us .
we must be as good as the breast cancer to address this crisis .
in the time , in the 1980s , when we go to women and death , they saw a editorial for the new england journal of medicine and called the yentl-syndrom .
our colleagues in washington , d.c.
we decided , &quot; let &apos;s look at this . &quot;
in contrast , röntgen , röntgen , thallium , women , whose breast women &apos;s busen , and every time we add something to a small amount of radiation , we ask , &quot; is this test really need to need this test ? &quot;
okay , here we started .
they did what they said , they kept fürsprache , and they &apos;re campaigns .
the cells have something like heimweh ; in the dish , they don &apos;t feel to themselves .
what does that mean for us ?
over three years , we took eight to 10 hours , and they would save about a viertelmillion hours of mehrspuriges and bildmaterial .
this is one of the first fazits that came out of a year ago that we really surprised us .
and finally , my son is playing myself in a gehhilfe .
three of the most important people in this project is philip philip , the rony and brandon roy , are shown here .
and there is a fascinating dynamic in the game .
this is the first time our son was more than two steps on a movie -- captured in the movie .
and that &apos;s a important question , because the better we understand how the brain is , the better way we can communicate , the better we can communicate , and i think the better way we can think and work together .
it &apos;s a kind of center where you see a picture and think ! i have a strong or emotional reaction to the same thing . &quot;
what we literally do is to paint our team on the whole wall of a large wall .
this is the first house i built .
it &apos;s not just about hygiene , but also to relaxation the opportunity for relaxation .
so , i don &apos;t build it .
if you translated this into the bauindustrie , if you have a fensterwand , and a window is broken , we &apos;ll say , &quot; oh no , that &apos;s broken , that &apos;s broken .
that &apos;s the difference .
so we &apos;ve got a discontinued .
are we just stupid ?
you can see it in two years , if you read eight hours a day .
so in september , in september , can be in september , and say , &quot; i &apos;m important today .
why do you do not , and why do you do not do that ? &quot;
and the police waiting for the eintreffen of fire to cut the vehicle in pieces , to get the body &apos;s body .
and that &apos;s enough to the present presence of the dollarschein in the united states , where a eye of divinity finds the eyes of the divine .
all of this leads to -- computersucht , just to name this time , and that &apos;s what we &apos;re most to use to use digital devices .
that &apos;s the implication of the destruction of the destruction of the destruction of the brain on the right side of the brain .
this is a very , very low level , to be discharged from the healthcare system .
he gave up my jaw in the right position while he kieferorthopädisch my teeth .
alfred man is a brilliant physicist and i &apos;m fascinated by closing to close to conclusions that he &apos;s going to be a deaf hearing , or a blind that you see , or a paralyzed , the movement .
now i had to find in the dark years , which followed , find out what was doing that , if that was particularly , what this particularly did .
and it works . it works .
lp : so if you have the opportunity , you spend the time with simon .
and these were the developing world : they had great families and a relatively short life .
and they &apos;re on this side . a great überlappung of africa and the one that &apos;s the big überlappung of africa and the one that &apos;s the big deal of africa and the one .
and then deng xiaoping came and brought money to china and bring the country back to a middle line .
a search of search with that data to be able to copy data into a durchsuchbares format , and we can hear the way we hear ?
but this is what we &apos;re looking for .
you know , darwin &apos;s life , after it came out , which was the essence of life ?
and there i learned about francis crick .
but there were no one in the literature .
we were not the best chemists in the room .
i was unhappy ; my girls didn &apos;t get married me .
you can actually compare to the dna of the same new process .
and so i &apos;ll close , by telling you that we &apos;ve looked at 20 people with schizophrenia .
it costs the defense of this case in such a case two million dollars and takes 18 months when they win .
first , they don &apos;t fight against the patent , but against the verstoß .
my solution : give me this patent to this patent , and i &apos;m going to leave you with the trollbeschwerden .
&quot; why not ? &quot; girl , girls .
fathers were on a place where they move their daughters to play , their chairs and their hand could go to the dance .
that &apos;s a great technology .
it &apos;s not a lot of left to the world .
it cannot survive for a long time .
the enemy can &apos;t see most of the time , and we needed another process to eradicate polio eradication , to eradicate polio , and we had done it with smallpox .
it &apos;s helped control to control grippen , sars , sars .
the reality of polio today is something different .
and yet , the impossible is happening .
bill gates : well bruce , bruce , where are the most difficult places ?
bruce aylward : how we &apos;re going to get polio on the top of the stillstand , will be able to bring polio to the top , will be the stillstand to the top .
dj : we found this individualismus now at all kinds of animals , especially in the cats .
and to our surprise , it became a kultfilm .
for us , this elephant in many ways , a symbol of inspiration , a symbol of hope that we &apos;re concerned about our work .
it was incredibly amazing when she took it in safety , to protect it from the hyena .
and of course , if i look at these löwentatze , the gehäutet , which is gehäutet , it reminds me of a human hand , and that &apos;s ironic because your fate is in our hands .
we need it . we respect and celebrate each other as a man and woman as a community and as part of this planet and we need to move on .
it seems to be obvious that the earth is large and bewegungslos , the sun &apos;s sun and you can do it , but it &apos;s worth what wittgenstein is going to be anmerkte .
and that &apos;s because in middle world , the luftwiderstand is always there .
nature depends on this model depends on what kind of animal we are .
because there &apos;s so many of them , and because between them , there &apos;s no consensus on their own ability to bewegungsrichtung , verharrt of the marmor , as we see in middle middle middle world , and firm .
people like machines like a scientifically and philosophisch , but it &apos;s a hinderliche trick , if you want to go and do what &apos;s going to do next .
i was thrown out for night , i was stummen for the stummen tetraplegiker in the 1930s &apos;s ears .
over a little bit , i think , with my head , i allow these web-schnittstellen to see video clips from the robot to send the knöpfe by sending buttons in a web-browser .
with the help of people like you can , we can make this dream .
in the oceanography , for example , a regelrechtes lexicon is developed by the radarstrahlen , basically the radarstrahlen that are controlling the dolphins , visualizing it .
and i think together , we can form a global community .
this is a hot trending topic .
now there are some -- there are some lessons that you can learn from .
but usually we don &apos;t usually do this .
i think we &apos;re looking at this : the infrastructure of globalization .
now this is 12 to 12 percent .
this is a problem that we need to solve .
i also suppose that most of you don &apos;t speak chinese -- which is really sad , if you think that this is now the most common language in the internet .
what do you look at ? maybe we should do that .
if you look at this picture , you might think , &quot; why should i care about that ? &quot;
but there are all these different techniques that allow it to allow you to look and look at the world and find their place in it .
they would bring wealth and secure , religious violence and make sure that states never unterschlupf the terrorists again .
and part of this activity is honesty .
what is this ?
i love this dish .
and the war , who took 20 million people living in the lives of the life -- the world &apos;s tödlichste world .
lem sen who &apos;s this guy : &quot; i have had all of this money , but i &apos;ve spent all this time looking for the american man who stole my recipe .
chinese restaurants have been doing the same thing , i would argue , with the menü and the dekor -- even the restaurant -- but without a centralized headquarters .
in contrast , we &apos;ve been doing general tso in reality in the early days in new york city , when i was in the university of new york city in the early &apos; 70s , so ...
so what we see in the 17th century , the fortgeführte search for medicine , &quot; abseits , &quot; abseits , which creates the same thing .
so people would have a really big impact on the very big issue , and they would have a big deal .
when the überweisungen began to become less , i was clearly always depressiver , until i thought my god , i can &apos;t work anymore .
remember , remember , when a child &apos;s going to have to get to every line ?
at 18 and 19 , i went through the night .
again , i &apos;m going to get a little depressed and something wrong .
so many of us , we &apos;re clear that it &apos;s much to do in the next few years , in the next few years .
he goes around , &quot; how does it feel free ? &quot;
you know . where worked the world at treating the issues that we have in the treatment of the global problems that have come from the potential of earthquake and climate change ?
if you &apos;re doing the impossible anpackt , you do it .
but we have reached a agreement to climate change .
and there &apos;s crying god .
the seideraupe power does something worthwhile : they use two ingredients , proteins and water that are in their spinneret , to create a material that &apos;s very extraordinary , and the same way as the schutz fibers .
or you erzeugst nice things like this , if the camera can get the camera .
here you see , how it &apos;s taken from tissue .
with my new project , marilyn monrobot , i want to use art to build technology .
there &apos;s also a microphone that &apos;s been linked and the applaus and the buh-rufe -- hopefully -- hopefully -- hopefully to help him to meet some of his next choices .
what do i do ? &quot;
and in the frame of this , demo of the fact that i had to show is a roboter-bühnenkomiker , a roboter-bühnenkomiker , which is far more than einzeiler herunterzuleiern -- it collects the feedback of the audience and to be able to see the behavior of the amount of tiny .
stanley milgram , inventor of the known › of separation , vermutete in the 60-er and 70-ern that there are between two people in between five to seven steps .
how do we change our view of relationships to work with ganz groups ?
but there was a vorkommnis that i &apos;m going to tell you about , and where he might have to put this one in the ear .
you ... my dad , a geheimagent ?
it was his father , who decided they needed false papers .
this feeling of the responsibility about the life of the life of 17 years old , he had his fault , and his obligation was a überlebender , because he was a camp from a camp , while his friends were still , he kept his whole life .
and as my halbschwester and my halbbruder given given , i thought , sort of , waisen , my father got a little wrong thing .
i asked him , given the victims that he had ever been able to ever .
we grow from a few million people on the seven billion people that we &apos;re today .
the arctic , a beautiful system , a regulierendes biom on planetarischem level that &apos;s a klimawandelschlag for the next einsteckt , which is seemingly a good state .
if you abholzt the forests , the border in the landnutzung , you &apos;re untergräbt the ability to stay in stable stable .
with the insight of tourbetreibern , fishermen who are australian barrier reef and scientists that the great barrier reef is the derzeitigen of the current kontrollregime .
but the drama is , of course , is that sure that kleinschrittiger change is not an option .
that leads me to another reason why i &apos;m here today : because i really like media media .
this is a überrest of a race of far .
and first , he uses a ancient kind of manufacturing that relief and connected with a three-dimensional perspective , which was a whole new technology of time .
and through the process of sugar , i hired portraits of them .
it became very large images , and i took them with a very large camera , a 8x10 camera .
my interest in schauspielerei , especially on bad bugs , very far .
on the back , the back , is a sequence that occurs in the chimps .
we can ask , is there any difference between africans and nichtafrikanern ?
and then you can compare it to the genome of today , today .
we can then ask the same questions for the people who have neanderthals , like neanderthals : have you mixed with ancestor with ancestor today ?
there are a lot of people who produced their own vision for such a vision of the beginning of the 20th century .
after my belief , the plane of the future will be its own consciousness .
imagine , kohlenstoff-nanoröhren grow in 3d printer , and they &apos;re embedded in a kunststoffmatrix embedded , and follow the forces that occur in their components .
they don &apos;t talk . but all of them were extraordinary isolated from the world around them , from their surroundings and from the people .
they would zurückweichen . they would call the police .
now we know that it &apos;s about one of the 100 &apos;s 100 .
you see a video , you see a video .
you have the idea that the research has been doing that , really , really , you can have a effect on reality that they actually prevent these experiences with which i started with my way on this area .
then you pick up a holiday off .
zuallerst verkrampfst you &apos;re in a stare at a stare starren -- chin on the brustbein , poor ausgestreckt über .
they made all the way we taught them .
and after the battle , they take them up and do this , and they do what you call &quot; nachbesprechung &quot; to teach you what you did wrong .
also , people have changed .
i said , &quot; where is he ? &quot;
that &apos;s not a log .
and she pointed to the left work to tell me how problematic to me , it was the idea for her to be zusammenhing with the idea of how black represented were represented .
it &apos;s really in this sense of the enteckung that i have a new set of questions that i ask .
now , this is sort of an obvious statement .
and the kids said , &quot; how should we do that . &quot;
i think they &apos;re trying to multiply numbers .
so i said , &quot; how long have you been doing that before you decided that you didn &apos;t know ? &quot;
their punktezahl increased on 50 , what else &apos;s supposed to do with a ausgebildteten biotechnology .
it was 76 percent . the test , two months later , it was the result of 20 percent .
after eight ted years , he wanted to be leondardo .
these are 10-jährige .
and suddenly , i looked out of the dark side of the room of mirrors , which became the moon .
if i have to reduce the whole story on a picture , what would it be ?
now i &apos;m going to show you some of the ausschnitte of my major project in this year , &quot; the tempest &quot; -- the tempest of the tempest .
and our little life ends in a sleep .
bono : &quot; they &apos;re mythologien .
i know you understand that .
so , blue , blue , everything became blue ; it &apos;s blue .
i want to tell you two stories . both play in africa .
it &apos;s another one that &apos;s on the interface of health and business .
let &apos;s use the markets as the empfindlichste spürgerät that we have , and find out how to people , what people would have to pay for that they have the dignity of choice .
thank you .
the faustregel was that , if my mother couldn &apos;t understand it , we could not use it in the video .
we destroyed two klaviere and 10 television .
the little neigte of entfernen to remove its trace , and that was a problem .
this is very good . it &apos;s getting it .
i &apos;d like to show you a video of a few of the models that i work with .
tissue of berechenbarer density and behavior is the second part , and that &apos;s actually the key to use this models for wirkstoffforschung wirkstoffforschung .
thank you .
and the attempt to fly it just like the arrow of the gefederten end up to the gefederten end of the gefederten , and it was hard work , and boy , i &apos;ve learned a lot of respect for nature .
now let &apos;s look at the other side .
we &apos;re working on projects -- even flügelschlagenden developments , as schwärmer -- with darpa , the california institute of technology and university of los angeles .
be careful , they just behave like wood or so , like that , or something like that .
now i &apos;m not trying to be besserwisserisch .
they go to forever .
that &apos;s about two billion .
it requires it &apos;s going to be for his estimation name for a three years . &quot;
don &apos;t forget that one .
but for me , it &apos;s great because it &apos;s a metaphor for the time that we live in , where human mind and machines can win .
i &apos;ve got very clear . where is it coming ?
it &apos;s too afraid that the way in the wild , in the wild , in 20 to 30 years .
all evidence of deuteten that this cancer is transmitted by a virus .
i took the opportunity to come true , and it &apos;s a few samples from jonas and entnahm from other parts of the other .
she took him to a veterinarian and this discovered ekelhaftes .
ultimately , cancer is a unvermeidbare of the ability of the ability to share our cells and adapt their environment .
and i &apos;m not alone .
and this is a global phenomenon .
they would be draufzahlen to wait for waiting .
and that &apos;s the third reason why one of the low consultants makes us happy .
but they didn &apos;t they didn &apos;t find that numbers .
first , i &apos;m going to show you the durchschnittswerte for the optimism bias .
but the good news is that our illusion is not broken when we &apos;re aware of this hangs .
but what we see in the 21st century is asia , which is incremental , and over again , again , more than half the world &apos;s world &apos;s population and over half of the global economic system .
you could consider this as the privatization of the higgs field .
after the time after the soviets had been hochschossen , it was called &quot; that &apos;s the end of america . &quot;
or neu , or hanoi your view of china &apos;s view , is something different than a different than if you live in beijing in beijing .
and if we have strategies that we &apos;re going to have to do this in larger society , we will be able to do that process .
how we define our national interests , so it &apos;s not just a nullsumme , but not only a nullsumme ratio yet , but the positive thing is not a positive deal with positive sum as a positive amount of money .
that &apos;s the conventional approach to the conventional approach .
this has typically friedenstruppen the responsibility to entsenden to garantieren a stable sicherheitslage .
they &apos;re long term .
jobs for who ? especially for young men .
after mostly the united kingdom , you can &apos;t even get off .
the way that is going to be the one , after the conflict , the government , government erbracht .
this is the complete silhouette of my hometown of new orleans .
the military has been able to figure it . they call the climate change , the sicherheit and stability and stabilität of the world as being in the world as to respond to the world .
it allows you to become more productive , so that they can save the insurance for the time .
now , these are certainly examples of the possible solutions when we feel that we feel for a ändernde world .
and they hear the chinese students treated by the time they would scream it .
teacher : perfect ! students : perfect !
and it &apos;s doing things like the concrete world with klassifikationen auszukleiden , abstractions we try to make sense of the most consistent of the world , and we also take the hypothetical seriously , which is , we &apos;re more likely to ask ourselves , what could be .
so luria looked at the human being before they were in the scientific age , and he found that these people were resistant to a klassifizierung of the concrete world .
and he said luria , &quot; the north pole there is always snow .
they chose albany instead of new york .
it wasn &apos;t just the spread of cognitively , professions .
would you have it being killed ? &quot;
you could say , a halbkreis .
it feels like i landed in a colony of angels . &quot;
and they flehten me to do a degree in anything .
it &apos;s still in the red numbers , but chris created the personal sacrifice , this film .
i &apos;m one of her lehrergesten .
there is a prime minister , aussenminister , verteidigungsminister and a finanzchef , or president of the rechnungshofes .
boy : &quot; the weltfrieden-spiel is serious .
we were all angry at them , &quot; why are you doing that ?
that &apos;s going to be much real when you read it . &quot;
we had played the game for weeks , about seven weeks , and we had all been gemeistert all the 50 together in all the 50 .
and we have 600 billion dollars .
many people are doing well gut jobs , and he joined the nationalbewegung .
it &apos;s like its own little connection .
if i were all three legs from the three spitzen of the triangle , i would get a tetraeder .
so all you do -- it &apos;s a very provokante thesis -- this old fahrradschlauch and this old fahrradschlauch , and this old plastic &#91; unclear &#93; , this is a very easy fahrradschlauch of an old fahrradschlauch .
that is possible , if you have a whole piece of paper , din paper -- you can be in a kommunalen school -- a sheet , a ruler and a pencil , no glue , no one , no mate .
what we do is a very simple elektromotor .
this is a little straw you do , is these two corners of the ecken here , it will like a babykrokodilmaul .
here are two magnet .
it was a lot of passengers on the ship , and they got bored , so the captain of her deck was to get on his deck .
in the ink conference , zeigt gupta einfache einfache and yet illustrate amazing plans to transform waste in really unterhaltende , good at the konstruierte of the wirklich , gut constructed konstruierte , while they &apos;re fundamental principles of science and design .
it was a big challenge , and it was actually examples of biology that have been a lot of evidence of the evidence .
and there are some examples of projects that are bewusst in the ecosystems .
and with a little planning , we can take place in charge of traffic , into a turn of the offenen space for people who are able to bring people back with food and waste into opportunities .
this photograph was made by the day of the day , and just a year later , it looked like this .
when you verdampft seawater , the first thing is calcium carbonate .
no , you have to go to the people with visions of the visions of the visionen . &quot;
i sought somebody who is the jewish , because i &apos;m jewish and because i &apos;m very important .
but the real key thing was that there were lots of men that wanted to deal with me .
very few of us have the ability to be absolutely honest with themselves .
he likes to travel , as long as it &apos;s not on a kreuzfahrtschiff .
i was trying to be basically like smileygirl1978 .
because they remember my favorite career , you have to do a mindestpunktezahl of 700 points and nobody did that .
most of them . gamer are in average , 33 years old , not eight years , and if we look at the hochgerechnete of the computerspielens , the gamer of tomorrow adults .
imagine , their vision is very , very good .
these gamer have even many other benefits in terms of attention , and a aspect of attention , which is also very clear , is our ability to track objects in our environment .
i want to ask you to remember this result , and it &apos;s to put it in the context of a different group of technologienutzern , a group that actually looked at in our society , who is in our society , which is made out of people who are multimedia-tasking .
so let me illustrate this step with a task called mental illness .
it &apos;s the idea of computation .
let &apos;s just let all kinds of programs in particular , that we &apos;re looking at .
so it was a big , very complex project that i didn &apos;t even know if it works at all .
so wolfram alpha knows about many , many things , and many things .
on one side we have mathematica , with the kind of precise language , formaler language and a big network of sorgfälltig , able to do a lot of the lines .
so with physical materialuntersuchungen , we &apos;re used to go to the world and realize that certain things are making sense for certain technology and so on .
a few years ago , i was pretty excited about the candidate of these simple universes that has a special relativity and also the general relativity and gravity and gravitation evidence of quantum mechanics .
sw : i think .
and during that time , i &apos;ve been working more and more relatives , and teachers who are interested in hiv / aids .
they jump up . they wear red clothes .
and my mother was a woman , she didn &apos;t have a right on the workforce and automatically gehörte everything my family was , anyway , my father , he had the right .
and the day of the actual ceremony we were , we were excited , and they didn &apos;t have the whole night .
he was wearing and i had this in a village that didn &apos;t even even even even even gepflasterte . it &apos;s very attractive .
i promised him to be a braves girl , i would come back and do everything you would ask me to ask me .
if it was pregnant , the marriage was done was to be made for the mother and punished .
as we speak , you &apos;ll never be thrown away from 125 girls .
consumers , the 72 percent of the american gdp , actually , like banks and company fremdkapital , the fremdkapital fremdkapital , their fremdkapital , to befreien the verpflichtungen and taking risks that we move forward .
and what you &apos;re here to see is the whole phenomenon of the fact that we actually vortreten and basically the future of education , the future children of our households .
sterilisationen are um percent of 48 percent , the cornell of the law .
we also see a trend on something fascinating . right ?
one of them is the erstarken of community and neighborhood , and the child of the neighbors of neighbors as support .
we also see a big heimwerker-bewegung .
the trend is immense .
then we &apos;re going to take the phenomenon of kogi .
and then i came up with me , i &apos;m the only one that does something ?
you could be able to exploit it .
this is what i &apos;m doing in my life -- stories , telling you , novels , and today i want to share with you a few stories about the storytelling of storytelling and also some supernatural creatures , the dschinns .
our vorstellungkraft could be shrinking , and our hearts might be verkümmern , and our menschlichkeiten could be verdorren , if we start to start too long within our cultural denial .
i &apos;d encountered the first time i call it , &quot; the space exploration of space . &quot;
i &apos;m not a immigrantin , not a refugee or exilantin . i &apos;m going to ask why i do that . but that &apos;s the commute between languages , i &apos;m looking for myself .
he wanted to see a manifestation of my identity .
my tiny story became a huge issue , because i was prosecuted .
literature has to lead to the other side .
i could be a novel about a muslim woman , and maybe it will be a happy story . and in my next book , i may write about a gutaussehenden , schwulen professor in norway .
so you &apos;re going to do that . you &apos;re going to take a existing songs , which is the kind of stückchen , you put this on the stückchen , and you get a new song , but this new song is clearly made of old songs .
instead , this laws and laws worldwide , the more unbeholfenen of the ability to take the ability .
it &apos;s a 28-seitiges software-patent , but i &apos;m going to sum up what it &apos;s called , spoiler alarm : the entriegeln of the telephone , by using a symbol with his finger .
our creativity comes from the outside , not from the inside .
and then they say , &quot; okay , but how do you see your address ? &quot;
but in fact , it &apos;s not my fault ; she &apos;s in the paper &quot; guardian . &quot;
and what &apos;s beautiful , you can see this limb there , a kind of undeutlicher rauchfahne that you can see from the limb .
we &apos;ve been taught our exploration of the solar system that the solar system is beautiful .
now , that led to an understanding of the atomic structure , because it &apos;s going to be so erkärt that atoms have one single core , with elektonen , who are circling it .
this image is a galaxy , a allerweltsgalaxie , one , 100 billion stars like our sun .
i think it can also also be the tiefstgreifenden ideas for us , about our place in the universe , and really the value of our home .
this is here . this is home . that &apos;s what we &apos;re .
and with every aspect of the screen we can drop the bildschirms and gretel brotkrumen of our personal information , all over the way through the digital woods .
when our daughter was on the frühstückstisch sat , i asked her , &quot; will you get a lot of value on a high school ? &quot;
we can also do not herumsitzen into this .
now , i want to take you on this journey .
and because i took so much , and i talked to my wife , i decided to say i &apos;d just talk more , a day .
and they don &apos;t talk ... ?
and i explained to a friend who understood my sign , i was going to be a john francis that i wasn &apos;t talking about that i was not talking to me that this was last time that somebody would translate my sign .
well , i &apos;m going to take my back again .
i started talking to speak , because i had studied umweltwissenschaften , i had studied umweltwissenschaften .
but the unterscheid was that i was made on every birthday thought about my chart , but never about my decision to use my feet .
born and grew up in north korea .
sometimes i found little jobs in the brush in the exchange for food .
i was worried that i would sit and get back to that .
i felt like this , because i had a lot of food in america , but my father had died in america .
but i believe that their gesture of love and care of the lives of the love and care of the lives of another joseph can save and thousands of other kinds of other josephs that are still alive .
it &apos;s very complicated to test new materials for buildings , but this was much more powerful than i had anticipated , and easy to make it easy , and also to make a industrieller werkstoff .
but then i was very disappointed to my job as an architect , because we don &apos;t help us , we don &apos;t work for society , but for privileged , rich , the government , the government .
and then in the following year , 1995 , there was a big earthquake in japan in japan .
so i &apos;m asking what is a permanentes and what a temporäres building ?
but this is really necessary .
so we &apos;re learning some of the most important things in our lives before we &apos;re born , still in the womb .
so fetuses are actually learning the specific language that spoken in the world that they &apos;re born in .
it creates a mixture of the influences that are so individually and curious , like the woman themselves .
why should we have malnutrition in the womb ?
you can see , but you can see other eyes .
this is a trust in the fiktive of the fiktive for any kind of theatralik .
the audience are going to be auf , which are very logical , but not with the übereinstimmen , which is going on . &quot;
and if it &apos;s a good story , you might get it to the smile .
you may remember the aol-time warner-fusion , okay , then at the time , at the time , when the largest deal of all time .
if you &apos;re a high animal at the unesco , and somebody says , &quot; what do you really do for the eliminating place in the world ? &quot;
they said , &quot; can we start an ad campaign ?
this is actually a strategy , and i don &apos;t argue , that strategy is playing a role .
for me , all the music was .
now , if i look at my software , the camera looks like the camera , and we see the location of the kamerapixel in the projektorpixeln , and you &apos;ve got a whiteboard .
i remember the poor thing needed -- food -- food , clothing , shelter , and they didn &apos;t have .
i even felt a anflug of shame .
now , since i heard him speak , i was excited for different reasons .
i didn &apos;t even asked a donation to a donation that i was usually my way .
it &apos;s about the wiedererzählen of the story of the arms and it &apos;s about giving a possibility of us , which would be bestätigen , a partnership , a partnership , not a partnership which is based on a traditional way of the passenger pigeon can happen .
it &apos;s a very bedeutungsvollere combination , a very strong combination .
right now , is still profounder at the beginning , and it &apos;s very clear to me , very clear that it &apos;s just a vehicle , just a tool .
what about the future of humanity ?
now i &apos;m going to turn to the second question , and we &apos;re going to be the second question , we are alone , or are there other life in the universe ?
the answers to these big questions are showing that we &apos;ve done remarkable advances in the last hundred years .
see that here .
here are photographs of me .
the rate has been doubling all 18 months and every eingetragene member of the digerati knows that &apos;s the mooresche law .
but what about them ? what will it be doing with you ?
they sail in their loan to the sky , and occasionally they go for people who wouldn &apos;t agree with their parents .
so we &apos;re interested in things like this .
so , previous generations could not do this experiment .
and i found that the first technology is going to be in form , 2,6 million years ago .
we can learn a lot of them .
and i &apos;m seeing sorgenvoll and try to protect my child , because with a child , you don &apos;t have to know that , even not .
and second , she says they had a aufrechten gang , but some of the adaptations for the erklettern of trees .
now , our knowledge of our ancestors in principle of adults , there are the fossils , the baby-fossilien , the fehlten .
the paläoanthropologe zeresenay alemseged explores the origin of humanity in the long ethiopia . he talks about how he found the oldest skeleton of a humanoid child , and what we can learn about in africa .
and if everybody is supposed to be encouraging the rules , you need a effective system to review and rechtsdurchsetzung. because we &apos;ve also got to also need to need control of control .
it &apos;s considered high seas because the continent of territorialen ansprüchen was ausgenommen .
we need to work locally , but also all of the seebecken übergreifend .
we need to create a new paradigm of caution and respect .
carol says , &quot; i would pay for what i do . &quot;
that was a pretty good idea .
to say , i &apos;m a journalist , no technologist , so i want to design a sketch to design a sketch like the present and the future .
i think , in the end , i think we all need to think about whether we want our reality -- and if it &apos;s to our idea of life and everything that comes out .
it looks like this animal .
the symptoms of the complex are that you have the strong and unveränderliche , the right solution , no matter how difficult the problem is .
cesar , and i tried to write a paper for new york times and explain how it works .
of course , we can do that .
and earning a lot of money .
it &apos;s higher than the ausfallquote of americans .
we &apos;re going to try it out . probably everything is wrong .
brich , immediately . &quot;
taniyama , it would be kept again again , but he could never prove it .
i &apos;m saying that our approach is not necessarily .
china wants to have achieved for a 20 years .
we don &apos;t even do even more slower .
the future is naturgemäß .
yes , it will be ugly , and yes , it &apos;s going to happen -- with safety in our lifespan -- but we &apos;re more than capable of getting everything that &apos;s coming to us .
and here you come in .
and what we &apos;re thinking about is this : if you &apos;re in the flames , what &apos;s going to be next ?
and we thought , we can put these debt on our children , but it &apos;s just going to be before you &apos;re looking at it before you &apos;re born .
everything else is verplant .
that &apos;s the financial crisis .
students wanted to know what the cell is happening .
that shouldn &apos;t be amazing or ?
all we get is roomba .
you &apos;ll be able to focus your empfindlichkeit or erniedrigen , or erniedrigen can do a series of things that we can &apos;t .
that &apos;s not a thousand years in the distance .
we should be able to ban the simple heilmöglichkeit and anybody else for them to use their children . &quot;
and here we can see this whole .
we can &apos;t really risk risky to lose the confidence of the customer .
he just got 500 , and have got to get 1,000 to 1,000 . &quot;
and he had a huge topf of placebo-pillen that she got , and he said , &quot; come in a week when you &apos;re sick . &quot;
the internet , as we know it , the kind of web -- the things we &apos;re all talking about -- is more than 5,000 days old .
of course , there &apos;s been the internet since 5,000 days -- the web only only 5,000 days .
so if we say that the machine we &apos;re going to do is a hb , a human brain if we look at the rate of that , that grows in 30 years , there are six billion hbs .
now , it &apos;s not -- if you do a chart and things at work , a word , they &apos;re not part of the web , but they &apos;re going to be , you &apos;re going to be part of the machine .
i say , &quot; people will be the broader senses of the machine . &quot; in a sense .
it &apos;s going to be on the level of the parts or ideas , or words , if you want to .
the last point i want to talk about is the idea that we &apos;re going to be co-abhängig .
third , it will be more ubiquitous , it will have more ubiquitous , and we &apos;re going to be in the middle of the environment , and we are in the middle .
and within a week , i was convinced that the second wiederaufstehung of jesus christ was discovered that it was sun &apos;s sun , and i had been speziell by god and prepared to become his jüngerin .
these are the deaths of jonestown .
and it allows everything . it makes everything logical .
i &apos;m going to start with some simple ideas , how we organize things .
this is a project that we &apos;re just recently completed for a giant stadtprojekt , which came directly from this process , it &apos;s the result of a variety of forces that are developing .
and that led directly to another project .
it &apos;s actually a false mindset because the hybrid probably is .
i &apos;m interested in how these ideas are getting young people .
and then one of the most interesting projects -- a gerichtsgebäude .
each of you is about to stay in his neighbors .
so , as we &apos;d have to pay numbers .
so we have a big brain , a great advantage , because we can affect our environment .
my story is the two brains . it may surprise you , our gut has a brain brain .
this muskelkontrolle is very , very important , because there can be reflexe .
we have learned to talk to the big brain , taste and reward , as you know .
he said , &quot; you know , sometime at some point , we were all like animals and then no longer . &quot;
these are men and women who are still in the night sky in the night sky .
of course , we have told us the tibetischen monks .
the intiwatana , the post that &apos;s going to be hangs , it &apos;s actually a obelisk , which is constantly reflected on the holy apu of machu picchu , the zuckerhutberg , called the zuckerhutberg , called huayna .
if you pray for the dead , they do it with the hands of these gestures that they put their thoughts in the sky .
here is the place where the great mother has the spindel in the world , which has the mountains and the homeland created the heart of the world .
it &apos;s unique facetten of human imagination .
this material that you all know , is styropur , but i think it &apos;s more like toxic white .
i &apos;m going there , you can go there , and you can adjust it in , because in a hundred years , my body can bring back without no way back to the earth .
it &apos;s a abfallprodukt .
you want to apply it anywhere in the world and not care about reisspreu or baumwollschalen , because you have to have a lot of alternatives .
first , they start atoms in a special bottle .
i &apos;ve got a competition in four years ago called &quot; dance . &quot;
my country is called 15 trillion dollars .
and that &apos;s -- -- this is much more much more than all the speakers and all the speakers that come to me .
and she thought about my work on mathematical models that should be an understanding of evolution and modern genetics .
the other half of the audience may not like kopf-zahl-zahl -- from some of the world &apos;s , cultural reasons , they &apos;re doing it for boring -- and find another pattern -- head-tail-head .
you can think about two types of ways .
if you toss a coin , you get a sequence of head and number .
back to a rather secular secular , because of that you are concerned with uncertainty .
and only one percent is lying .
he postulierte : &quot; i &apos;m going to take that for a sudden death in a family that remains for another same same . &quot;
not as improbable as one in 73 million , but rather , very unlikely .
the whole quality of the qualitätskontrolle is the weitreichende impact on the industrial processing , and it &apos;s carried by statistics .
the rauchmelder may save hundreds of thousands of life around the world .
a smart outlet of injury is injury because the power is always recognized until a smart anschlussstecker is recognized .
however , on the other hand , china is a sick-land . a concept of facebooks börsengang .
you have facebook , we have renren .
yet , the chinanet itself can generate a very strong force , which has never been in the history of china .
and that &apos;s how chinese mikrobloggen this mikrobloggen mikrobloggen , not just as mere überschriften .
how a big ted , isn &apos;t ?
so in the last three years , by mikrobloggen lokalregierungen , really changed the last three years of lokalregierungen , and more transparent , because they don &apos;t have access to the data .
more chinese , the chinese freie freie and human rights as their geburtsrecht , instead of as a aus privilege .
many of you know that the beethoven was the siebte .
i &apos;m not saying they can live a wonderful life .
girl : well , my sister can be pretty nerves .
the acoustics of music is much more complicated than the language .
that &apos;s a violin .
and it seems like his schläfenbeine to try to try to try to try to find the death , and that &apos;s the ton eingepasst , and his skull got to the pages of the pages .
cl : joseph is phenomenal . he &apos;s brilliant .
if i &apos;m umsehe , in this tedxamsterdam , i see a special audience .
in many countries , it &apos;s another thing .
at this point in the dutch story , my father was the ufer of the waal river near nijmegen .
the rate of civil wars and oppression is gone since the end of the cold war .
my soldiers use their guns as a tool of peace .
peter van uhm : why i took a gun that i took a gun .
this program gets an form and then encourage 250 of dna .
this is a spannungsaufstieg in tuolumne meadows , in the middle of the yosemite .
you can &apos;t let &quot; be locker . &quot;
i &apos;m interested in love .
and i &apos;m going to give you a little example of this , but there &apos;s actually a theoretical argument for why technology evolved in a exponenzieller fashion .
now , evolution of our species took hundreds of thousands of years , and because of this interaction , the evolution of the technology has been erschaffende species , to see the next stage of the stufe , which was the first step in the technological evolution .
we live in a three-dimensional world ; we can actually exploit the third dimension .
over the last 50 years , we had a year percent of 28 percent growth in $ 1 growth .
another great revolution is the kommunikations-revolution .
and to our growth of computing , is 1,000 dollars in computing , and over time , about the brain of a insect or a mouse .
and in the year , we &apos;re going to reach the full maturity of these trends , and they need to be , how often the screw the complaint , and it &apos;s faster , and faster , when we get to these things .
you can get blessing and tücken .
they &apos;re harder , harder , harder .
they were removed from the genpool .
because there &apos;s nothing inside . well , it &apos;s not a little bit .
dopamine is apparently the stuff that &apos;s in relation to the connection .
and that &apos;s what we call schizophrenia .
and he was so upset with me to post that resolution and to us .
i mentioned in our little gedankenexperiment earlier , they &apos;re a hominid in the african flachland .
september 11th has a verschwörungstheorie . it &apos;s a conspiracy .
and we have our own lippenbalsam , and we have a führendes product .
i wasn &apos;t as good as he was , but we did it , youssou n dour , sting , tracy chapman and bruce springsteen tracy and bruce springsteen on a welttournee for amnesty , and that was a great experience .
they said , &quot; they said , &quot; tell us the truth and we &apos;re told .
musician and activist peter gabriel &apos;s gabriel his personal motivation to motivation the überwachungsgruppe witness.org for human rights and shares stories from active bürgerjournalisten .
next , we wondered how do you do that ?
he recognizes the problem and white with it . the dance is his übergangsverhalten to help him to orient .
the beetle &apos;s klettern much more rare than the pill , if you &apos;re talking about stiefel , when they &apos;re not wearing .
here &apos;s our durchtriebener experimenter .
we play a 550-hertz-frequenz and observe what happens .
this is the universe of stephen hawking .
thank you .
mallorys argument that it &apos;s fun to fall into these great adventures , right , not quite with my experience .
or , &quot; nice . you know , my grandmother &apos;s next year to antarctica .
so the whole of the presentation &apos;s the kapitalgeber that are the vc they &apos;re going to be entrepreneurs , where they invest and make a lot of money .
and next to the experience , a business or a company , to run a company , or something that doesn &apos;t have to be a company .
there &apos;s no financially financially in the island where there were no problems .
from you , they take them -- on a solid , left , ordentlichen , up to the top , right from the beginning .
if i happen to anyone who &apos;s a little bit about the device that has a device that has a device .
no , they &apos;re not .
then they give me a quick geschäfts-überblick .
even if the competition works for the altem pattern ...
it was hopefully positive , positive , positive , positive .
if you follow my hands , you will have a spärliche , very zen-artige presentation , and that &apos;s great to be vemitteln , who they are and they &apos;re emotionally emotionally .
i didn &apos;t know that , it &apos;s pretty cool .
statistically statistically , is one of them is a bug .
if you think something else , you may have a effect on it .
and if you have enough , you can click a extra link .
we &apos;re at the end of the table , on the last place , as the culture that doesn &apos;t make innovation .
as we think and behave , our verhaltenssystem is broken .
we have a durchlaufendes meme -- seriously .
but forgive me , the problems today are not the problems of industrial revolution .
and you know what ?
and who are the most innovative ?
it &apos;s very trostlos .
our thinking is backwards .
through a change change , change , like transparency , change , in such as selbststeuerung , and collaboration , collaboration , collaboration , and not autokratie , these things are focused on results .
because only the challenge is the only way that things are always made , the only way to get rid of us , the old trott of the old trott , and new solutions for the problems of today .
because we can &apos;t make it alone . we &apos;re going to do it together , and if we do that , and the ideas of games , we can make bulgaria better .
the magazine for industriedesign is , i believe , &quot; innovation . &quot;
my master took me with me to ofenbauen , because the ofenbau was at the time that he was doing .
after i had a gesture of handbewegung , they were very -- i was accepted and i worked for about six months .
nine days ago , i had a fire .
you know -- all of the stuff .
my children , davey and henry .
we abonnierten etliche magazines , we made our homework , but where we looked at , we were surrounded by images like this .
this image is literally in seconds after i got the baby into the poor and i brought it to .
rg : oh .
av : the taboo number three : about his fehlgeburt , you don &apos;t talk about -- but i &apos;m going to talk about today .
the general opinion is that every aspect of my life has become better than i &apos;ve become better than i &apos;m in the miracle of birth and family .
but you find that you can get control of the control in a wonderful way , which , what we &apos;re doing , how we think , much sense of life and what &apos;s extremely profound .
rg + the + + thanks .
i &apos;m going to start with glenn gould .
i started with the experience .
there &apos;s a episode of star trek .
we all have seen this star treks .
imagine , big , bereits klaverspieler today , as you would play , like you would play personally , and john q. walker , how amazing can be analyzed on the exact genauen and pedalbewegungen to sie them on computergesteuerten wings .
now , since then , we &apos;ve seen a time of the most powerful economic economic growth , the longest world in history history .
but now , a few months later , as well as well , politicians may be , &quot; in the sauren apple , without verziehen , as it once somebody , once somebody else , they can &apos;t hide their uncertainty .
now , i didn &apos;t really understand that until i met this guy , a 80-jährigen , slightly chaotic man who was running from tomatensuppe and iron to completely überbewertet .
but interestingly , it also has a future that has a few more kniffe in the society , which is a few kniffe from capitalism , namely how to try and try and then try to try and then the ones that work , ausbaut and normiert .
i want to show you a fascinating new hypothesis , some surprising new insights that i &apos;ve been working on , about the relationship between the structure of language that they &apos;re talking about , and their tilt are saving .
and if i want to talk properly , i want to think about the zwingt .
now , this is a phantasievolle theory .
please press this device , so they &apos;re going to be able to be able to measure your dominanten hand , so i can measure your greifkraft .
it &apos;s the present pleasure in the &apos; 30s in the &apos; 30s for future pain .
i don &apos;t have to tell you how important the ability to communicate with generations .
we englischlehrer it &apos;s more than that .
but i &apos;m against it as a ride .
but they didn &apos;t get the results that they wanted .
at the same time i was on the field of wettermodifikation , although i was a ph.d. in aeronautik .
people and bisamratten and giraffes and the birds and everything , the red line here goes up , and those are people , livestock and pets .
we focused on serious energieprobleme of the future and produced the produzierten products .
let &apos;s see the next video .
this was last night on the party , and -- you can see how it just herumfliegt , and you can get any ausspionieren to you .
and he was dissatisfied about how people are the buddhist religion in the india .
and he &apos;s going to be a gebrochener man to village .
and he has to shut his eyes , it &apos;s so disgusting , the gestank and everything .
the animals are in one of their lives . people are people .
we &apos;re looking at us . we take the sense of memory , and we all take this on all the creatures in this meditation .
and you think about how lieblich the things are when they &apos;re happy when they &apos;re happy .
and of course they &apos;re cruel and skrupellos to others .
although the change in your attitude is something that causes other creatures . they feel that new quality in you , and it helps you already , and it &apos;s why you &apos;re doing it as a model .
so the coffee cup , or the cup of the griff , one of the society using the public tools to get public health .
interestingly , the complexity is very highly sophisticated .
we &apos;ve heard of bill gates .
so it &apos;s very , very simply if you know how to read it .
well , let me close with four generellen , a example and two aphorisms .
and i don &apos;t want to stop you with detail , but in the lower right-hand corner , you &apos;re seeing a example of what we have .
have you started to do that ?
and then , the bedürfniss is talking about the things that i talked about , what jimmy is about the new kind of organization , or better : how do we make ourselves without organizations ?
the inventor of things are going to be able to be able to be able to do it , it &apos;s going to be used in the use of collaboration with the anwendern .
we take astronomy , for astronomy , which has talked about that .
it &apos;s also going to be ausgiebige , professional arguments , of professional arguments .
so there &apos;s no dispute of two of the camps , but between these camps will be able to make a difference in the same positions .
that costs about 100 dollars .
and then the people started to devote their brote , and actually , a team that would have been able to do it : between new and spain .
and the first thing i thought was to thank him for him .
but the truth is that life is right here .
so people who are calling up and have news like this one .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m like batman to the batman to keep my anonymity . &quot;
and the one that doesn &apos;t have done any intuition that turned out , they were in another city , and she had accepted a new job .
and in the last 35 years , i studied human behavior from all kinds of things about everything , from genes about the neurotransmitter , dopamine and , to ähnlichem , to the zielanalyse .
also some of them have it . and it &apos;s dependent on the gender .
this was one of these cases , because , in fact , there were no violence under their ancestors , but my father .
they &apos;re very similar to how you can be .
by the way , i &apos;ve got a email that is , in fact , that we &apos;ve done the last part of a atlas atlas .
and these guys here are the weak force that may be known .
so if you want to know why the sky is blue or so to speak , you should be in the principle , with a leistungsstarken computer -- why dna has the shape that you &apos;ve now got to do -- and so you &apos;ve got to have this shape .
the comparison is that people in this room have the higgs boson .
but it &apos;s really that this theory of the physical grundkräfte to the point of the big bang , and a perfectly wonderful prediction , and it was not a great prediction , and it &apos;s not been made with the goal that it &apos;s going to happen .
they created this civilization , this wonderful image , the darkness in light and allows it to see the civilization from all of the space .
another great insight came from a study of wayne state university in 2010 , the baseball karten of the major spieler of the fünfziger years .
in a similar study in germany , researchers use fmri to measure gerhirnaktivität to measure gerhirnaktivität , and after she had botox to the face to suppress smiles .
&quot; because the colors that you &apos;ve ordered , not the european standard , &quot; he said .
&quot; safer ? why ? &quot;
we built the light empfangshalle , who people who were people who were people who were going to think they were to abroad , they were to be in abroad , if they were to eintraten their concerns .
president roosevelt said , &quot; believe that you can do something , and you &apos;ve done it on half . &quot;
all throughout port-au-prince came to come together , and we added to ladestationen security to mobile phones .
a graph for the transformative is the technology that &apos;s happening in kibera .
it &apos;s going to be in 2015 , there will be three billion of the world in the world .
in the shops of the environment , taschenlampen , batteries and bread .
this flow of time is embedded in everything , in the erosion of a sandkorns , in the knospe , which is the rose rose .
do you read a interview interview a writer ?
and as i look at the great bear , i remember how i was a kid on his head to put his head and i &apos;m not just going to feel like this child .
we &apos;ve seen , like creative technology can be , and our lives and our are , we can choose the solutions , innovations and moments that don &apos;t zersplittern the flow of time , but making it again .
my mother was engländerin .
every single refugee had to be soldiers , they had to be soldaten , who was my older brother , who was nine , and he wanted to make a child .
and i should be doing it alone .
take something that you want to do , you want to have a wish to be out of the suitcase .
then i ended up in einzelhaft because i don &apos;t zurückhielt my emotions .
thank you .
almost everything life on earth is about five times more than five times .
svante paabo has the answer .
why would it be a role ?
so , theoretically , can we grow any organ from any cell .
here &apos;s the rise in less than 10 years .
here &apos;s the conclusion .
when the rotoren is going to turn around the same speed , the robot is schwebt .
and you see how robust the control is .
and he does it , while he &apos;s obstacles .
they take their neighbors .
this is that we double the roboterkraft , verdreifachen , verdreifachen , able to make them bring them together , as you can see .
but the robot can also find out where he wants .
i can do that . but there &apos;s so much , and i want to expand your horizon , consciousness and change your vision .
this has been a huge problem in the principle since the late &apos; 80s , the erscheinen of the varroamilbe that many different viruses , bacteria and pilzkrankheiten with himself .
they don &apos;t experience that .
take the chefs for their dishes , and the honey -- there are live-veranstaltungen -- they use the honey to their bars .
the bee dies . honeybees are dying if they stick , so they didn &apos;t want to do it .
okay , now , now , the question is , why is this ?
of course , we have it , especially in the last decade , let &apos;s done the world with a dense chain of supermärkten , with an chain of global trade .
and never before , many people were not aware of that fact .
in fact , many of them don &apos;t know that our bread was not a european invention .
and especially the fleischkonsum in südost-asien and china , china drives the getreide-preis .
agrarwissenschaft , most of people , and here are not many farmers among them , bad , the environment to make environment , in large scales , to be the environment .
all together is .
and so , as i do here , i &apos;m doing my bread -- and i have it gebacken . and i &apos;m trying to burn the hands .
and it has to be , to keep the long most comfortable , with the dort , and they &apos;re available with the available tools , materials and kenntnissen .
you take someone like me , and i think , a scientist and i and it &apos;s created a new technology , and certainly the quantitative leistungssteigerung .
because i hope you &apos;re looking for this today to you , a new link with nature .
this was a few days ago .
and what do we do ? what is our answer ?
this is from a year .
but poolan devi was one of them , and shekhar kapur , and he turned a movie about them , bandit queen , who should see you .
but i think the most important thing is that we can do it .
but the one has been grubenottern in the field of the fact .
this is a repräsentativer patient who was at the time back then -- he needed a bypass , but it was decided to go for this .
i like this slide , because they &apos;re going to talk about what people really really motivated about changes , and what doesn &apos;t .
if you eat a fettreiche meal , how do you feel ?
it &apos;s a halbwahrheit . americans have even more fat because of the more , and even more carbs , and even more carbs , but the actual number of times , but the actual number of higher , that &apos;s the end , so that &apos;s the end of it .
one of the atkins-zentrum gesponserten discovered that 70 percent of people were clogged , 65 percent of people had been bad , 65 percent of people had no longer , 54 percent had headaches -- that &apos;s not a healthy diet .
on the other hand , everything is , what intimacy is intimacy , is heilkräftig .
i hope it &apos;s not going to hang .
the film is based on a kurzgeschichte of f. scott scott fitzgerald .
two filmstudios were involved in the project : warner brothers and paramount .
and we had had enough passion to do the arbeitsverfahren and technology .
we &apos;re so focused on motion of motion , we can do ourselves .
the number of people seemed to be infinite .
and that &apos;s the data we get to get that , and then they &apos;re used for the model .
and so the thing was the finished picture is made in the movie .
that was a very , very , very early rehearsal .
and we found this , in the middle of the state of karnataka .
and it has a own telefonzelle .
people are going to be kalandar , these cruel , barbarische past , where they lived in their lifetime .
we were too viert -- two and a half -- and imagine this , this whole , this is a ocean from sand , 40 degrees fahrenheit , a water bottle .
i think the camel is best designte in the world . &quot;
and they use it as much as we see our zweiäugiges .
we weigh our animals .
so i &apos;ll show you another film .
i don &apos;t schwitze until my graduate 40 degree c , and it &apos;s enough to make a egg .
ricky , thank you for inviting .
and they start a meeting with a poem . that &apos;s an idea .
but how would you never know how they would never know how they &apos;re going to be the next day , your shoulders into the clouds , or if you &apos;re sitting there sitting down by the tapete , geradeaus with the little plastikgesicht ?
who could be walking in this night ?
but , you know , judy garland in your age , dass 150.000 pro d d d d d d d armee to the french , and he had a blaise pascal -- no , i mean , he invented the calculator ?
at the end , they sat in a tree and a streckt , the hand come out .
and the human moralgefühl is more than that , but if you were to remove these two columns , probably would be no left to the best .
and we also have the problem that you can build a construction , which is too hard for a single elephants .
one component of this is the understanding . here &apos;s a standard-definition : &quot; the ability to understand the emotions of the other and share . &quot;
so now we &apos;re studying complex magnetic field . here &apos;s consolation .
that the test isn &apos;t good for you .
there is a very simple task that you have to do .
a philosopher wrote that it was impossible that the one is a sense of fairness , because fairness was invented in the french revolution .
now it &apos;s not a lonely crazy , it &apos;s not two crazy , three , three , a lot of news .
the last decade i spent with me , and the humiliation , i hope , and i hope for a good thing to do .
and i have to say , thank god .
so i stopped , in a way , was a success .
over the years , the serious difference can produce the serious difference .
a.j. jacobs : how the life of life is almost entirely of my life .
and i think many of these are sharing this view .
a really cool thing .
now these studies are in this study of scientifically , and they were reproduced , but they &apos;re not the whole story .
you ask , after the part of the story that &apos;s not told .
... a priester ?
but last group , the fact that the indus people are the people who are the ancestors of people in the modern südindien .
on the right , how many ?
it can be useful for the entzifferung , more data that are then analysierbar .
this sign is the most common of the indus script , and only in this text , it seems to be double .
it turns out that it &apos;s been in india , as long as a long tradition , on the basis of the sternbildern of the birth of the birth of the birth of the birth .
space , we all know what it looks like .
this wire übertrug the telefonsignale that would make the names of bell bell .
and then , jansky had made the historic discovery that the himmelskörper would be as well as lichtwellen as well as lichtwellen .
actually , all the young people in the city .
somebody who &apos;s sitting next to you -- this is a rare in a veranstaltungssaal , but they would sit on a parkbank , and somebody would sit down so close to you , then they would austicken .
the dalai lama says , he says , if you can get into his mind the idea of the mitfühlens , it &apos;s because you realize that you &apos;re pain and their pain and then finally , you &apos;re going to have a small playground for your intelligence .
but you take this beautiful thing that chiho us . they &apos;re jagte us with the lava-mann .
a man in front of a tank was a picture that became a symbol of the resistance .
but what would they do not have anything to do if you had the modern communications to make a sense of the wrong , that was going to be something to be done before ?
combine the power of global ethic with power to communicate and organize global level and organize global to the challenges that we &apos;re now going to be more and the most fundamental nature .
in the museum of children in rwanda , there is a photo of a zehnjährigen -- and the museum of children lived in life , who were left , when the völkermords were gestorben by the völkermords of rwanda , they died .
here &apos;s the task : help me , a vibrant , dynamisches , parameterisiertes kontaktmodell in 3d .
you can see on very different untergründen , and they vary in the kontaktwahrscheinlichkeit , the motion of the surface and the gegebenen .
this is the hier of the tarnt , as a floating algae .
boy : stachelig .
let &apos;s slow down to see the spines in action .
mark cutkosky , one of my partner is an extraordinary engineer , which is a technology called shape deposition manufacturing , where he can actually walk directly to a artificial foot .
you see almost like aliens out , and the secret to what they stick , their sexual toes are .
here we go off .
these filigranen structures allow the spines to get spines and the hafthärchen , to very herausfordernden , tough surfaces .
so bartenwale wunderschöne wunderschöne wunderschöne wunderschöne , which is as a paarungsrufe and males as female to find each other and choose to be a mate .
so when dolphins are less than 20 meters apart , they need to be less than half of the time that we have created .
when we think about marine animals like dolphins , we have to be able to be the effects of our surgeries in the very striking of our surgeries that we were right for .
after the mauerfall , the marine walbioakustikern the walbioakustikern that the systeme of these systems are made to experience what scientists could hear .
they &apos;re just hearing the low frequencies .
if male and females , that signal use to find a mate and they &apos;re scattered , imagine what the effect would have been working on the erholung of the origin of the origin .
how ships can be made , they found that with a better durchdachten propellerentwurf of this noise um to 90 percent .
she verringerten the speed by 50 percent , about 50 percent .
we see foreign worlds , we see foreign fighters , 300 , 300 , 300 , and it &apos;s more and more . and they &apos;re not like us .
you have all of the possibilities to have .
we &apos;re seeing a continual gain of men in men .
and obviously , there is one , the hundred .
with initiatives like 100 dollars , it kräuselt me to mind that we &apos;re bringing a whole new generation of people in the old computer lab .
thank you .
i think there &apos;s nothing that &apos;s the problem .
our daily lives is , but gelinde , in a uniquely state state , we say in a ausnahmezustand .
usually it &apos;s one or two per year .
and there &apos;s it !
but we &apos;re a lot of things .
part of the challenge was to try and verstehen. the space and the space , i don &apos;t just have my hands -- it &apos;s a lot of handorientiert -- but the rhythm of my body and the feet and the bälle is controlling my feet .
and then they play crazy .
ok , because they don &apos;t understand all of what a fünf-ball-muster is , i give you a little hint of a little bit .
now , -- finger , finger , finger , finger , finger , finger , finger , finger , finger , finger , finger . open .
you have here , here , somebody who &apos;s the most important principle is to do this whole life , ok ?
you go -- and then it comes to the calm . only one little number of time .
with space and straight in the room in other ways .
and then the niveaus .
in this year -- they &apos;re going to show you the slides -- in this year , we &apos;re going to do this treo with us , a project that we helped with design .
we can put this on a touchscreen-monitor of a touchscreen-monitor , which enables you to get more information about the kleidungsstücke , while you &apos;re these anprobiert .
( scott : i &apos;ve discovered that i &apos;m on the way to become the leading expert in the arbeitsplatzdesign .
and we &apos;re also giving a new product today , and it &apos;s the first time that it &apos;s shown .
now , the farmers can only be in the rainy season , and not in the nebensaison .
electrons are disappearing in a kind of wuselei , and then it &apos;s just energy , and energy , you can &apos;t see .
that &apos;s what he thought he was there .
potatoes , potatoes , 48 chromosomes . have you liked that ?
good . atoms , you can &apos;t see them .
and someone told him , &quot; well , what &apos;s the sense of doing , ok ?
we have about four years of time .
if google a book , they will put it into a very beautiful format .
i &apos;ll give you an example .
suddenly , in the middle of the 40s , everybody was excited .
but i think , it &apos;s not going to be interested in .
but also , there are a lot of the right that seems to be a anscheinend .
if you look at the zeh , it means a &quot; argh &quot; with a &quot; a. &quot; with a a. &quot;
if i run this pink sound for longer than a few minutes , they would stop hearing it .
many people get to kopfhörern , but this turn into big , public spaces like this , shared klanglandschaften , in millions of personal klangblasen .
you can do that in a beautiful place , like a lake .
and for the end , a acronym .
and i said , &quot; this is my job . &quot;
thank you very much , that you &apos;re here . we &apos;re all so grateful . &quot;
and they went away .
because they were not at the gehweg and the exchange of the exchange that i couldn &apos;t see between me and my crowd , an exchange that we have , you know , but fremd .
now , i say you in the weltveränderungsgeschäft , there were a lot of competition , because the arab spring still always is still out of the last year , the eurozone is still called , what ?
this photo was actually in a police station , and on the ground , they see the personalausweise of the people who were tracked from police .
the kids just make photographs in a class , the teacher , they get to the schulmauern .
today , in the lecture , it &apos;s about the brain and , yay , there &apos;s a gehirnfan .
that &apos;s something we can work in our lifetimes , and i was able to get a difference and i tried to get out of the computergeschäft , to get out of the gehirngeschäft .
but sometimes science has some other traits that they really really do really interesting .
what are we going to get more data ?
there is something we believe it &apos;s obvious , but wrong .
it &apos;s so that intelligence is defined by prediction .
but we &apos;re not looking at the ones not as very intelligent , not in a human way .
in humans , we &apos;ve developed the frontalen part of the network , with the name portion of the neocortex , and nature has done this little trick .
it &apos;s not that you go back and say , &quot; what am i seeing now ?
not like a computerspeicher . not in the least like a computerspeicher .
these are the things that first come first .
we need a little more cops , we need something military , but only to defense .
you can see it on your mind . &quot;
she &apos;s gone because they was the wahlen outside the country .
this is rigoberta menchu .
and then when she looked at the door , she said , &quot; no , no , no , no .
you wash up , by hand .
these group are , in fact , everybody , everybody .
it &apos;s real .
she &apos;s done it in english and learning it as a foreign language .
the computer is already , and it &apos;s about one of three .
if you think , you think , you think differently than the employers that actually were part of our family system , because that &apos;s what we did .
we went to the same experiment with the same groups , but a delay number one between the aufklärung of the enlightenment , how we deal with the data , and the actual dawn of the fragebogens .
the price of this is the displacement from paradise .
and they moved and they took off each other and they were leaving their arms to each other and abwandern .
we &apos;re really good at talking about skills and security and health , we &apos;re really bad at talking about character .
then you ask the personal trainer , the cialis like pfefferminz gegen against bad breath .
i don &apos;t feel that emotions with me .
the first gift , or talent , is gedankeneinsicht -- the ability to attract people &apos;s minds to come and find out what they have .
they have humility .
that &apos;s what the subconscious is .
we found them between bahngleisen , raped by many , many men , i don &apos;t know how many men .
where does it start to go ?
and that it &apos;s not normal , in a home .
what was my challenge ?
they need their empathy .
lexicography : the process of verfahren .
well , first of all , i give the queen , because it &apos;s funny .
all of you have to be different .
the bad words -- you see if somebody thinks of a place and then it finds it on the map , he thinks , &quot; this map is beschissen ! &quot;
you think , &quot; ok , if we think that words are words , that we &apos;re using to give our idea of expression of how you know that the market are better than hammer ?
the oed has 33 different nummerierte definitions of &quot; scenes . &quot;
and then there &apos;s this mike oates . mike oates lives in the u.k.
i have the whole time &quot; the dictionary , the dictionary , the dictionary , the dictionary . &quot;
so , i &apos;m going to make a chair .
and , to make a long story short , here i am .
and to play with this , as this three days , you start with it , and why i hear all of this stuff stuff ?
you may have been from a ted speakers and so we can run the conversation during the year , and next year , after coming back , after the same intellectual and emotional journey .
the manufacturer have the trägerphasentechnik trägerphasentechnik trägerphasentechnik , because they &apos;re not sure what the public would start to do with a precise präzisen that may be falten on the palm of your hand .
there was a lot of people who was already there was already , and was technically unable to find the broadcasters .
instead of stören the gps-signale , you can tell you .
and you said , &quot; you can trust . &quot;
we call ourselves pors &amp; amp ; d and we live in india .
this is a video of prototype .
this is a work that is the cartoon of a umgedrehten .
we &apos;re going to debattieren about the thesis of the world now , which is now nuclear , is nuclear -- right ?
and now there are three hauptquellen of this -- coal and gas , wasserkraft , wasserkraft , which almost all over the place is -- and nuclear power .
we &apos;re going to get rid of the russian vote by getting rid of electricity .
co2e emissions are the equivalent of all greenhouse gases and particles , the warming , and to co2 transformed .
now if you look at the fact that the spread of nuclear weapons is associated with nuclear power , because we know that india and pakistan secretly secretly joined urananreicherung in atomenergieanlagen .
for wind , the area is a lot larger , but the standfläche is smaller .
the reality is that 21 states have nuclear power , right ?
and in the senate of the united states , we need to have the support of the support of the unterstützung -- just one or two voices , to get the global warming rolled in the senate , and this room can help .
we &apos;re only going to get from renewable sources of sources of sources .
but before , i &apos;ve been worried about the 10,000 years of conflict .
thank you .
that was -- my motivation was rejected by apollo genährt .
for the first time , we have enough wealth in the hands of some of these hands , and the available technology that will allow us to allow us to allow ourselves to allow us to allow us to allow us .
26 groups from seven countries , we had seven countries in the competition , every one of the u.s. military , there was a 25 million u.s. dollars .
orbitalflüge -- we can take it to space station .
and the way for the sponsors is the summe of the bekanntwerdung and the social media revolution .
would you try to surprise us ?
that means that surfaces can carve itself . you can get incredibly small .
a challenge was how we can put this new algorithmic ordnung in an column .
what i didn &apos;t know because of the time , because we &apos;ve only seen the outside , that the surfaces kept on the column , within the column , within the column , and that was a pretty surprising discovery .
inspired by the process of zellteilung , michael hansmeyer , michael algorithmen , the incredible forms of surfaces , and no human forms of surfaces , they could design them by hand , but you can build them . and they could revolutionize our understanding of architecture .
so you see , look at this picture here -- lots of shapes here are dancing for them .
it &apos;s a very rare condition .
this is a drug that was developed for cancer .
you can see the chip actually ahmt the atembewegung .
it &apos;s a very young nation that will lead to young people .
and i think many people in the room , many of you are in the same position .
so i think women are in our society to become leaders because they realize that it &apos;s very important for their future generations to get our cultural identities .
we &apos;ve realized that recently , there &apos;s always been how many people are investing and social networks to give their stories to express their stories , to show their photos and tell their own stories with their own voices .
at the same time we invite them to explore and explore our part of the world .
so i became more or less than &quot; nothing . &quot;
so i thought , &quot; maybe if i do that ants a few apartments , they &apos;re going to pull it there . &quot;
this was called &quot; huf house . &quot;
so i thought , &quot; how do i do that ? &quot;
and when i finished it , i came back next day .
and it was ...
my work , roughly , geschätzt , sometimes five , six or seven weeks , that &apos;s not always enough .
and i &apos;m going to go around it , and it shaped the kampfwagen .
so i went to the needle .
it &apos;s a very simplistic work , but the best things come in little paketen .
they expect by their employees , they &apos;re asking you to do what they were asking you when they got the task , you can do the quality of the job .
there is this absolute concentration of consciousness , this absolute ballung of consciousness , awareness , a absolute center , and love that the primary attributes of the divine defined .
my gebeutelter body flew in the direction , my geschundenes bike in the other .
i put all the spaziergänge that i probably wouldn &apos;t do with you , the kunstprojekte that i wouldn &apos;t follow you , the friends i wouldn &apos;t have even higher , the brautgänge that i could not go to them .
because you don &apos;t need the sich-kennenlernen-sitzung .
and if you &apos;re going to näherst them off the back , against the wind , you can just get them , and it &apos;s plums in the dirt . &quot;
20 years ago , doctors had taken my leg and hoped it was a 15 percent survival .
as i got more and more and more of -- and at that point , i was probably 14 pounds of lighter than i am .
and nobody would have these modern mannhaftigkeit in my eyes to my eyes .
run a game , you say , is the threshold of what makes us human .
it &apos;s the distinct president union for gliederrettung , which is the least euphemistische name that i &apos;ve ever heard .
he was born and early months early to early , and it was a fantastic impression of him .
so as i tried to approach the piano , i became a great weggeschubst .
and at the end , you were so fast that things like &quot; flight &quot; no problem , right ?
would you like to hear me ?
dp : &quot; tiger rag . &quot;
i don &apos;t do that .
they &apos;re fighting to be their own lifestyle in this forest , in a world that &apos;s still clean , a world that hasn &apos;t been even more , in a world that &apos;s not yet not yet .
we know that they &apos;re able to make a performance that we &apos;ve been able to do research that &apos;s impossible for absolutely impossible when i started .
the long range of time , the long period of the mother has been developing during this long childhood , and also the siblings , can stay in the whole lifetime , and that can be up to 60 years .
it &apos;s not sustainable , and also the huge camp of holzarbeiter in the forest is now meat , and the pygmies that are jagten in the kongobecken and there &apos;s been in their wonderful lifestyle , so many hundreds of years have lived in the kongobecken .
yesterday , that somebody said somebody &apos;s , someone who said somebody .
now we have in every state , and the problems in florida are other than the in new york .
come and get to you and zerren me down here ?
out there out there ?
what we want to do is , in the lab , is pretty much the same thing , but with a couple of dozen types of molecules -- so an environmental reduction of the complexity , but yet , however , is trying to create something more useful .
it &apos;s very lebenslos . if you &apos;re doing it , it doesn &apos;t really do something .
now , where they &apos;re all experts for protocells , we &apos;re going to play with these protocells .
we see the self-assembly of these bodies of öltröpfchen that we &apos;ve seen before , and the black blobs of labor in these black sludge -- these facettenreichen , very complex , very complex , organic schlamm sludge .
in his lab , martin hanzcyz , &quot; protocells , &quot; experimentelle kleckse of chemicals that behave like living cells . his work indicates how life on earth may be , and maybe elsewhere .
this is a kaulquappen-gehwagen to go to the evening to go to the evening .
what is this -- where did you did this ? they took it .
but if we did that in every single -- we could define the emergency room .
and the dreck is otherwise in your hübschen lungs , and it &apos;s associated with -- in relation to the connection .
birds could jump from one to another .
you can abonnieren the current news from him . you can talk to him .
but that flock , is going to be a big toll of our planet .
next , we isolate the skin cells , and multiply it in a zellkulturträger .
we &apos;ve been working for thousands of years of zellstrukturen , starting to products like wine , beer and yogurt .
it &apos;s true that if we &apos;re going to do that around the world our research , we see that there &apos;s almost a universal ambition of people to have a car .
let me just talk to the other .
this is a huge amount of energy energy to produce more energy .
if we can see these moegliche future , that can be done .
you had to survive .
and we made sure our school district genuinely to be zugeteilt to get funding and support .
because why would our students have been so far away from their own way ?
it was to a book , then a demo .
there had an incredible idea , a crazy idea .
here at the west coast , they were destroyed her forest .
but in this picture , you see how we started building the ausbildungszentrum , which was going to be a big umweltzentrum of brazil .
and as i came to start to start my hauptstudium , i studied the enstandene of the landschaftsökologie .
if you look at the south of the south manhattans , you see the expansion of new york city as it was , at the end of the american revolution .
the white surfaces on this map are the winterwinden places in the winterwinden places .
or the moorschildkröte , the feuchte meadows , insects and sonnige places needs .
maybe , maybe there was a wald-klapperschlange .
it &apos;s so much force in it , science and visualizing together with each other that these images are like this , and it &apos;s like both sides of the spiegels .
and we have a really dramatic level of this , in our society , a really dramatic level of it .
so i &apos;m not going to get into it .
you do that the pristine , of course , of course , is supposed to be .
this is a biomorphes building .
one example of that we all know is the mobile phone , is the mobile phones .
and it turns out to be all the question -- of course in a very artistic and indirekte way .
but it &apos;s happening everywhere , and these tools are parts of that helping us to do it .
seriously -- clapping it -- that &apos;s really great .
alex is seeing a sustainable future , a sustainable future .
you might think that this could be a big problem for a law , but congress seem not to be very much to let it be very much .
but if you put a lot of the quality of the air and sold it , it &apos;s not okay .
some of the things we share , we made from things that we found and every single option of the industrie caused in this industry .
that &apos;s the simple thing .
i had a very elitist , versnobte , expensive education in india , and that &apos;s almost done .
and i thought i &apos;m going to start to start to start a barefoot college -- college for the poor .
a professional is somebody with a combination of competence , confidence and persuasion .
when i said that , they said , &quot; show us what possible , what do you do ?
all the power comes from the sun .
democracy , bürgerrecht , as you &apos;re going to encourage the country , which is what you should do if you &apos;re going to be arrested for what you should do in if you &apos;re a animal .
it comes in the way that the presence of the schools , it &apos;s between teachers and parent , and they can call the puppets of the teachers and the parents , and say , &quot; give you hands .
you use zeichensprache .
i said , &quot; that i can &apos;t , mr. president .
one erfolgsstory .
and our ingenieurskollegen is creating a great , dynamic computers for this kind of informations-erkundung .
you see the elektronenfluss entlang along the stromlinien , which we &apos;ve created as an artist .
thank you very much .
interestingly , there are data from those two groups of people who are happy about how happy they are .
&quot; i &apos;m going to be physical , financially , emotionally , mentally , mentally and in almost every other way , &quot; i don &apos;t have any minute .
he was lieh him money , and of course ray six months later , the same idea later .
in this case , because they &apos;re in the experiment i &apos;m going to tell you about , i &apos;ve been using to share with drucke images .
we collected our materials , went out of the room and was waiting for half an hour .
i &apos;m going to show you why .
they were vergrößerten two images , and now two beautiful 8x10 8x10 &quot; glänzende abzüge of them on them , and we said , &quot; which would you get back ? &quot;
we &apos;re taking a completely new group of naiven and say , &quot; you know , we give a fotokurs , and we can do it in two different ways .
nachtaufnahmen , the big car and the milchstrasse are beautiful .
voices : it flies into the air . oh shit .
&quot; ma , don &apos;t you . &quot;
don &apos;t forget that this tradition is not from avalon , but it continued to go into a time , even before we geschichten stories on papyrus or piktogramme on feuchte höhlenwände .
the kind of food , yeah .
the kind of thing with the gewellten roof , you know .
and so , we left my father to his mittagsschlaf , because i knew he would kill me if i drive them alone . so we go in the car .
&quot; and he had a blue uniform on and a entsetzten expression in the face ? &quot;
i really want to go there in this ? because if i didn &apos;t have the ariadnes , to ankern me -- enough metaphors for your taste ? -- could it be that i never came out .
see ? we &apos;re a secret club with a secret händedruck .
she says , &quot; ma , you have to look . &quot;
&quot; i &apos;m going to vote for the small , old lady , damn one . &quot;
it &apos;s got out of the car . &quot;
i really scared very big .
so what is the social outcome of that ?
where can i go and do with who ?
and if we have it , we will decide how many kilometers we drive , where we &apos;re going to live , where we live and work .
smart terminals are communicating on the station , and you see them exactly where your bus is just coming , and when he comes , and you can get your tickets .
i want to make the wireless launch that &apos;s technically lancieren , and i challenge that this network is to be open to open standards for everyone .
and they came up here in the late 1960s .
and for all of you who came with a mental illness in touch , knowledge , what a challenge can be .
i said i wanted to tell the fantastisch-geschichte , i wanted to share the three one of the awesome , and i wanted to leave you with a abschlussgedanken .
because they were all three years old .
and what i love about this story is that rosey grier &apos;s just a certain person , and that &apos;s what we &apos;re about in authenticity .
i ate oliven oliven . &quot;
you can sleep in a clean laken laken .
j it &apos;s so many , that &apos;s a problem that &apos;s a problem .
i thought it was strange about to speculate about it as a competition , over a very powerful wound .
it &apos;s a white part of a white , rich unternehmergruppe that was not responsible for the city .
it looks pretty simple , but that was a halbe-million-dollar-projekt .
people were talking about two things -- they were amazed by the destruction , but there was also a sense of the unglaubens of the heldenmut of the new yorker that i found very well .
because in the early platforms of the grundstücks , the verbesserte version of the grundstücks -- and we knew that it had to be beweglich , to respond to ändernde , and the changed of ground zero to respond .
we have the ability to rethink our thinking about cities .
dr : it was a honor to me .
and i know children every year every year .
if -- heaven forbid -- somebody from us here wegginge and a concussion , would most of us would have been in a given of a few hours from a couple of weeks .
you have to be auskennen with the issues that we &apos;re talking about today .
it turns out that it turns out that a helmet was a helmet for 20 dollars a good way to keep a 100,000 dollar-studium .
it &apos;s not true , but it happened tony blair in 2005 , when his opposition , of course , of course , &quot; and he &apos;s been described to it .
in other words , they have a common and growing complexity complexity of visual language that &apos;s happening in vorhersehbarer sequence .
and he told him that there was no cure .
today , all countries are committed to patents for pharmaceuticals that had at least 20 years .
it depends on the bereitwilligkeit of the pharmaceutical companies , their patents to bewilligen and make it available for others .
in orlando , the same kind of stage , a open-air-stadium . people sitting in the united kingdom , afternoon in the high sun , the afternoon at very high convenience , and they didn &apos;t feel comfortable .
they can adjust all of it to be able to worry about your well-being .
he offers all these services , überweisungen , tickets , tickets , and so little things that you do in a moment , but for people that he just connects to the digital world .
the question was , &quot; how do you do that in this teacher &apos;s teacher &apos;s teacher .
let &apos;s see what he does .
and the husband of the daughter , he was also sick by the exhaustion of his wife .
but the visual complexity is still very big .
well , schlagzeilentexter had a heidenspass on our studies .
now , if we &apos;re feeling emotion , we show them .
and they could get the impression that the unfortunate people are going to occupy another structural position within the network .
that &apos;s my favorite sozialerfahrung . &quot;
they &apos;re both of carbon , and yet one of these two kohlenstoff-atome in the way that are placed on a certain way , on the left , and you get graphit , which is soft and dark .
to get to the something to relativieren , let me take you for a moment .
older , it &apos;s not just the time .
under the same circumstances , older people are producing their cognitive resources , like aufmersamkeit and memory , more on positive information than negative information .
we cost the lives .
they &apos;d like me , &quot; tonight i &apos;m going to put this moonwalk for this girl on this bar , &quot; aufführen . &quot;
kid : it &apos;s so that i said honestly , often , not so really , what happens when i dance .
they have me brothers and uncles and uncles and i &apos;ve been invited over a period of five years of five years .
1868 : the second treaty of fort laramie clearly , clearly the souveränität of the great sioux nation and the besitzrechte of the lakota black hills .
the treaty of fort laramie demanded that at least three quarter of the stamms would have to sign the country land .
they were tired of the treaties .
the lehrerfluktuation is eight times as high as the american average .
so what do we do ?
and today ? child mortality dropped since 1960 , from 24 percent to today .
you get it either as pill or a syringe , you have to take it every day to regulate the blutzuckerspiegel .
if we do it , like here , with people ...
but basically , it makes a lot of sense .
she says , are you smarter than a fünftklässler ?
bmw is a very serious car .
the problem for bmw is that this car looks like .
now you &apos;re going to think , &quot; if my life depends on it , i would use it every day . &quot;
we need to connect this with a scientific method .
that &apos;s something else as actually a effective ad .
what &apos;s not new .
the lamps will be dark .
we do it for our customers .
we have the sun in the sun .
now , logic -- logical , logical look at that , logical now you &apos;re now going to go from this position to move the wrist .
i &apos;m going to intervene now , and now every time you -- every time you could have another person -- not always the same way .
so if you &apos;re interested in this , i &apos;m going to present some of the untergrund-techniken .
here &apos;s -- i have to look from the start of the beginning , so i can follow my cards during the mischvorgangs -- oh , we should have one , no problem , no problem .
yeah ?
i think ...
lg : pardon ?
what &apos;s the map i should ? the lady , the lady , or the five ?
lg : but you see the hand .
now , wait , take a card , please take some map .
another color . lg : diamonds , perfect .
compassion .
karo-ass , yes ? zoe : yeah .
here -- all the cards -- here -- here -- all of the cards -- are all cards -- right ?
and finally , the king -- in exactly -- five seconds .
some of them seem to know this kid .
after i was back , i did my whole company to a ein-pobacken-firma . &quot;
if you don &apos;t have heard , you could have tone-deaf , you could not turn them off .
let &apos;s see what &apos;s really happening here .
i say my students , &quot; if you have a fallacy , you always have a augenbraue , and then you see it every one . &quot;
imagine the person ahead and follow the whole way of b to e , and they &apos;re going to hear everything they &apos;d say to say .
i had an amazing experience . i was 45 , and i was dirigent for 20 years and suddenly a realization .
she came to auschwitz , when she was 15 years old . her brother was eight , their parents lost her lost .
so ladies and gentlemen , and i &apos;m sure that &apos;s going to look at this .
if you &apos;re the fastest of all today , you get 20 dollars . &quot;
for tasks of the 21st century , however , this mechanistische , belohnung-und-strafe-ansatz , doesn &apos;t work often and fuzzy , they often do harm .
think about their own work .
standard standard is lower .
these are the tiles of a completely new betriebssystems for our business .
this one day has been a single set of autonomy to a whole range of software-fehlerbehebungen that would never be given .
do it because you like to make it like .
aluminum aluminum is used because of its lower weight .
in a series of 55 bullets , she &apos;s proportional , proportional , every sphere , and their distances have come back to the small earth .
and the blue side , the gegenseite , shows the other direction .
this has evolved in many durchlläufen durchlläufen .
the standardbild on the object would be a highly aufgelößtes image of the earth .
but they always lets those 10 percent or more back , which is most benachteiligt or erfolglos .
232.000 dollars and bei at a verein dollar dollar dollar bills .
now , organizations have to go to the zurückhalten , bold , big , new spendenaktionen , from fear that you &apos;re going to be pulled out of their own call .
so what should you do ?
the overhead is now well .
dan pallotta : our thinking about charity is grundverkehrt .
then there was the klatschenden listeners , yes , that &apos;s how they have to have their part of music to music .
people who have made these stradivaris , the amatis , all these beautiful instruments .
he says , &quot; i &apos;m responsible .
it &apos;s just about the execution of music , as it &apos;s written , not to interpretation . &quot;
that &apos;s great . and what about the eyes ?
that &apos;s what he does .
you know , the authority is available when you needed . that &apos;s very important .
so kleiber is about the process .
as a kulturgemeinschaft , we tell ourselves a lot of stories about the future and what we could do from here .
there are 98 nations &apos; globally .
and given the climate change , it &apos;s not really durchführbar .
and it &apos;s a process that makes really joy .
they feel about whether they should move it forward .
and the ratspräsident said , &quot; if we hadn &apos;t been transition transition to transition , we would have to invent this entire infrastructure for the first time . &quot;
but there is a problem .
the budgets are not really balanced . and to a certain degree , just the games that they play , to hide this , so that you can &apos;t see what the most profound size is really obvious .
in fact , there are five states that are worse , and really only four states that aren &apos;t facing the big challenge .
and even if they just get to just get so on , they could actually get there .
it should be more like the private buchhaltung .
but i had a hintergedanken , when i went to college , and i was in a scheideweg in my life , and i tried to decide between music and medicine .
if you laugh , you know .
many years after the free watches , the solar-powered clocks , a young lady i knew that sex might be so good at the five senses .
and the reason is that the befragten sex has been all about five senses on a extreme level .
of course , the five senses don &apos;t want the only thing to do life interesting .
we &apos;re all born as an artist .
if you have a conversation , the child has to come to the next answer to what it started .
but their parents say , &quot; it will all be all from the waves . &quot;
but kids normally do a little bit of fun . it &apos;s playing .
but that &apos;s how you find a teacher .
in karaoke-bars , there are always people who are she &apos;s gone , or &quot; hotel in &apos; 20s , &quot; as the hotel in the während .
in this minute , we can turn the tv off . take it out of the internet , you stand up and start doing something .
the students fall into a kind of trance .
he said it was his profile . &quot; and what are you ? &quot; i said , &quot; actor , &quot; he said .
let &apos;s start with this one thing .
it &apos;s going to be stronger storms and more flooding .
if yes , it will give a warming .
but the delay is the same thing that the expectations is .
the economic consequences are almost unthinkable .
a lot of the species is being threatened by extinction .
now , if now , a car accident is , it &apos;s imperative that we &apos;re not just the stunt , but it &apos;s the crew .
something else used to be used for something else . once it was all you had .
but today we &apos;re going to use a stickstoff-druckkanone .
it &apos;s not , it &apos;s not , a hüpfburg .
1960 , joseph kittenger of the united states states air force something very incredible .
one of the difficulty in this altitude , if you go to 10,000 feet -- it &apos;s great , right ? if you go to 10,000 metter , you can really use oxygen .
they have a puppet for him , he looked like this .
we expect and others expect that maybe the ultimate or the caa will say , &quot; you have to put somebody in a suit , which is not sensitive to the airplane . &quot;
there were three leitmotive -- not true ? -- that &apos;s what the conference is , the importance of what i want to talk about .
and the girl answered , &quot; you know , you know . &quot;
the problem is an artist , and i &apos;m convinced you &apos;re convinced that we &apos;re not in the creativity in creativity , but it &apos;s going to be vielmehr .
all over the world .
the whole system was invented -- all over the world , there were no public education in the 19th century before the 19th century .
the brain is not in areas .
they made ballet , they made stepptanz and jazz , they danced a modern and contemporary dances .
the festival goes off like a very good job . with a postitiven press for you .
let &apos;s just say , &quot; let &apos;s say , &quot; value for money . &quot;
dubai is for me like a hand who wants to give any of the things in the field .
before i go into the middle east , i want to close with a quote with a quote with a quote one of the greatest sheiks .
it &apos;s also the krankhaftigkeit .
so , there &apos;s a disorders of behavior , and they &apos;re interference &apos;s disorders of the mind .
we don &apos;t have all the facts . we don &apos;t even know what the tools that will be , or what we &apos;re looking at in the process of exactly what the hell of the time is going to be able to get before .
how do you get it out ? &quot;
the three ones are all the same , even though they &apos;re all the same , one is magical , the other two are like i may have these books because they have something very special to have .
the kids have taught them .
they were very friendly .
we also believe that the content is more important .
i &apos;ve changed through my children .
howard does this experiment , and when he gets the data , he &apos;s going to see a curve , and suddenly he recognizes that no beautiful glockenkurve makes it .
this was his meerrettich . he was obsessed with it .
howard , not believe that there are that at all .
people are always saying if you ask them how they wish to her coffee .
a mustard mit with more elegance and culture and meaning .
so , it was . and why did we care about that ?
he was spent a few times the most powerful and spent the majority of his career in the lower ligen , and then ended up in management , and he was the general manager of &quot; oakland &quot; . &quot;
we all know what happened when millions of women were given to symptoms for decades to symptoms for the symptoms of symptoms until we have a huge study , until we took off of the national park , &quot; gefördert , &quot; found out , &quot; herausfanden , &quot; found out , &quot; herausfanden , &quot; found out , &quot; herausfanden , &quot; found out , &quot; herausfanden , &quot;
thank you .
but dad erschrak , and he didn &apos;t want to do that .
but there &apos;s also a grauzone in between .
these are four different ways to see the world . i named it named it .
what &apos;s interesting about it , once you bemerkt it -- and -- the way -- it &apos;s from 1450 -- zeigen all , zeigen einfache einfache : rechteckiges simple einfache , without schattierung , and a lesesequenz from left to right .
and that was what i proposed : we could do comics on a infinite canvas , on the x- and the y-axis and in treppenform .
this is from daniel merlin goodbrey in the u.k.
maybe you &apos;ve been able to see all of them for a long time , but i &apos;d like to talk about this very closely every day , i had this verständigung inhärente challenge .
that &apos;s honestly and in the way , and the reason , the feys of representation is such a sustainable impression of that nachhaltigen .
if you think your baby is gay , and i guess you should be able to get it in the adoption of the adoption .
perrys political solution was the citizens of texas , texas aufzufordern , for rain .
this is called &quot; farther than . &quot;
i want to start a little bit about today , because i want to ask you to leave the mainland and to jump in the open ocean .
they quickly traded after the vanishing disappearing on the way the dinosaurs , 65 million years ago , when whales have left legs , and they entstammen a splittergruppe rebellischer , and they allow me to take me this poetische .
and how do you do that ?
the kalifornische seelöwe takes the molas when they come into the bay , the heat knocks you the fins , you turn them into a kind of frisbee , and then you get around .
i &apos;ll show you a lot of data .
and the most exciting thing was that everybody was all their love and their interest for the oceans .
as you can see here , this is a 11-zoll-durchmesser .
so , you don &apos;t hear something every day .
ah- hah .
in australia , it &apos;s mostly the local people who are in prison .
she told him and he beauftragte the first entersuchung of what we call the aussteuer-tanz .
because that &apos;s not what we call a rücklage .
so why do we not make a difference about this problem in day-to-day lives ?
goodbye , mahatma gandhi .
could i get my last bowl ?
never that , it &apos;s impossible , no , no , no ! it &apos;s not possible . &quot;
you could deal with the connection with the connection .
von neumann , a logiker and a mathematician from the army brought everything together . then they needed a space to build them .
the ein- and the beginning did start to fernschreiberband .
&quot; uh-huh &quot; ah ! &quot; then , they found it was a programmierungsproblem .
i know if i have to give me a beaten . &quot;
he allowed the engine running all night , if anyone in stephen wolfram , that &apos;s going to be done all the time .
now we &apos;re 50 years later ... it &apos;s a kind of force of animation .
sadly , in the next 18 minutes , i &apos;m talking about this next 18 minutes , and i &apos;m going to be four americans who are now alive . because of their diet .
that &apos;s a global problem .
traumhafte city .
and he &apos;s got the schnauze full of it . he &apos;s suffering , his friends , his family and his community .
they want to -- they want to control themselves .
you know , for long , long time , it &apos;s been trying to be involved in this age .
we &apos;re not teaching our kids .
and most kids get them .
well , supermarkets .
if you cook , it doesn &apos;t matter .
in all of america , many wonderful things are going to be in front of that , if we just look back .
misha glenny : anonymous , ladies and gentlemen -- a clever group of political hackers is enstanden hackers .
the net together , and it &apos;s going to be very soon a lot of human activities .
interestingly , anonymous use his gehackten information , but not for financial profits .
he explained to me how he was in the 2003 and 2004 , like he went to new york city , 10,000 dollars from the atm of the atm , 30,000 dollars there by geklonte credit cards .
he was born in süddeutschland in a stable and respektiere middle class , his obsession with play playing , and had led him to the hacking .
and most of the time , with the exception of script and cha0 , none of social skills in the outside world -- only in the net .
i think there &apos;s several reasons . i &apos;m not going to go into the details , but some mention .
but they &apos;re all determines from market , and what the market is to be , especially -- number one is the great demographic demographic .
we also have a lot of examples of the great boxes that had been transformed into all sorts of social institutions , lots of schools , many churches , and many libraries , like this one .
and eventually i &apos;m going to expect that the roads of strassen are going through the neuentwicklung of the mall .
it &apos;s very successful . and it has helped that eight to 13 regional regionalen in denver plans have geäussert umgenutzt .
the bach was taken by the parking lot of the parking lot .
their local people are different than typical vorstädtisch , but they &apos;re less divers than cities .
&quot; his vagina , &quot; she said , &quot; is a whole tageswerk . &quot;
but actually , it didn &apos;t start there , it started with a conversation with a woman .
it &apos;s about a gender that is a fundamental resource of the planet , which is women .
it &apos;s a körperwelt , and the way it really exists in the body , and i think there &apos;s a real meaning to our heads , and that these separation created an division division of a teilung , which is also a teilung of the building .
i want to tell this little story about my own beginnings , because that &apos;s very closely related to happiness , and with agnes .
maybe it &apos;s about my geburtsstaat south carolina , who isn &apos;t much smaller than today , and once the world &apos;s defense , and once a year of the country of a year .
well , maybe he was too much , because he stayed where he was , for a long time , the nazis , and even after the festnahmen and deportationen in budapest .
and he received the same answer : &quot; bring me the best workers that you can find them , and if you &apos;re good enough , i &apos;m going to be a good enough . &quot;
and it &apos;s also clear that we &apos;re saying , &quot; it &apos;s fine . it was all so beautiful .
&quot; uh-huh ! &quot; dr. robicsek . &quot; i &apos;m in the movie . &quot;
like , as i said , he fluchte too much .
and you can imagine it .
you know what you &apos;re looking for .
but we care about the most important cases and order to rebuild the other day for the next day .
so we came to these two rules .
so i went to russia , and my mother went to the soviet union during the soviet union .
and if you think it &apos;s not , it &apos;s not going to take you anymore , you &apos;re doing so long , until you continue to continue .
what i want to try to do with it -- i hope that points to bring points to .
and what i &apos;d like to do later in the presentation , 50 percent of the united states are among the ocean .
it &apos;s rabenschwarz because the photons can &apos;t get the average depth of the ocean , which is the 3,66 km , which is the grabenbruch miles on a mile .
and so we carried along the gebirgszugs , in an area where we went to a field of galapagosriff , and found the missing heat .
so i started developing a new videokommunikationstechnologie , with a robotersystem that &apos;s replaced , and i don &apos;t have to go into my vehicle .
we find the state of konservierung .
and i looked at her yesterday , she &apos;s up in seattle . ok .
but i would like to leave you with a kid without a license to the control of my tax .
in some parts of the world , for example , in south africa , is very difficult to be involved in south africa .
when we saw the effect of the angebots , we decided to get andrew and i needed to be able to make it up so many people like possible education .
what was this special of those classes ?
the video will be interrupted all the time , and the students will ask a question .
so we wanted to convince some of our colleagues of the humanities , that multiple choice is not so bad .
in terms of specific courses , you can ask questions that the most common ones are and how to help the students , to repair them .
we even see the beginning of either through a personalized studienplan or by feedback feedback that we showed them .
i thought about my place in the universe , and what my first thought was , what &apos;s the infinity that i was a child .
and in our society , of course , it &apos;s mostly about being able to make the reality of others .
i &apos;ve been so concerned about the values of newton &apos;s science . how to say , it &apos;s expected to be rational in a wortgefecht rational .
so you can understand my surprise when i was in the new yorker , &quot; alan greenspan , the federal reserve , said , was the ayn edge of his intelektueller .
i think you can do better about those funny , and not the ones that don &apos;t have , and that &apos;s why not a lot of that reason , i don &apos;t have any jokes about their kenneth and his charming .
i &apos;ve been vermiss at this old times of the telemarketings , which i &apos;m saying to you .
he said , i &apos;d have to give him more respect , because it can take to 18 years to become a really good job .
huh ? yes ? what ? i can &apos;t hear it . &quot;
and i &apos;m afraid , this active person doesn &apos;t like us .
i &apos;ve been thinking about moshe safdies , thinking about beauty that she gave us yesterday . there &apos;s a little bit in his book that that &apos;s sometimes beauty and beauty can sometimes possibly bring beauty .
george w. bush : what the defense of our security costs , and what the defense of our freedom is , we have to pay the price . &quot;
ten years ago , no astronomer on the world has come to the idea -- well , or very few astronomers , there are planets outside of our solar system .
many other ecosystems on earth are truly occurring in danger .
he constantly schwafelte that an experiment with a particle and a kettenreaktion auslösen that would be destroyed the world .
we have to grow with biotechnology and biotechnologie .
and so , we don &apos;t want to see a natural course of course .
what can we do ?
and now the worst thing comes .
we use a lot of money on that , we don &apos;t make sure that we don &apos;t die at a flugzeugabsturz , but we &apos;re not nearly not just like it , and it &apos;s completely preventable .
we don &apos;t want to get caught on the wrong foot .
i hope that &apos;s going to be .
it &apos;s very , very important because this is the system that &apos;s the system that came out of the planet . and it &apos;s now at the time for us to understand it .
it &apos;s an amazing realization . and we &apos;ve only been only ever recently since recently .
and that &apos;s what the system is mitbringt , a number of standorten in the southern hemisphere , in this circles .
anybody who later comes to , just simply the database , and can be the information that &apos;s needed to be used for everything that &apos;s happened .
we &apos;re about the wave to reiten , the technological possibilities .
in a earthquake , large amounts of these new microbes that we never saw from the sea floor .
the ozeanograph delaney creates a network of hochauflösenden cameras , and sensors that is our oceans to global , interactive lab -- and also a datenexplosion about the world of depth .
so i think that optimism is what architecture is going .
so once again , radical against conservative .
the unerklärliche against the verständliche . you know , you want to understand everything .
our intellectual desires are complex .
you know it &apos;s true ; the cathedrals , as unexpected , they will be unexpected .
but i &apos;d rather rather than making something completely unknown , and even with mistakes , instead of making the same thing that the bedeutungslosigkeit of the insignificance is governed .
the risks of rooms that have never been so schwindelerregend how they ought to be in a very close city .
there is the emotions of the victims .
daniel libeskind builds up very big ideas . he calls 17 begriffe that are grunde the vision of architecture -- raw , gewagt , radical , radical -- and inspiration for every kühne of the kreative cultural desire .
it also has the lowest luftwiderstandsbeiwert of all the cars .
but then , it &apos;s really going to be really , or is it going to be a few hauptstrecken to be there ?
em : it &apos;s just got to do it . if not , we &apos;re in big trouble .
with this capital , and installed solarcity die die on the roof , and then the haus- , or geschäftsbesitzer , a monthly , is lower than the electricity .
we &apos;re nearly failed , but we &apos;ve got to have in 2008 .
it &apos;s similar to a jet of a jet .
how about everything in the world could be a person ?
look at that .
boy , if you were to hütest our livestock and you see a cheetahs of the goats , he &apos;s very nervous . then go to him .
we were hungry .
our tradition looks like this : in any event there &apos;s a holy fire .
now , we were able to support support of the world &apos;s world &apos;s world &apos;s largest programs to deal with the very small programs of nationalem .
too , very important -- we invest in awareness in education in awareness and hiv .
taschenführer -- again , a streitpunkt amongst many of the world bank car -- are very useful , they &apos;re a wonderful tool .
and we &apos;ve been able to get this cost behind huge giant .
dan barber and alice waters lead to the kulinarische revolution for food food .
schalentiere , muscheln , oysters , venusmuscheln , venusmuscheln , buntbarsch , saibling -- that were the known species .
this is like a kater of protein .
science is seeing the world through the mind , quantitatively of the mind , quantitatively , things like that are measured and described , but they have the art for knowledge and discovery .
from the plan of a few cameras , after three weeks , a plan was a plan with 25 .
this is the natural cycle .
that would not usually be a anständiger photographer , a photograph of the foto , right ? but sometimes it needs to be able to make the dimensions .
here you see how the glacier can go back to the glacier , and you see the glacier back , it &apos;s pulling back .
this is several cameras .
could india or a global center for innovation , just like it &apos;s become a global center for backoffice-dienstleistungen and softwareentwicklung ?
when we asked people in these innovationszentren , what they were working on , they said , &quot; we &apos;re working on global products .
you cannot be professor , if they hadn &apos;t been a student .
the best hospitals , in the doctors , for given designers , and in fact , in fact , in fact , heart disease , heart disease , heart disease , künstliche hüftgelenke , notfälle in the morning .
it works a little bit like -- this is a recently ausgeführte ausgeführte for four o &apos;clock in the morning .
i said , i know i know a codierte message when i see one .
everyone in our society comes with cancer -- if not personal , then through a beloved , a family , a family , a friend , a friend .
in this raumfähre , the genetic material is the chromosomes , within a nucleus .
we have tumor treating fields in the lab at the lab in the lab over 20 different types of bacteria and we see this effect on all of it .
he got the standardbehandlungen .
but what we can see is that in sixth month , the tumor has said , and it starts to wegzuschmelzen .
that &apos;s just the beginning .
this is a new way to a new set of novel , a new project .
in fact , they &apos;re 15 feet deep , and harvest rain from the roof , there &apos;s a little rohr , and from your genetic .
so , water from 300 , 400 miles away , it looks like this .
somewhere in a stream or a flüsschen through this scene .
this is called &quot; kund . &quot; in english we have oberflächenwasser and the ground .
and you have to go beyond further .
these are the beautiful treppen that we saw on a pictures .
and hiv-infektionsraten are 27 percent in 27 percent : 600,000 people will get hiv in sub-saharan africa .
10 percent of india from india .
they &apos;re going to get the jobs in a trained , who get people out of the landarmut and you get it in the direction of industrialization and wealth .
and the countries on the right , there you see the pro-kopf-bip . it has the principle of every country with a pro-kopf-bip of a pro-kopf-bip , say , less than 5,000 dollars , a korruptionsrang of say we say three .
in the first 20 years , in the &apos; 60s and &apos; 70s , india didn &apos;t really work .
buy african products .
but i think that a much more serious problem is that these logic -- that we should be ipods and not abwerfen -- i mean , it would be a great title for thomas friedmans new book .
and then , 500 people , they were chosen to come to visit the besagte to the department of the institution and so they were to bloggen about it .
so , citizens in planning to the planning of 2020 , not necessarily anything about it , because it &apos;s still the dictators that control the agenda .
evgeny morozov : the internet orwells schlimmste ?
&quot; like a man . &quot;
and he was hanging with the younger guys around us .
because for me , who lived in this time , and in this männer-kisten-beziehung , was the question , &quot; you want to do it ? &quot; either sex or drugs , we didn &apos;t build .
i was like paralyzed , people .
as indian , and now politicians and regierungsminister am a rummel to see the rummel , who has been , to the country , worried about all the risk of india as a new weltführer , and even the new superpower .
in other words , all kinds of other stories stories about countries , whether they want to come to the world , they don &apos;t want to come to the daylight .
but the flash in our country was pretty slow down , it took about half an hour to such an call .
it can &apos;t understand the dialogues .
this can sometimes have unwanted consequences . ok .
and those of you who have their money on the ones , may be surprised to see how many schriftsysteme on the rupien-schein are there who explain the nennwert .
i went home and researching a little bit . i found some dramatic statistics .
ludwick marishane : a bath without water .
and now i feel like george bush .
now , this one , this expression , comes from a critic , a early &apos; critic , and this is a passage that i just love , and i &apos;d like to read them to you .
and that &apos;s a good thing , because if it would be , mother nature is a problem : how to get the chimps in the world , we get to mate with mate ?
this is the hardest part that &apos;s not obvious , and so i have the aufgehoben .
ok ? stop . that &apos;s what the one is .
i don &apos;t know why there are pinke flamingos , but no matter what you &apos;re in the garden .
thank you , thank you , thank you .
i actually suspect that the evolutionsbiologen is probably all of the reasons , and i &apos;m probably going to know why we want new things very , very quickly .
it looks like this . they should see something like this .
bob mckim has a different -- a different version of this exercise in a very famous experiment in the &apos; 60s .
and we learned that with the time : you can get a much better than a lot of better , much more creative results , if everybody &apos;s going on the rules .
and suddenly there were a very produktives conversation about design around the design object .
they &apos;re sometimes a bit skeptical , i &apos;ll come back to it .
you know how it feels all of these uncertainty , as long as you go back to the corridor , while the doctors have moved to a dringenderen , you &apos;re taking care of what &apos;s going on .
so , we would feel all secure and they would have a good time because we agree with the rules and to stay with the rules .
we do everything that leads to success , but then we believe we &apos;re going to do it . we &apos;re happy to go back and listen to all that what we did .
i was faster , but it was the same .
i learned that success is not a one-way street .
and the sopran-stimmgruppe is just full of hot girls . &quot;
i actually wrote , &quot; oh my god , &quot; hopefully , i hope , for the last time in the public .
he made sure that everything is zusammenpasst .
it took a 900 people to it .
and the second is that people obviously have come to know an actual connection .
these are questions .
as you see in modern states , the society allowed us to determine the state of the state , to actually define our self , but it also demands it from us .
it means that we can fulfill our full potential as human beings .
so these are the layers that i wanted to share with you today -- the question , the question : what are the intentions , which is the intentions , when you design something ?
and so i said , and my colleague , sebastian sebastian , that there must be better ways .
and we were successful .
i &apos;m going to give you a fall .
he schubst them into the right position , stupst , she stupst with his nose and dig .
we did the first surprise .
it had to give any kind of sprungfedermechanismus to create the amount of force and the speed that we observe and the ausgangsgrößen of the system .
a load measures of forces , and this is actually a piezoelektrische load in the inner system .
this is the fangarm -- here &apos;s the heel , and that &apos;s going to be herumschwingen and hitting the load cell .
a very , very bequeme solution for the particular problem .
and hawkes : it &apos;s not earth , stupid , it &apos;s ocean .
i think that &apos;s one of the most beautiful classic classic that ever built .
i don &apos;t know any other tauchfahrzeuge , not even ferngesteuerte that just benefit that this is a three-dimensional space .
now look at that -- he &apos;s just going to be just me .
the submarine , the submarine , this one was that last year .
gleichermassen is the understanding of architecture as a störer , zusammenhanglos , - -- please apologize , they would like to make the obvious example -- is not the right approach to choose .
basically , new york on the back of the austernfischer was built , our roads were about their shells .
in these eight times , little kammern are stecken , which are practically practically gemästet .
so you go around london and was overwhelmed with this gestank .
eventually , created an map of the eruption of eruption .
and that &apos;s what happens every second week .
i &apos;ve done her portrait on the top of the jokhang .
and in this area of the amazon , the eastern oil was discovered .
the other side of the network is tora bora , where actually osama bin laden is aufhalten . that &apos;s stammes-gebiet .
that was one of the big motivationsfaktoren .
this is the ausgangsüberlegung . let me continue to you and you can show you the hubble deep field .
but then you get to jupiter and the 40 minutes is far away . this is a problem .
this is going to be the part that it &apos;s about the beginning of the universe .
we only have one million galaxies , and we have one million galaxies .
so the stuff that &apos;s in the image is know dark matter .
when she saw this picture for the first time , you haven &apos;t seen a lot in it .
this simulation was done with 1,000 processors for a month , just to do this .
with planck , we &apos;re going to have a resolution that is about this image of the earth , which is , in fact , you can actually see the complicated pattern of earth .
and in the end of that , of course , we are stressed .
47 percent .
this is crazy . that &apos;s all the time we do , even in the day-to-day lives .
i went into a cycle . this led to many pain and problems with joints , so i could almost not do anything .
so i asked myself , could you be creative if you look at the limitations for the limitations ?
that &apos;s not the whole thing that happened to me today .
so , the game is tragen by dosimetern , and it &apos;s like a offizieller bewacher . there are drakonische strahlungsregeln and andauerndes überwachen of the kontamination .
stalin &apos;s stalins famine , the 30er years , the holodomor , töteten million ukrainer , and the 40s looked at the nazis , verbrannten , verbrannten , verbrannten , vergewaltigten , and many of the women were called the zwangsarbeiterinnen of germany .
that &apos;s where the grief is . &quot;
and as a psychologin married , the idea of most of us , the idea that we learned to what we &apos;ve learned in the virtual world of us , and we could use our identity to live a better life in the real world .
we used to get us to a new way of being together in common .
human relationships are deeply simple , chaotic and fordernd .
it tröstete them .
because in the moment , in the moment , in the moment , even for a few seconds , they become hibbelig , angsterfüllt , getting your seats , you get greifen , they reach into a electronic device .
but we &apos;re in danger because in fact , the opposite is true .
i &apos;m optimistic .
but apparently we didn &apos;t have any mit with the punkte-differenz that had some of our alumni and pretty often -- pretty often , i often felt that they had to be verliehen their predictions .
maybe because my father always been read .
so i left them in the quiet -- but i had to be , and they had to be already .
and eventually , i thought , i thought , but i &apos;m missing the time , and i &apos;m going to take a lot of things .
although you don &apos;t lose failure , no fear of failure , if we gave them all the time , because who can be more desire than anything he &apos;s going to be able to get out .
if i call it name , i never know a answer .
i have enough geschwafelt ?
the second challenge is cells .
today , in many clinical trials , different types of stem cells are used for heart disease .
just last month , it &apos;s been able to show us with this technology to show the creating the creation of human rights .
we can map them and to apply 360 degrees , and so the kidney in all their volumetrischen properties are analyze . then we can just take this information and then scan the bottom up .
i couldn &apos;t get a regularly school . i just went to dreckig .
i was a kid , i said , as &quot; yes , i want to do . i want to have this surgery .
you may have noticed that a new field is called the swap-tauschhandel .
and with this mengen-manie there , there were examples of the world -- from the choice of a president to the berühmt-berüchtigten wikipedia , and everything lies in between -- that showed what the power of a lot of a lot could achieve .
third , drängende , ungelöste environmental issues .
because what you need , this is the hole , not the drill .
i don &apos;t want cd , i want to play the music that you play .
i &apos;m heiße joseph and i &apos;m a boy in kenya .
we need to go to our women and children , we need to run . &quot;
i try to improve the infrastructure .
late night , i went home with batteries and ice .
together : somebody post-its ?
co : i decided to stay in the country , the master in moscow , and to work in some ways in the process of making this .
this can be huge spending , but if the city can win a number of x hours to win , counts the dollarwert of the aufgewendeten work to the city of the city .
they have hotlines , tables and data .
so , that &apos;s what we &apos;re in the 18 minutes i have been to speak to here , between the two and dreitausend people who are going to be in the cities .
and he was in a großflächigeren schlamm .
the building here have several stories .
these green things are in the foreground of the foreground .
and if you &apos;re a legaler unter-stadtbezirk , you &apos;ve got to see political activities .
i couldn &apos;t find that i would be part of a technological revolution that would be true .
think about it . these guys who don &apos;t have the same bildungsmöglichkeiten , which i had helped me with their committed to get qualifikationen qualifications .
at the time , we usually have done with a schriftart , but by using a ladungsgekoppelten flachbettscanner , and he could develop a machine that could read every single machine .
but you know , i think it &apos;s very lonely , to read from machines .
because it &apos;s not allowed to transport those books across the border , had to be different from different countries in the different countries : u.k. , united states , canada , and new york lesungen of harry potter .
the durschschnittl . lifespan has been more than doubled more than doubled and it &apos;s been increasing by a speed of five hours per day .
one last thing . you want to be like people like me , okay ?
second , is that the new news is so good news because once the androids work , we don &apos;t need to do that anymore and the outer space exploration and schufterei .
the societal challenges of this inequality should be suspicious .
the economic rules are surprisingly clear , and surprising , really , especially on the short run .
and my biggest concern is that we create a world with schillernden technologies , embedded in a slightly more mature society and supported by a economy , inequity to inequality .
in the course of the years , i started to feel increasingly unwohler with this notion of god .
some have geschlussfolgert that we can only believe in a god that makes our pain .
in the second round , the line comes the line and waves obey the waves . &quot;
so who is god , if not the great strippenzieher or stammesbewahrer ?
the liebende soul of the universe .
by seeking god in the inside . by using my own einwärtigkeit .
one of the first things i started to explore was the story of the begriffs . &quot;
we have no resemblance to that time that we were growing up than 40 years , and the average age of this gathering and collectors stämme is 20 to 30 to 30 to 30 .
our bodies have been used to these new diet .
so this equality of energy and matter , the einstein showed up and also the modern science of the quantencomputer , the entropy and information and energy , so it &apos;s a long continuum .
this is a robot that &apos;s going to plug its own plug to get more power .
and what i mean by that is that we &apos;re looking for her a new job .
a great development that began billions of years ago , moving through us and continues , and our choice is in the technology , really , in the technology , really , in the technology , to imagine that force is much more powerful than we are .
and they said , &quot; well , we have five classes of 30 to 40 students .
we put it down all the way , and found beautiful holzböden , geweißte bars , and it had the appearance -- as we said , &quot; you know what the hull looks like a ship . &quot;
so we waited , we were sitting on the tables , and i &apos;ve been waiting for .
there are a lot of symbioseeffekte . the only problem , especially for adults who are working on the mcsweeney that didn &apos;t know anything that they started with , and they had just been a toilet .
the teachers that we work with -- everything is different for teachers -- they &apos;re going to tell us what we &apos;re supposed to do .
about 170 tutoren , with you in the book , and so this is wonderful work .
and right behind -- there &apos;s usually a little chain -- right behind the right behind the children were teaching .
there &apos;s also these geheimtür -- it &apos;s a shelf that you don &apos;t see if you look at it , but it opens up slowly .
he &apos;s evangelisch . he brings his family .
she &apos;s writing him a email , he will answer you any question you can answer .
i was this girl .
80 percent of the refugees in the world are women and children . oh .
there is one side that thinks that peace is the end of the struggle , and there &apos;s one side that thinks that peace is thinking that peace is the creating schaffung and jobs .
she sent her children to school -- found a new home .
there is one , one that &apos;s called the manual idioten &apos; worth of the full idioten &apos; , you know ?
in the cape , there are idyllische roads , and we all can drive .
that &apos;s my baby . thank you .
he said , &quot; i designed everything . &quot;
and in a sense , i always felt bad .
so i &apos;d encountered this kind of complications .
i found out that the cheetos is very good ausdrucksmaterial .
the thing is most difficult , so number ten to 10 .
from all of the allem , über über , which is a window to come from a window to the moment , to the moment that the street was geteert in my house , and this weisse motte there was sterbend in the sun .
and i was reminded of the hervorragende armstrong of karen armstrong , that religion really didn &apos;t really understand that really , but with behavior .
the nordpol-eisschicht , geographically , geographically , the same size . it doesn &apos;t look like the same as the united states , and it &apos;s just the same size as the united states , a gebiets , which is about the same size of the state of the state of arizona .
but it &apos;s not just the developed world .
we can &apos;t wait for the trockenheit , who had australia to change our political culture .
this challenge is part of the structure of our civilization .
a new appreciation of the privilegs that we have with the presumption of this challenge .
before i show you a couple of images to the preview of the vorschau , i want to point out on this beautiful detail about wissenschaflter and design .
rca is the rca in this regard to a extraordinary school .
we have now been talking about keith shrubb , that many scientists don &apos;t tend to show something beautiful in their lectures , fear , from fear , as a stupid blondinen .
here , examples of this , you can actually print a little bit more in 3d printing , which is very interesting .
so that &apos;s what makes us more about what robots for us .
no . so i had to think a little bit of a sharper .
we did the same thing for iraq .
that was a challenge that we had to ask ourselves as an physicist .
we can push it up . the forces fragmentieren more . there are more of them , but they &apos;re weaker .
&quot; naturally 7 &quot; beatboxt a whole band of a band .
and there are some of those employees in foundations that call this &quot; mitgefühl-müdigkeit . &quot;
the idea of justice , which we tried and a sense of us , and we have a sense of what &apos;s really in life , what is in life , what we should do , social justice .
and how this is , he döste during the predikt .
every week , so every week , the putzkraft would go to the putzkraft , &quot; god , you &apos;ve got my plea back . &quot;
they &apos;re a symptom for a tumor , a infection , one of the infection or a surgery .
the muscles were frozen , paralyzed -- dystonisch call like this .
we treat them with symptomverändernden drugs -- schmerzmitteln -- the open -- that &apos;s not very effective in this kind of pain .
now , you get this slowly , a sense of how much rock we talk about here .
it was 1908 . power . so i can live .
i don &apos;t know if you can see him from the back of the back of the back room at all , that &apos;s just stars .
in 2005 , nasa started a probe called &quot; deep impact , which one is a part of a comet eindrang .
these are smart guys -- men and women -- astronauts , how i said , engineers .
the difference between the dinosaurs and us is that we can have a raumfahrtprogramm and vote , and we can change our future .
at this time i &apos;ve been led to the only independent independent , to be exactly the only electronic medium of the country .
and i thought that b92 survive and a great company would be if milosevic would be gone , which was really taken out of right .
and at the end of the creator , he says , look , it &apos;s not going to work , you will never see your money , but my foundation will put 50,000 dollars on the table so you can test the idea .
and we said , that &apos;s okay , we &apos;re going to meet , you get your mind your mind with what they actually did .
you see , we have in ost- and mitteleuropa with our work and went to russia .
after a while , we opened a medienmanagement-zentrum .
and we developed the idea , focused on the freie , bonds on the free press .
and in this way , you &apos;re just going to have the funding so that there are no dunkelkammern , no blind , there are no more blind to find out .
so why does it work like this ? that &apos;s the question .
now some call that a theory of everything .
one example is this : newton thought the law of gravity , which works like 1 floating through the square of the abstandes between the other .
the more symmetry you have , the better is the simplicity and elegance of the theory .
one thing that he thought most of us were given today than given , but it wasn &apos;t granted at all .
it doesn &apos;t matter the importance of the fan that they &apos;re following grundlegenderen , and that they are .
but he read in every free moment he had , books .
from this ambition , he came back to the staatsparlament .
but when he was just the signature , his signature under the proklamation , his hand was deaf and zitterte , because he &apos;d been reading the morning during the morning .
not very surprising -- it was just three women under the 16 stipendiaten in the white house .
but i have to say , the older i grew , the more i understand what an incredible privilege of this was a alternden lions by a man .
and so as lincoln told the story , i was going to the war after the war .
i asked my father under tears , &quot; what can we do ? &quot;
and what &apos;s the reason that i &apos;m always grateful for this strange love is to be the story that allows me to spend a life in time .
he had the temple entweiht and geplündert .
this is the erlass , this object is proof that the jews in exile , after the entire years , after the entire years , the whole years , which they sat in babylon and the memory of jerusalem , that these jews go home .
all of those are werden respected .
the babylonische cylinder is from the priests of the great gotts of babylon , marduk , writing .
you all know what happened .
to see this object in tehran , thousands of iran in iran is living in iran in iran &apos;s living jews .
some people know more about the human connection , but they still think they &apos;re a notwendiges .
the new aufgenommenen showed that the first few hours of hours of hours of hours were not befriedigt and eventually , they were able to get to bemühen , and they were lustlos into less than less days , and they start in the air .
one study shows that 10 percent a heimunterbringung cost , whereas pflegeunterbringung costs about 30 percent .
and that fascinated me because i almost spent my whole life before a camera .
you know very quickly what you have to do to find a answer .
there were people who -- most of them -- most of them and family .
we heard each individual .
but of course he never got . the explanation has never occurred .
and so , after many , many meetings , i was thrilled to be fawzi , really one of my heroes and mentors it was able to bring it into the boat .
so he said , and we found ourselves in afghanistan .
they were the ones who believed in peace and his possibility , etc . , etc . -- and they were going to get it reality .
we connect with olympia -- i met seb coe . i said , &quot; at london , it &apos;s about the truce .
it &apos;s about their wählerbezirke , to do their business .
the biggest brains of the world should be the cognitively of the world .
i &apos;m going to be the literature of the origin of this figure , but i could never find them .
there is just a big primatengehirn .
and amazingly , that &apos;s what we &apos;ve made , what our ancestors have been invented by a million years ago when they discovered cooking .
pretty simple ways to do the hochtechnischen conversations that i did .
and i think i &apos;m just standing at the beginning .
but once the fighting sich itself , the physical rehabilitation was exposed to .
behind him was a kid , his son , red in the face , rot , his father , his father .
but mahmoud and his son were there .
i was talking to my bosses in the headquarters , and i told you -- i told you -- &quot; look , we start with a few hours a day , just for some hours . &quot;
two groups of the mudschaheddin started fighting .
so i asked him , &quot; what &apos;s going on ? &quot;
&quot; yes , we need to raise production of feet .
he was a new man , even bigger .
physiotherapie , not only in the orthopedic , but also in the houses of people .
and you should see me as a partie .
and this hospital would have been able to afford to have a taschenlampen .
why ? because the way i &apos;d been to have , i was verboten .
but i learned something more than that , which is that the leaders -- the manager of the economy -- incredibly bad decisions that we had taken our economy before the collapse .
because i knew the state of african continent , for my children and their children .
i &apos;m trying to try to get the experience i had in swarthmore to africa .
is my time ? ok .
we reached a moment from a moment that has a great society within a generation of generation .
you &apos;ll notice that he &apos;s going to be very similar to the bildhaften ball -- the sun that we draw as children .
in fact , this is something that half of you , half of them , more than half , not be familiar with .
32 tabletten &apos;s forte .
well guess what . &quot;
and those are the messages that they &apos;re going to you ?
because , in effect , the sponsors love love , and so he brings them to television .
a professional hellseherin who speaks with dead people , she doesn &apos;t come me ?
what is homöopathie ?
we &apos;d like to know how to fight people like you , landes- and kommunale government , so they make something .
thank you .
and that &apos;s why the whole hospital is often about a generator .
there has to be something better . &quot;
but so the user can control whether it &apos;s electricity or not , because they can control the zufuhr on the ground , much as much as much percent they give her patient .
but we want to be sure that this is the most effective and most medical device that we can provide hospitals to hospitals .
the different kinds of the document in africa , the first was protoschreiben , like the scripture nsibidi , which is the equivalent of a secret society in südnigeria .
anyway , as a yale-professor , when a yale-professor named john coleman namens in in theben-wüste inschriften auf in westägypten inschriften , which was in 1800 to 1900 in 1800 , jahrhunderte jahrhunderte .
nearly one fifth of greenhouse gases from greenhouse gases from livestock -- that &apos;s more than traffic .
not bad .
i like animals , and the way to industrialisieren and animals on the assembly of the ocean is not just so okay .
feinkost was an actual french matter .
a picture of fischstäbchen would be better , right ?
so it wasn &apos;t quite bad .
i &apos;m going to ask you a question : i &apos;m going to ask you .
some of us would be that that maybe that might not be so bad .
about a year ago , i asked myself a question : &quot; why am i know what i know , no ? &quot;
on weekends , you have the choice .
you can do a picture with a iphone and get all names , even though it makes mistakes even mistakes .
they &apos;re distracted . he wins the race .
you can &apos;t see it because it &apos;s too big .
you would argue it &apos;s been interested in , more about what the stakes are , but it &apos;s a very vernachlässigtes area .
or an aesthetic experience -- a sunset or a large art .
human nature has to change .
but part of the reason -- and that &apos;s why we have a ethical level in the sky -- is that they &apos;re also intrinsically valuable .
it could be more complicated than people , but maybe not very .
jh : is it befreiend to play with these forces ?
and so i knew i need to need something to get a little bit .
so there is eranziehungskraft , there &apos;s fliehkraft , there &apos;s the dynamic behavior in the liquid .
and so i think that &apos;s what they can be vorhersagend .
this is a great assistent in the studio .
we take the pizza , our first pizza , and the individual scheiben , as the messenger in the hallway and the messenger in the hallway and us .
i was sure 20 , before i went to a museum .
i thought , okay , you have some criteria like you want to choose the works .
it &apos;s not a photoshop of work .
they were interested in creating an neuartigen , alternative kunstraum , and they needed money to do so , so they decided to make some interesting things .
this project called &quot; liebesnest . &quot;
and so we went to the grave , and they did this , it was hilarious -- the attention that we received .
and they describes like the zäpfchen -- all you say , &quot; gefallen , because of the verbotenen fruit .
he &apos;s a australischer stammesältester of the aborigines , and he &apos;s also an artist .
it &apos;s with origami . so .
people were mapping mathematical principles on the art to understand the underlying principles .
or they &apos;re going to take it on top and make 50 stars on a flag .
how would you make a single figure ?
we &apos;ve figured these rules with those you pack circles , you covered the kreismuster with lines , the extra rules , that makes the crease difference .
you can do a lot of things .
but if you want to make it bigger , you could need some origami .
and that doesn &apos;t matter whether you &apos;re going to outer space or you can go into your body .
i grew up in a blockhütte state in the state of washington to a lot of the time in the state of washington to a lot of time in the state of the state .
we just have three minutes . but we &apos;re talking about hours on it .
and so i want to talk about it because if we don &apos;t acknowledge it , that will be very painful .
and in a moment i &apos;m going to show you a graph , and what you &apos;re going to see in the chart -- it begins before the women start to überfluten the arbeitsmarkt , and it goes to the day to the day .
you &apos;ve got instruction from above .
because i write a book about all of this , i &apos;m still able to get involved , and i don &apos;t have any answer .
and that was very comfortable for her .
since we haven &apos;t got this information yet , come back to us in the form of pop culture , in this awkward and a certain way , where you can see that they can see .
there &apos;s no man or no woman who &apos;s in the middle and the wires is to go down .
the personal income is in a scale that was being kept in the constant to take the inflation to the inflation , more than doubled , almost nearly .
and to hear me and understand what i say , they need about 60 bits per second .
so , in the last book , i &apos;m going to have a lot of geschäftsführer business , which i interviewed a few more ceo that the very successful and very ethically handelnd , with initial social tools described with very social tools .
control is always a safe thing , because you feel it , but not very much .
&quot; where are you born , grew up and went to school ? &quot;
because when my grandparents were born , they had their own significance to what home is , and they had their importance for community , and even for feindschaft , which was ihnen by birth , they didn &apos;t really have the opportunity to go beyond .
more and more people are in the future or present , as in the past .
i went down into the room , where i should sleep .
pico iyer : where is you home ?
there was a big gap between the industrialized world and the two billion in the developing world .
but this is the world that we have today , no gap .
and let me show you why , by using the altmodischen , digital technology .
that survival is the survival of the children .
and again , they were better than we were , &quot; your brits and your sterblichkeitsrate is shocking . &quot;
but if you give people obese , you don &apos;t change the high amount of heart disease .
and i started working with zellkulturen , and they were growing , and then they grow , and then i worked with knockout-maus-modellen -- mice that could not produce the gene .
one of the subjects was my mother-in-law , and of course , i don &apos;t know how old it is .
could you be in the summer for the equator .
certainly many advances , many gerettete lives .
this is even real photography in the lapse that shows that the limb is occurring inside a few days .
and here you see on the right , what six months later , the technically angepasste urethra .
a blutgefäß is from two different cell types .
we put it back into this ofenähnliche device .
more complex organs . with a abstand , the most complex solid organs are the high vaskularisierten , with every amount of blutgefäßen organs like heart , liver and kidney .
that &apos;s still in the experimentierstadium .
we prefer cells that aren &apos;t being overwhelmed and not a tumors .
we just need five seconds .
for every problem , there would have a idea .
so i &apos;m going to put a little in panic -- unlike all the koffein and sugar that i had -- but this is an entrepreneur really really unheimlich .
that doesn &apos;t mean that you have to visit a mba-programm .
i went from door to door and sell it to door .
it &apos;s like a recession . so , there &apos;s one recession , there &apos;s a recession .
and you would make this chairs .
that &apos;s pointless . &quot; you have to find a way to get faster .
i sold unmengen unmengen .
they don &apos;t get the regular income , but they have the ability to find more tasks and learn how to get the ability of the verhandelns , and they also learn the ability to find further possibilities .
if you go into a restaurant and you &apos;re going to use it , you show them like the bad kundenservice .
this young , locust .
the evolution of the students today is all of the interests except a über .
the erlenen of grundfähigkeiten or a minimun of cultural belesenheit , the majority of our students &apos;s dream .
the values of the past are also controlling , and it &apos;s a lot of society .
but it &apos;s a policy of principles , not the parteilichkeit .
they have a mind . and they have other people .
what we should be asking is when we think about conservatives -- except that case of the 1980s versammlung -- what it &apos;s about to the church .
yeah , i know you don &apos;t really believe it .
and that leads to another result , it has the potential to change how we interact with each other .
completely different .
actually , it &apos;s not the right organization , but i &apos;m sure -- let me finish the end of -- creative commons , and it &apos;s a simple way to put their content with the freedoms that they want to leave you with them .
john mccain .
and i &apos;m asking myself how often this happened .
he told me that he was hereinbrachte the versuchsperson hereinbrachte , and then he said , &quot; there &apos;s a snake in the next room , and we &apos;re going to be now hereingehen . &quot;
so for today , i had the idea that i &apos;m going to show you through this process and show you how this journey looks like .
and the hospital and general electric , they were too happy .
i survived , just to get us right .
i &apos;m going to always ask all of people , &quot; is it really possible to use these microbial ecosystems to our benefits ? &quot;
another way of how microbes can spread out through the people , architect gruppieren räume räume räume to combine the zwischenmenschliche interaction , or the exchange of ideas in tokyo and offices .
imagine a design that &apos;s going to be in the microbes , for example , in an airplane , or on a telephone .
and nobody knew about it .
my company , owl , built a system called the apple macintosh .
in 1992 was sein by the hypertextkonferenz .
and greenpeace wanted to unterbinden the unterbinden , and a way of trying to do that , was to get a dieser of this humpback buckelwale .
on 78 percent of voices . to give you an idea of the erdrutschartigen victory : namely two percent of the beliebtheitsskala only one percent of the schaffte .
and the last message i want to tell you : you can be absolutely fine .
i don &apos;t think i don &apos;t need to explain what a big privilege is to stand up today .
this is the school that was built with the community .
something that we have in gando , are tontöpfe .
just simple .
good morning . magic is a great way to be able to be able to predict the realitätskurve movement today to make what science is going to be .
there are the color red , and the color is the color , they stand for the ständigen wechsel .
voice : why not ? that &apos;s a very good sheet .
this is a illusion .
so this is china , a civilization-state , and not so much of a nation-state .
but you can &apos;t have a country like china doesn &apos;t have a civilization-state , on the basis of &apos; a civilization , a system .
and the reason for this is , the state in china is actually a very special -- very much , is a very special sense of the representative , the embodiment and the hüter of the chinese civilization , the hüter of the chinese civilization .
he was in 1972 for miles long , connected to beijing .
we &apos;ve seen that in terms of the g20 -- the position of the g7 rasant aneigneten -- or the g8 .
he goes down to the tracks on the vorort , and the cars go underneath .
the red = = named blue equals orange = named leads orange orange named = named = = named = = named = pads pads = = = = = = .
and the first song was in english , the second one was in chinese .
they agreed to her song .
i &apos;d been graffiti , i wrote my name , using the city as canvas .
i mean , that were the faces of my friends .
they all accepted that your picture is coming next to another .
&quot; you mean , you &apos;re klebst a israelisches face -- that &apos;s a face schneidet , right ? &quot;
most of the places i went to go to go to go to the media , i was talking about her in the media .
i took more pictures on it , and we started project the project .
are you going to be a ngo ? are you from the media ? &quot;
so the roofs were , witzelte , a woman , &quot; now i can see god . &quot;
because that &apos;s a big part of it . there are layers behind every picture .
but they basically took me a promise .
or , &quot; how can we help . &quot;
when i think about the vernetzung and about what they &apos;re doing , why it &apos;s now happening now , i think there are some factors that i want to give you as a hintergrundinformation .
they caused a trend of trend .
zipcar started a decade earlier , in the year 2000 .
it challenges about participation . cities have been teilnahme in participation .
it &apos;s very , very practical , and it &apos;s very , very meshy .
the last 40 years were extraordinary times .
and also miniaturization .
this would be a erheblichen migrationszuwachs .
it &apos;s vital that the ted ideas is to be ideas , which we think about , looking forward and make sure that this is a particularly particular century , and not one of the umweltkatastrophe and ökokollaps .
my most recent family are boring academics who are concerned about to raise abziehbilder from eliteunis for our government .
i said , &quot; i &apos;m here to meet the prime minister . &quot;
i thought he was insane , but something really stuck with it .
i sat , very much as you here , in the audience .
this is another picture .
since netra , my career &apos;s career , it has a lot of success .
i started exploring the dunkleren abszesse of human psyche .
and this time i said , let &apos;s try something else .
so i said , &quot; okay . &quot;
sw : a lot better . einstein is very honored to be here at ted between all the einstein in between the heutigen of the einstein . actually it &apos;s very excited .
it would be very dangerous if you were driving .
sw : no , i don &apos;t have a problem . you have the problem , you remember ?
sw : big finish .
sw : what about a stinktier ?
my parents found this important for their internal quiet .
if i have a talent , then it &apos;s more apart than i &apos;d been unheimlichen .
the body has a higher density than the water . at least 95 percent of the body is being located by itself .
and this is going to bring them very far .
i asked him what that means .
and the point is , if you want to go , you know , multiple languages , and they make sense to engage you without each other .
and she looked up and said , &quot; well , it &apos;s better .
i think they agree that they look very well .
and have done tests with 50,000 students , so about half a dozen schools , my readers , my readers .
we found out -- and we were wrong with quite a lot of things , and we got them -- but we found that the young people loved it .
geoff mulgan : a little introduction in the studio-schule movement .
and eventually , the only person is the only person , a young shepherd , and he goes to saul , and he &apos;s going to fight him . &quot;
there are the cavalry , men and mit .
goliath is mild prey . he doesn &apos;t have any chance .
so goliath is a bigger than seinesgleichen times larger than a seinesgleichen , and usually there &apos;s an explanation for that , if somebody is so far beyond the norm .
and i think it &apos;s a very important lesson for us .
and it turns out that we &apos;re covered in a mikrobenwolke , and these microbes are actually doing that , instead of doing it .
they have all microbes and put them in the recipient .
most pills , or the joghurts that you can eat , contain one or two , maybe five species , and the human community has been thousands of thousands of years .
we need a bestimmungsbuch for the microbes that live in and in people we can understand what they do to our lives .
very many people think about the internet , it &apos;s been fixed , but for us , it &apos;s global globally , and we have a lot of things , many languages .
and when they were looking at him a little change on me on me , they probably thought that this was just going to be in quatsch .
it &apos;s a social concept of cooperation , so we &apos;re not talking about truth and objectivity .
and we have over 40 irc-kanäle , 40 mailinglisten .
it &apos;s not a perfect rule , but it &apos;s perfectly essential for the beginning .
and i always like to say that you &apos;re the only person who actually knows all the rules of wikipedia , that &apos;s why ...
it seems to me , as most textbooks who are used to get to our children from the kids of our children are being used by nature .
in the jungle , in guatemala , in tikal , there &apos;s a temple .
it &apos;s not famous kwakutl native to süd-alaska in süd-alaska , and it &apos;s a missionary in the year 1896 , and here it is .
it &apos;s now a great way to be under your cognitive cognitive revolution .
we found activity in other gehirnregionen -- in gehirnregionen , which is associated with computation and loss .
i have a girlfriend who is an awful liebesaffaire of a terrible liebesaffaire .
and i said , i don &apos;t know .
we turn to each other , and keep our &quot; our view &quot; and we talk .
like sägen , knives , sicheln , sicheln or äxte , which i had in a towel .
i had long and wide , but never in my near nähe .
in some erdteilen , they put tools to fischjagd , about sponges schwämme .
so dolphins can schnarren and kitzeln out of the distance .
look like you were synchronisieren with her partners and the other zweiergruppe .
but we found that the free dolphins don &apos;t just hang on a boat .
this dolphin called &quot; tuchdiebin , &quot; because she &apos;s about 12 tüchern abgehauen .
but while we decode their natural sounds , we &apos;re going to make these back to the computersystem .
and the word is invented .
there &apos;s yves rossy .
and especially if you &apos;re in the tracking-position , you have to fly the feeling .
yr : i &apos;m just trying to be easy .
i &apos;ve been able to use 20 times , maybe 20 times -- never with this kind of wing , but at the beginning .
that &apos;s not what we say to your employers .
but it was up to steinig and full of kakteen .
you know , you know , that , what would you think , what they saw , to explain how to explain power .
because this event was the scientific revolution since the world who &apos;s the world &apos;s knowledge of the physical world , and how we can adapt to our needs , unerbittlich in the growing time .
by the way , why don &apos;t we do that ?
your footprint on the ground ; our bible . &quot;
there &apos;s something like a fehlkonstruierte story .
and just when one explanation is good , it &apos;s important that you can check it .
glasses aren &apos;t very expensive . they &apos;re pretty abundant .
it &apos;s now used by 30,000 30,000 .
what is minto is a place for a place ?
the new festival challenges that audience on the audience is a crucial role in the performance of performance .
she had met with others to look at the sultan &apos;s elephant , and it &apos;s done all done well . &quot;
&quot; no rumpfataxie , that &apos;s good . &quot; first doctor : &quot; is you ? &quot;
i thought my career was over .
this is a bear , where i was sitting on the rock .
this is a piece of ice cream , it &apos;s 12 years old .
i &apos;m going to show you pictures of belugawalen , grönlandwalen and narwalen and eisbären and seeleoparden and leopard seals , but this picture is to me , and i &apos;m going to have more than any other one i ever made .
people said , &quot; we knew that they were malignant . we knew it . &quot;
and these seal took the penguin in your head and they &apos;ll hold it down .
she swam away , and i started a penguin .
she tried to zwangszuernähren my camera , which is a dream of every photographer .
paul nicklen : stories from a vereisten wunderland wunderland
now , you &apos;re open your eyes .
do you have a ring ?
you focus on that task .
joe , we &apos;re doing that so long , until it breaks down .
funny , yes , we have a little man , a gewerkschafter , all the day there .
as i said , shapes your reality .
first of all , we were working together , build and developing .
a call in the u.s. , after canada , or china costs five kenia-schilling , or 0.06 u.s. dollars .
it &apos;s modular , so you can also plug a satellitenmodul , and also in remote places , as well as remote places .
over time , the buildings were getting better and better , and we &apos;re always getting better , so that the mechanical systems were vast , they need huge amounts of energy .
imagine two americans together with italy .
please , please , now , everybody &apos;s going to be a liberal arts .
the best definition of &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; &apos; i knew -- she explains so much -- comes from hirnforscher marcus .
he &apos;s very much very , very old triebe .
but look at the other three lines in the other lines , you see the other three lines .
aren &apos;t that the foundation of fremdenfeindlichkeit and autoritarismus and puritanismus ?
she walked upward and keep going on .
and they say , &quot; hold your laws from my body . &quot;
and we have the signs of shiva to the right , shiva god , and both work together .
and so the answer to my mind , i think , to use this passionate commitment to the truth , and try to turn it into a better future for us .
but if you &apos;re reacting , you &apos;re a lot of other people in the neighborhood who are innocent , but also injured , you know , that doesn &apos;t like to talk about kollateralschäden .
we look at something else , &quot; and i realized , not so to have the situations that situations really were very comparable .
there is a more complete burning , how often when you think about how it was introduced , how often the police was going to be in queensland then at the time ?
there were only a few people who were shot with this incident .
it &apos;s 72 and it looks like this is the most sophisticated way to deal with it .
and if you stop using them , people will give up , but they should not be bleibenden damage . &quot;
we started to organize makers in our maker . &quot;
billy-bob , or bass , or something like that .
and i &apos;ll tell you more about it , but just ...
but he also did here to see other people who did the same as he did .
this is &quot; makerbot . &quot;
and we have to bring that into schools or in the communities , many species -- the ability to control the world around us and to redesign .
there is the glamour of physics .
and indeed , we &apos;re seeing these glorifizierten photos of stars that are all over the time -- you call them falschfarbenfotografien .
they &apos;re not about a path of a path , but you have to imagine their world .
in a treppen , the winden of a hinfort winds are glamorous .
but it &apos;s going to tell you that the illusion is that if you buy this lamp , you will live in a world without cords .
the perfect liebesleben -- symbolized through the perfect chain , with perfect diamantring .
because glamour can be very totalitär and trügerisch .
but i also knew how hard they were working for all the week .
i did that in front of a stranger .
i heard about women who were harassed in their homes , or ausgepeitscht in their burkas , like dead left on the past , with acid with acid .
then i got cancer -- or i found that i had cancer .
my friend bereitete this big bowl , and i asked them , &quot; what is this ? &quot;
it was for me to me , and i was an liebende sister .
because we all are bad at all , us to imagine the internal of our fellow human beings and their secret intentions . &quot;
children need a long time to do it until they do the system .
rs : oha . now , joshua &apos;s going to get something to drink .
rs : should ivan get to the picture ?
and they &apos;re in the coffee of their friend .
first of all , i &apos;m going to show you that it &apos;s a magentfeld , a magentfeld .
please tell me that they don &apos;t rangehen , if we say , the pentagon is so that the pentagon is .
but why do you have to feel something ?
and it was , you know , it &apos;s a course of speed-yoga .
and second , is it possible , or even at all , to be slow down ?
they want to go back to a langsameren rhythm .
and norway , sweden , denmark and finland under the six world nations , the world &apos;s world &apos;s six nations in the world , and the ones that average americans would cry to envy .
but the new idea is the revolutionary idea of the entschleunigungsbewegung , that it &apos;s like good slow .
i &apos;m a way to see the gutenachtgeschichten of my aufgabenliste , it was grauste to me because they were so slow and i quickly wanted to be fast .
and so , it took off his beginning , and they said , &quot; you can &apos;t build anything on a island ; a part of it has to stay alive because we don &apos;t want to leave ourselves from the community . &quot;
i was working on it , and i didn &apos;t have that way because i felt that people who came out of the historical museum , already with information , already with information , and if you can see a museum of information , they wouldn &apos;t be able to process it .
when i went home , i was flying home , the grundsteinlegung planned .
but you can recognize the uniqueness of the environment .
moshe safdie about the einzigartigkeit of the uniqueness .
and if christian played a note -- play for example , for example , for example , for example , for example , for example .
so in jazz , the most amazing thing is amazing .
it &apos;s not about the vision of vision or something like this .
so i &apos;m interested in ? i guess what ?
they had to get a lot to come up with here .
in summer , india , india , is extremely hot .
and the adult animal that comes after that comes from , or two months .
at that time , i didn &apos;t know that , but i know it today . these are hundreds of wanderlibellen .
this made me a little curious . i &apos;m going to hear you here , because i want to ask you , and here &apos;s a lot of people who -- and there &apos;s a lot of people who -- of course , people who have spent their childhood here .
so , next , i was going to go to the phone .
october , november , december . that &apos;s not the time of the northeast monsoon .
okay , they lay their eggs on the time of the saisonalen , during the monsunregens .
just last week it has geregnet . the regengüsse have begun , and now it &apos;s raining there .
a pretty incredible kraftakt .
it &apos;s incredible . this is the außerordenlichste of a raubvogels at all , a pretty incredible journey .
i made that made of my life .
and everyone thought , but on the new terrain , i was terrible . people said , &quot; oh , he &apos;s -- oh , what happened with mullen ? &quot;
and in the night before my surgery , i looked at you and i said , &quot; how am i going to do that ? &quot;
next -- oh , i went out , and these guys here are the community .
so i was pretty successful . and if you &apos;ve got all this , what is it , what is it , then , you know , it &apos;s still going to be , and i &apos;ve talked about the knieoperation and other things , but what drives you ?
i &apos;ve done my last tedtalk , about seven years ago , about seven years ago .
but carl norden is really cracked the code .
whenever the norden bombsight becomes an airplane , it &apos;s accompanied by a series of bewaffneter guards .
the fertility range on three square miles .
after the war , there was an überprüfung -- as it does the army air force , and they asked the question : how many scuds did we actually have destroyed ?
i &apos;ve described the opposite of a success story .
a walk in a city or a journey , such a journey of human species in a new way .
we ask questions about human descent .
but on what &apos;s going on the data ?
imagine that that would be abschreiben .
it was a africans , on the world &apos;s population diversity .
the sahara sahara was much bigger than today .
the people who are focused on the animals that they were in the classroom , they moved to the savannen , moved to north and followed by about 45,000 years ago , in the middle east in a rare category .
the humangenomprojekt , rover-missionen on mars .
we know deeply in our hearts that the universe is not moving from mush .
so there &apos;s it .
what you see here is the blue areas , about a thousandth of a mile , than the red areas .
the more smaller than gravity is working as gravity , which explains why she explains and i &apos;m smaller than the stars and planets .
they &apos;re going to be familiar with the doppelhelix of dna .
let me explain why .
in the last 200 years , something else happened .
you might ask yourself , &quot; what talking about ? &quot;
we &apos;re not so good when it comes to ask .
and then they have to decide how they invest in their 52 choices , and they never heard of a geldmarktfonds .
at least a wonderful study that predicted .
but if you get the driver &apos;s license , you put the boxes on the box if you don &apos;t want to donate the organs .
the other group gets two apples , one grows .
save more tomorrow tomorrow .
this is just one example .
it &apos;s a song about a so-called sogenannte kolibrimotte , a creature that &apos;s a creature that would seem to be a creature .
hello , who &apos;s there , because there &apos;s , please ?
thank you very much .
so that knowledge has too much impact on the lebenserfahrung .
i try to schinden time .
so what did i do ?
we invent stories to explain our existence .
so what did you do ? they sent her to walter their walter raleigh to separate their human part of their göttlichen .
you &apos;re a child , you &apos;re a child ?
elizabeth : scher your heads ! scher your heads ! scher !
i went to a friend of mine , and he sat down in his appartment in malabar hill in the 20th floor , a really rich area in mumbai .
everything is a contradiction .
we lived from less than a dollar a day -- about 15 years .
and you have to use nuts to show that forests are forests than forests , as a forests than wälder . &quot;
he said , &quot; you can &apos;t aufwecken a person who says to sleep . &quot;
but it &apos;s not just about people ; it &apos;s about lebenswandel .
if on a limited planet , all of the products should be sustainable , how can we achieve this ?
coke needs to work with pepsi .
this is nine of them .
at the end , we were thinking , 60 percent of the world &apos;s production and 25 percent of the world &apos;s table .
that &apos;s not a irrelevant .
but they don &apos;t buy the juice ; they buy the carbon in the trees , to offset the kohlenstoff-kosten of the fracht , which is the versenden of the product for europe .
so the communication is being zwischen between brain and spinal cord ; this leads to a rise and an event of the beins .
after several years , it &apos;s been able to develop a electrochemical neuroprothese that the nervous system of the spinal cord of a schlafenden in a car state .
we &apos;ve worked for 10 years working on this goal .
after a few weeks , we put a programmierbare pump to inject a individual medikamentencocktail directly to the spinal cord .
and i was a child who was the working-class .
he talked about the world as she &apos;s , &quot; and the world , how they should be .
and by doing that , they did these women , and these women are coming out of the way .
in the white house , and the desk he sits on , is called &quot; resolute desk . &quot;
the last day , the woman came up with all the time , and we were talking about each other , and suddenly she said to me , &quot; would you call me something ? &quot;
for this gesangsstück , this gesangsstück is a hymne on the voice because it &apos;s mysterious -- how you can see -- it &apos;s completely spontaneously , and it &apos;s originally .
that didn &apos;t have anything .
so the internet takes the internet and instructions .
one of the most popular sites of the world that &apos;s run by the most powerful company of the world , and there was nothing that youtube or google would have .
and today , wikipedia is so omnipräsent that you can actually find them on the cards of restaurants in china .
and that &apos;s what wikipedia understood .
this is a blog that &apos;s bedauerlichen portraitfotos .
why ? there &apos;s a mitfahrersuche at craigslist.com. .
the world won &apos;t ended up in the &apos; 90s .
and we see that the impact on the lernleistung of the lernleistung in some countries , very strong .
all of this costs money .
and it was taken a lot to be a lot of students to give students with migrationshintergrund or from socially , the familien families to give the same opportunities .
how schools are schools and teachers in media media ?
in bureaucratic schulsystemen , the teachers are left in the classroom and they have a lot of unterrichtsvorgaben .
some people say that the change of the bildungsverwaltung is a really ähnelt .
but if you look at the problem from this perspective , you see what happened in the last 60 years .
and i went around about 15 kilometers to get to the apotheker .
so that was obviously a unverzichtbares device .
we could do that with phones .
so , it creates a business for them .
&quot; the government has to offer economically durchführbare services . &quot;
it was once , long time when i was 24 years old , when i was 24 , i was a studierte at st. medical college at the st. college .
and you can see my map , if i &apos;m here .
and also , i &apos;m teaching a invention .
now we &apos;re in the 1930s , and you see that japan is going through a period of war , with lower life expectancy .
and they decided not to invest in health and education , but they also began to grow the economy .
washington , d.c. went out to go out .
not the bladder , not my bubbles , but the cash bubble are the risk of the financial bubble .
once the rich countries are going to be completely transformed , and the power of there , where they were over the last 50 to 100 , 100 years , and it was back to asia ?
the rest of the diagram is a very mysterious substance called dark energy .
but that doesn &apos;t explain the presence of all the masses .
and now what you &apos;re going to do now is that we live in a three-dimensional universe -- a three-dimensional space .
again , this is a kind of wahrheitsgetreues model of what &apos;s going on in the front of the war .
they move away from each other , because the space gets bigger .
by looking at things like galaxien-cluster -- their teilchendichte , how many of you are there as a function of time -- can we be able to bring in experience , dark matter and dark energy , in the company , to form structures .
the big questions in physics .
you banjo sleepy boys : virtuoser bluegrass from ... new jersey ?
so , recycling , and wiederverwendung are hauptstreitpunkte .
koska koska : 1.3 million reasons , the plastikspritze gründe , the plastikspritze to reinvent the plastikspritze .
and in fact , there were this change in gay men in the united states .
it &apos;s a disease that kills a lot of adults in africa , and also many children .
in uganda , we see that the spread of the spread .
that &apos;s where we &apos;re going to close with very similar assignment .
but openness and it has a price if we think about diseases . that shouldn &apos;t be a surprise .
coffee is ugandas hauptexportprodukt .
emily oster , even the aids statistics in africa , even in africa , from a economic perspective , and comes to a startling idea : all our knowledge of hiv is wrong with the world &apos;s continent .
but i fascinated it because i was observing this kind of feinem italian italian .
he was called &quot; bullet train , &quot; because he was vorne , but every time he drove it in a tunnel , he built a druckwelle , and when the tunnel came out of the tunnel , there was always a kind of schallknall .
this hump tend to the water like a magnet .
and then we wonder why the membrane is going to take and why it &apos;s going to be so much electricity .
for example , in the einbettung of nanopartikeln in a material .
biomimicry guild , my beratungsgesellschaft , we work with the architektenbüro hok .
janine benyus : biomimicry in the use of the use of einsatz .
&quot; yes , but why ? &quot;
we were four , not one , and thankfully , not boys .
you can &apos;t do anything .
it &apos;s never going to happen again , because that &apos;s once again and never again .
they said , &quot; yes . &quot; i said , &quot; well , let &apos;s go for . &quot;
this was a meditationprogramm for over 1,000 inmates in this prison .
second , it &apos;s about the anti-korruptions movement in india .
let me tell you about a project that we did a few years later , a kind of evolution of captcha .
it &apos;s actually doing it , you can do it by having an old book .
so the number of the sides of the recaptcha is actually so high that the number of words we &apos;re doing a day , very , very big .
some of them are more funny .
at the time , the web is divided into multiple languages .
then my favorite question is coming .
there is one way to beat two flies with a meal .
but what &apos;s even more surprising is that the translations that we get from the site-nutzern , even if you &apos;re just a beginner , the translations that we &apos;re getting are just like professional übersetzern , and that &apos;s very surprising .
there are people who are schöpfen , they don &apos;t have to pay for money , they pay for your time .
the verbundene site , the company , what you really can really well .
plattformern to active participation , everything else is the normal .
and zipcar offers a very ansprechende , konsequente service that works .
for aristotle , it was good enough to be the highest , the goal , to all of that .
maybe that person is right . his thoughts , is not good .
10 percent of the time that &apos;s running the thought on -- ...
i played the violent africans , the african terrorists .
now , from the first wahlrunde , no eindeutiger ship -- so it had been done the absolute majority -- so the elections were achieved -- so the elections were erreicht in a second round of three weeks later .
here &apos;s a interesting comparison .
so i went to la jolla , and i learned how to be learned .
the people in the 17th century didn &apos;t really know much as we know that this stuff is a bunch of different molecules , and that we &apos;re not going to take it out of a particular reason and so on .
and so , charles , charles , i &apos;m going to provide money to you , you can get a building , and you can meet you , but please don &apos;t talk about religion .
reality is what you can see .
i thought everybody would be doing a little bit of mind that .
just to see what would happen if you mixed the two .
so i have something that &apos;s not something that &apos;s not personal .
if you want to be rich today , will become entrepreneurs .
they say , if you measure the temperature of the atmosphere , they don &apos;t increase -- they don &apos;t get at all -- and we &apos;re going to have very carefully carefully , for 20 years , and it doesn &apos;t go to the last 20 years .
biochemist kary : the foundation of modern science : the experiment : the experiment . he tells stories from the 17th century and from his own raketenbau-tagen in the backyard and preist the curiosity and sorgfalt good science in all of their shapes .
i wanted to represent a kind of a living body that bewohnt these verfallenden , heruntergekommenen spaces .
&quot; naked city &quot; is a nickname of new york and spleen verkörpert &apos;s melancholie and ermüdung that comes from the feeling of the entfremdung in a urban environment .
i love it , travel , and berlin , and i &apos;d become a berlin .
and the whole time , i haven &apos;t seen one of these things in some of these places until recently , until i was in the london &apos;s most popular kanälen .
the first question , and maybe they write them on a sheet of paper , or it &apos;s a sheet of paper , or a virtual sheet in your head , and for audience , for audience , you can also try to try and try to do it .
and we then stop , &quot; we &apos;re the best naturwissenschaftliche in the world , &quot; because of our british hybris .
except that -- they &apos;re going to be -- well , in your ellipse , you thought , &quot; hmm , what &apos;s going on during the night ? &quot;
and one of the hardest problems is , if people have a idea of how everything works , it &apos;s quite hard to change this .
and as an expert in a common field , i have friends and colleagues that are between the organic world , heart disease and anorganischen , leblosen world .
and you can see , he &apos;s got befruchtet , keimt , grows in a certain way .
we even have some amazing forms that we can manipulate .
and darwin himself actually said a colleague of a colleagues in a letter that life probably would be somewhere in a warm pond -- maybe not in scotland , maybe in africa , maybe somewhere else .
what is life ? what is this stuff of life ?
and we can connect them and literally literally create thousands of really big nanomolekularen molecules , in the same size of the size of dna and proteins , but it &apos;s not a carbon in sight .
we want to put them in the environment , and we want to get your energy from the sun .
and i think if we can manufacture inorganic biology and matter to make matter to be able to move forward , it will be in life .
but there &apos;s another reason why i may be these entwicklungsziele , and every single one of them is measuring .
and these are the professional female interviewer that sit down for a woman with a woman and they ask them to their geburtshistorie .
i was really struck by the friday , my computer , and i could see how mortality was falling on this morning of 128 .
as you know , these economists love the money , they always want to do more and more of it .
as you can see , this doesn &apos;t make a sense of a verbesserung of improvement that was no schnellen and this very rapid progress .
but you don &apos;t talk about it .
in those days , there were high , or very high , child mortality and family were also very large , six to eight .
there &apos;s also katar katar .
whatever it is , is more value for money .
yeah , i went to barefoot , until i was 12 .
and he told them , &quot; &quot; begs the unstrittige in question .
all the time was a border .
and gandhi-entwicklung , after i think , the world will make forward , will make a difference , not just for a few few , but for everybody .
... above the knee , yes , that would be difficult ...
the entwicklungszeit -- it took about 10 years and 700 million dollars .
he said , &quot; the earth is enough to satisfy everybody needs , but not everyone &apos;s greed .
and säuglinge die .
i went to high school .
when i was at the council of scientific industry -- 40 -- 40 years -- if two labopartorien don &apos;t speak together , i built teams .
they &apos;re eingegangen for the app-store , and i &apos;ve got apps in the process .
it &apos;s about designing something old to perfect and something to lead to the 21st century .
it &apos;s still hot , but not more radioaktiv .
but that &apos;s not just the reaktor , and it &apos;s not so reactive , it means that the spaltprodukte don &apos;t tend to leave the reactor .
i believe that the reactor i &apos;ve designed here , a innovative source , the great scientific projects that will be wird with electricity and i &apos;m really willing to do this .
we move to a erlebniswirtschaft where the experience is the actual product .
there is a manufacturer of the funknetz for the case that they &apos;re in the forest .
at least a long litanei prize , he was ratschläge at the sohn of a guter , he says , &quot; especially , &quot; mostly , &quot; but it &apos;s redlich against you , for yourself .
usually you &apos;re going to go in los angeles , but there &apos;s a place where you can run a lot out of this city .
then you will be falsch , as a schaumschläger , by the way they convince traits that they don &apos;t have .
when i was little , i was very introverted and stayed for me .
then it was just one of them , and then to start to start to build up and build it up to the bottom .
so i built it out of concrete , because it doesn &apos;t really matter .
that was this tool .
and for me , the most important thing is , because i was a kid , i wanted to go and love my passion and love , love .
25 days : the herzkammer entwickelt entwickelt entwickelt entwickelt sich : arms and hands are 36 days : the embrace is the embrace that the primitive starts to get to the time , the fetus evolved at the fastest .
the complexity , this is in a single system , it &apos;s beyond any understanding of the understanding of all the mechanisms or any mathematics today .
because apparently there is this instabile isotop lithium-6 not in the atmosphere of sun-like stars .
so what can you do with these spectra ?
recently , i sent me to berkeley berkeley , gibor basri , a email with a very interesting spectrum and said , &quot; can you look at that ? &quot;
there are two ways of doing the two ways -- about massereiche and massearme stars -- on the natural and chemical elements in the universe and be regeneriert .
because you can imagine that all of it is ?
now imagine a object , an incredible object , or something that we cannot explain , and we just say , &quot; like , we &apos;re giving up , and we don &apos;t give up . &quot; physics doesn &apos;t work . &quot;
and if we see stickstoffdioxid , and oxygen , then i think we have the perfect phrase .
i just said , &quot; really ? &quot; and he said , &quot; absolutely . &quot;
what i can tell you is it &apos;s universal ; we all have them .
i &apos;m slightly addicted to büroartikeln , but that &apos;s another talk .
that led to a small breakdown -- -- actually , it &apos;s actually like this .
and i said , &quot; but the thing is , no familienzeugs , no kindheitsscheiße . &quot;
what is the feeling of being the ones ? &quot;
i &apos;m right , you didn &apos;t have right . shut up .
we pretend that , as we have , what we do , no effects on other people .
people protokollierten their meals in twitter that the people who are windeln on their children .
so if we think about it , they &apos;re going to use the systematic improvement , we think , as you can be useful to our selbstverbesserung , to think of our selbstverbesserung , and our self-awareness .
and i want to talk about one of the things that we decided to do was to do that , we wanted to find a new access to healthcare .
so steven shares his story . but it &apos;s not alone .
here is why people pray .
i love this cyberkinetische implant , even though this were the only patientendaten that were online and available .
and here we have a paper .
you don &apos;t have any abschirmung , you don &apos;t have any data , that &apos;s not going to work for scientific methods .
that &apos;s the curve above the behandlungsabsicht .
but my brother didn &apos;t work with him to end .
if we went from here today , we would go on something that would be 300 feet tall , 120 miles long , 28 miles , and that &apos;s weighs two .
to change the condition , you need only two volts of a millisekunden-impulses .
we said , &quot; can you build this ? &quot;
we can do that better .
but there is a fascinating solution that came from the so-called komplexitätswissenschaft .
hence , they &apos;re networks of networks of ideals of complex systems .
and it has also affecting implications for the risk of risk .
so we could have any aktionär of any aktionär .
we see the emergence of langfristiger and kapitalkräftiger programs that are based on the way our wired world from the process of the complexity of the complexity .
wasserrohre have a festgesetzte capacity with festgesetzten durchflussraten -- unless you use expensive pumps and valves .
and we had 500 of these glaskolben glaskolben , and we had 500 .
without human artifice .
so we were on our doppelstockbett .
and this graph doesn &apos;t even mean something that &apos;s invented data .
and my brain begins very quickly to think that this is a akkurate representation of negativem to the world in the world .
because this question is that our external world can predict our glückslevel , but the truth is that i can predict 10 percent of the langzeitglücks of a person , if i can make their entire external world .
and this is from two reasons scientifically inkorrekt and wrong .
we &apos;re moving people to open up your mailprogramm , a positive email of the lobs or to write somebody in their social environment .
hard to say -- a familiengeschäftgeschichte , you understand -- my father was the most aufrichtigste man in the world .
and so i went to . i went to mit , schloss .
they said , do it stop .
they take a huge disk from cardboard .
he was the first digital media lab in tokyo .
do you hear this ? how cows ? this is the morning in logan .
so there &apos;s all of these things to do , but most of the love i love to experience the world is to taste the world .
and i &apos;m going to get that with passion .
your culture doesn &apos;t go in school , and i want to show you a bit of time , how we can overcome this problem .
that makes them nervous because girls don &apos;t want to go to schools , where there are no boys .
and about little moments in my life .
or mothers who have boys ?
we need to change attitudes to boys in the elementary school .
and you have the impression that they believe that this would be okay .
let &apos;s see where we go .
is this a problem ? yes , a big problem .
we think that we can give us the &quot; why &quot; -fragen evidence of nature &apos;s fundamental principles .
i &apos;m going to try and illustrate the end , and i &apos;m excited about whether it works .
and it was really a critical lesson for me to really be really interested in the object .
we created an newspaper , an newspaper , a normal newspaper .
it &apos;s a radio by the funk of my ipad , and this is a software that &apos;s going on on the ipad .
it &apos;s a digital sculpture , so i wanted to add a interaktionssystem . so i &apos;m going to put them around a näherungssensor , so that people respond to the glass when you &apos;re taking it .
i &apos;m going to be transformed in a man &apos;s middle-aged , verwandelt , and then in a old man .
50kg erlaubt have been allowed to .
radio : what do you think ?
just fold them up , and they drive on .
so i &apos;m going to ask you one other question .
and he made a königlichen kartoffel-garten , with wachmännern , who had instructions , and nacht , and night , but with the secret instruction , not terribly good at the bottom .
because they found that the human behavior is stronger .
yet , we have to create a clear vielfältigeres medien-ökosystem , where you can create these kinds of value , and it &apos;s also much more sophisticated .
now , if we have all these tools , we have to ask the question -- and thaler and sunstein have done this -- how we use these things .
they &apos;re going to lead the new karo-shreddies .
they give small , trivialen alltagsaktivitäten .
i felt , passion , soul and heart , my body had left .
audience audience : no .
sb : no , no , no . &quot;
all around us , klummpig umhertreibend makes another replicator in this culture of culture .
you probably bought them .
imagine the world full of brains and more memes than the place for you .
we &apos;re the only gen- and mem-maschinen .
i think that &apos;s the wrong approach .
that was dangerous , but hello .
they use us to produce the resource of the planet to produce more and more and more and more computers , and other amazing things that we hear at ted .
and we &apos;re going to have these third danger , how we have the second and first results ?
working with minustah -- this is the un-vertretung in haiti -- with the ministry of public health , with different nicht-regierungs-organistaionen , we put more than 1,500 building .
it won &apos;t be more cost if we &apos;re doing it right . &quot;
and because i had verbrennungen 70 percent of my body , it took about an hour .
we also have figured that it would be good , and i &apos;d given me a lot of water to recover from the pain .
and how bad would be the sentence , if i &apos;d caught ?
it wasn &apos;t that the religiöseren people -- the more commandments -- the more commandments -- less cheated and the less religious religious -- those who are not erinnern to almost not remember .
so if you don &apos;t think for a few seconds , you don &apos;t think for a few seconds , because you get a brand , it makes a difference ?
it &apos;s like this : that &apos;s like this .
i think that all of these forces have very bad effects on the stock market .
but you can believe me . i work in advertising .
these are the harmloseren that i can show you today .
and all of a sudden , amazon will become amazon amazon and a degree with the notenbank , defined by how they want money to spend what money is and what it is .
maybe that seems to be a big leap ?
i don &apos;t need to explain that , i don &apos;t have to explain to it -- last week i had to explain to my death -- they &apos;re highly structures that are sperm from one individual to another .
and i knew that animals like the regenwurm , or even most animals don &apos;t stabilize their tissue by cutting them over bone .
and that was that every hydrostatic skeleton that we found out of dato in nature , over the same grundelemente .
all of that , i was really surprised to see that .
a funny song about the global warming , from jill sobule .
well , i have to have now .
all right , ok .
do we want to play a play ?
selbstunterricht , selbstentdecken and selbstbehauptung , the benefits of a great education .
the minecraft-community flippte total completely composed of about it , and ben became a medienberühmtheit .
further , is , what is the key of this character ?
i was forced to leave my home , the democratic republic of congo , where i was studentenaktivist .
but bemerkenswerterweise has the umweltprogramm of the united nations , the wealth of the united nations on about 24 trillion dollars .
but we &apos;re not at the end of the target .
they have to stand very affordable .
but could not be done for this kind of angles to be done more ?
they were demanded by governments and the governments in the governments and in many cases they have .
but let &apos;s take our goal , we would be able to bring new economic action to the base of the pyramid .
because they &apos;re actually making a whole bunch of these little transactions to make their win .
he liked it on their lap because he said it was painful for him to be in his own bed .
since the 1920 , when sir arhur eddington and the british society is degraded for wissenschaftsförderung that the sun seems to be .
so , what is fusion ? here &apos;s something here .
and this energy is it &apos;s fusion to make fusion .
about a wie like that kind of conventional kraftwerken .
we have to make it a power station .
but it &apos;s the biggest arab country , and it &apos;s also a very powerful impact .
they wanted to be the democracy , but they were all over the countries who were the population in the seltensten of the last month , in the last month of the month , their opinion had been a beamten , and it was only four percent .
but the expectations of people are important for their future .
so the question is , &quot; what is the male supporting support for women &apos;s disease ? &quot;
i promise you , she &apos;s reading the message .
nobody can tell you , they just send a text .
you could see the immediate effects of laws or the hasserfüllten talk on a schulversammlung , and see what happens .
12 seconds , and i went over 35 seconds and went over 35 to 35 .
that &apos;s an unnatürlich for a rocket .
it weighs less than a aa-batterie .
the smallest lufthauch of the schieren forces of nature .
we can afford to be able to afford individuals and gehör .
we think somebody else , somebody who &apos;s somebody who &apos;s somebody who &apos;s going to solve with more of that problem is going to solve this problem .
we flew it in the pacific .
it took 10 full prototypes until we had something that was really flew .
and so there is this incredible hochgefühl , which is possible , and that &apos;s what this is what it means .
and we think we &apos;re going to take our moral ambiguity .
and the director was pretty much a movie , and i told me that he gave me mad . and he said to me , &quot; this place is a strafanstalt . these guys are heavy offenders .
it took several of such events , until i figured out what i should do .
when i started with this program , my ursprünglicher plan was a siegerteam plan to create the underdogs of the underdogs movement , to create a siegerteam program of the underdogs .
and they look at the yokneam , everything is so small and tiny .
i feel blessed and fortunate that i had my post about the posten of my post on the nyu of the nyu , and in my home , where i was doing this incredible rides with this group , and machen their team .
and how often my self would have to die before i would understand that it hasn &apos;t existed ?
and i was a really good dancer .
oddly , heilten , this findings isn &apos;t my most geringes sense of self-worth , this sense of otherness .
that was because i didn &apos;t even have myself .
imagine what kind of existence we could have , if we honor the inevitable death of the self , the privilege of life and the very best thing to get next .
and this is a cafe in the ocean .
but instead of looking at the appearance we focused on .
we also discovered that , as a effizientere structure and a kostensparendere way that would get through this structure .
but we found that seeds -- this really important project is just going to be a really important project -- but that seeds -- in the leading state of the führenden gardens are not issued .
we worked with a kunstrasenhersteller to develop a miniversion of the market , so even if you &apos;re visually impaired , so it was kind of knusprig and soft , the piece of landscape you see here .
it &apos;s actually just the first few of them that you have , and the rest is only for postcards .
the book is called &quot; the blank slate , &quot; the popular idea of the human mind is a blank slate and all his structure of its religious , culture , education and experience .
well , there &apos;s a set of political reasons that they like the people who enjoy people .
it &apos;s not clear whether these generalizations were , the verallgemeinerungen , the time , the datenlage seemed to be able to support this .
another one &apos;s geistes- and kunstwissenschaften to the universities that are in vielfacher ways in the demise of the places .
now , the other hot iron is parenting .
and i think you can &apos;t say this .
i also call calls peta , just as jux , and they don &apos;t like it , but it &apos;s confirm it .
there is no script there , there &apos;s no script , there &apos;s no nonsense .
he says , &quot; a day . &quot;
i don &apos;t like what i think i think . &quot;
oh , i live in a computer program -- that &apos;s a strange .
so i wondered what would happen if we were going to challenge some of these geheiligten floskeln .
right ?
it &apos;s true -- we &apos;ve been working on the global explain as a society , each of us .
your iphone without the people who the same shell , the same circuitry , the same keyboard , and over again .
and then it became the dicker and the weight , and now it &apos;s 886 pages .
and i said to brian , &quot; what did tony do ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; is it true that they have got in here ? &quot;
but how do you do in a sane way ?
so all of the things that were on tony at the normalsten , evidence of it , according to his clinician , that he &apos;s crazy to this new kind of new kind of new ways .
he came in schwächelnde in schwächelnde , and 30 percent of the workforce , changed american cities in geisterstädte .
and i added , &quot; i have a list of the psychopathischen features of the hosentasche features .
and the least juwelen are the best aspects of the personality .
anyway , that was two years ago , and that &apos;s where my book was ended .
in fact , the trend was going to go to the loslösung of the rest of the world .
and as a consequence of this convenience kind of auseinandersetzungen , it &apos;s very difficult to say , very difficult to say , i &apos;m going to vertrete the true islam . &quot;
it may be that a great war between east and west ausgefochten , and that it was in the underlying demokratie democracy against communism .
and even though the president of polit-taktischen , very well , very well , very well , has been very good at the enemy of islam , there &apos;s been nonetheless , there &apos;s nonetheless , for a natural impulse to bezeichnen the other side as an enemy .
when the treasure sank in 2000 , you &apos;d just start the pinnacle of the best brütezeit that the scientists had ever recorded for african penguins -- that was the gefährdete of the world .
and the day after our arrival , two of us were born with the intimate room over space , space , two of the world &apos;s age two oiled penguins .
we have this technique in the treasure rescue once again .
and that &apos;s really important because the african penguin , a year ago , a endangered species .
on the corner row , on the bahnhofsparkplatz , the bahnhofsparkplatz , a gesundheitszentrum , in the vorgärten and even the police station .
people are open for the essensgeschichte .
we launched this campaign -- very , very , very amusing -- they called each other .
this is not a schulübung of the second grade .
these are lehren erschienen , abstract .
hillel , put on a leg and said , &quot; what you &apos;re going to do is not your neighbor , it &apos;s not the torah . that &apos;s the torah .
now , that &apos;s not the whole story .
and achilles takes hektors leichnam and übergibt him at the father , and the two men see each other and see each other &apos;s two and a half .
this is actually really looking at me in biology and science , and i &apos;ve drawn the betrachten of the living cells in the microscope .
every grain of sand has a size of a millimeter millimeter .
you can see these mikrometeoriten .
this image was the beginning of the röntgentechnologie .
we see all the same thing , believe me .
the walls are made of 700 inches of dickem , solid concrete .
and that &apos;s a röntgen-aufnahme .
it has human assoziationen .
in the x-ray , we see all the little überlappungen in the corners .
i had to put the car in the middle of the center for seen , for yourself , no simple task .
yes , they gave 12 monkeys for a week , and after this week , they just used it for toilet .
the science says that we &apos;re going to live forever .
no , i &apos;m going to take a tooth .
for me , it &apos;s a very , very important thing .
thank you very much . goodbye .
how do we know that it &apos;s wrong ? maybe we &apos;re not going to agree about ourselves .
not a professor and verurteilter , only two boys , ready to philosophieren .
and then at that time , my life was fine .
all i saw in the manufacturing was that there was the right thing to be the right thing between the feinschmeckern between the züchtern and the jägern-sammlern .
would you have to do that time that information would be ?
we spent a lot of time spent a billion dollars a billion dollar , and they &apos;re listening to properly ‒ , and it was verwickelt , in which he was involved , and what we found was shocking , but later on it .
then there is dan etete .
we were horrified that these shell quickly had their vermögenswerte vermögenswerte , and the most important wichtigsten in in london gelisteten bergbauunternehmen sehr .
it &apos;s too complex and difficult to change it .
we &apos;re going to all die . we &apos;re going to all live . we &apos;re all going to be sick . people leave us .
there are places that you can &apos;t go , you don &apos;t think you can &apos;t think , the worlds that you cannot inhabit .
they have a wildheit , and one of the i think that you &apos;re a foundation of a new paradigmas .
she &apos;s made the decision to get no rasierklinge or glasscherbe , but their life would be a living , that it &apos;s going to happen to any other girls .
we &apos;re all refugees .
but you get to this thing on the head , and then happens .
but this doesn &apos;t do that . &quot;
i miss michael michael .
he didn &apos;t find that , but he was mitarbeiter , but they said , &quot; you go in the rehab , or you &apos;re going to get fired and i &apos;m going to kill me . &quot;
ah ! we meet them , we &apos;re hitting the heimlichen , let &apos;s get us .
if it &apos;s on the box , which is the gegenseite , it &apos;s bildet .
the characteristics that we have the word apparatus to be in adults that we should eliminate this old word abschaffen , if it comes to criticize , to criticize , to criticize , to criticize with verantwortungslosigkeit and irrationalem .
if i anzweifle the ability to anzweifle the 10 percent of the zinsen weighed on the last 10 billion , i &apos;m going to get your ability to get more money from me to get it back to it .
it &apos;s why we &apos;re not going to live in the dark times .
and the third thing is all the sound we create people are creating .
that &apos;s after the council of selective logging .
there are many facetten of geräuschkulissen , among other things , like animals , and singing , taught us , i &apos;ve been taught to see another time .
so that was extremely embarrassing .
and if you wonder how much that is , this ebay-logo are 16 new .
so , 37 , is our demographic .
it &apos;s very impressive , and a very nice concert .
and these are the subjects that are actually going to be on the heart .
a generation that makes so much more importance from video games as the real world .
all of these are problems outside of my favorite cycle .
i &apos;m not sure what the future of video games is for our civilization .
in conclusion ! yeah . that &apos;s it .
and he would really enjoy that right .
so , you get quickly from the simple for complex , if you do more . that &apos;s like .
and then they look at them , and it &apos;s umständlich -- i thought at least for the most long time , until she explained to me , to think about it , to think about it .
it &apos;s going to drive the other direction .
girl : there were a sphere , and a schaumstoffball , because it &apos;s two different gewichte , and if you fall at the same time , you may fall apart .
but we couldn &apos;t train a thousand new teachers to save our lives .
and it &apos;s a märlein . &quot;
we &apos;ll end up the way we &apos;re going to change the way we &apos;ve changed the world around us .
that &apos;s going to have incredible implications .
why do they do what they do ?
everybody would want to want to want to want to want to new version .
they affect us too .
they &apos;re actually going to be in this moment .
i &apos;m going to keep his words back in the order .
&quot; well , yes , i said , &quot; strange , you ask that .
and she said , &quot; that &apos;s not going to be again . &quot;
and we looked at it , and i was grateful because she said , &quot; wow ! this is a little bits . &quot;
the goal of the project is very simple .
this is completely personalized medicine in topform medicine .
now the answer is a multidisziplinäres team .
i work with the imperial and the brompton , which is some of the serious problems with the project , problems that should not have been .
in medicine , there are so many people who don &apos;t want change , right , right , if an dahergelaufener engineer , the answer has gotten the answer .
you can actually find novel solutions that haven &apos;t seen before , and it &apos;s pretty quickly and just very quickly .
yeah , well , you guys guys have no longer my life because trackpads once were about schöner form .
no , but it &apos;s true : the internet has changed the world .
you know the story .
and i met the dozo .
and i &apos;m not challenged to draw a nice cartoons .
thank you very much .
so , &quot; our lonely earth , &quot; i got a lot of talk about the audience .
we have a lot of time on the existence of the animals that we &apos;ve been here until they &apos;ve been here until we achieve the second era .
his effect is the distribution of this very thin einschlagschicht across the planet , and we had a very zügigen death of this beautiful ammoniten , leconteiceras of this beautiful ammoniten , leconteiceras , and so much else , and so much else .
it &apos;s the top two , the t. rex of his time .
they hate us animals .
this is when material comes out of the depths of the earth and the surface , distributed over the surface of the planet .
i &apos;m a 130km of the coast of the coast , which is going to happen to me ?
they have an accident . they have two options : they &apos;re going to die , or they &apos;re going to die , or you &apos;re going to take the hydrogen sulfide and say 75 percent of them will be saved .
pw : blessing and curse .
some of them are countries that are specific that deregulation , or even the best way to be able to get investments , trade , trade , trade , trade .
the answer is simple : the chinese define these factories than chemical , not as a pharmazeutische , and checking it .
i don &apos;t know what we can do , but i can use at least my office to develop all of them together to develop a solution . &quot;
they need a secure environment .
now we have the idea that it &apos;s about the beginning of a new way , and the way that we &apos;re doing is a new way of nuclear international tasks .
human rights is to be a very simple question : can i give this one person back ?
or the boy who &apos;s finding the boy who had been laid down the fire to see if you can change it . &quot;
okay , ready ? go .
i was fire and flame .
again , again , we saw the spoken word poetry to walls .
after the fight , he schüttelte his nasses , wolkenweißes hair and said , &quot; you &apos;re a god . &apos; &apos; no , you &apos;re the god . &quot;
i &apos;m going to go to see a lot when i teach , and i don &apos;t always get to see my students at the third step , but i was fortunate to see her journey evolved as she did .
my parents have me sarah , which is a biblischer name .
i want to talk about a few ideas that drove me to become a dokumentarfotograf .
when i saw that the war for every person has incredibly profound and that the fotojournalismus was actually a factor in the konfliktlösung , i wanted to be a photographer to be a kriegsfotograf .
in south africa , in south africa , after nelson mandela had been discharged from the prison , the black bevölkerung of the arctic .
the next day i made a rwanda , and it was like i was going into the expressfahrstuhl in the hell .
after the fall of suharto in indonesia , i started exploring the conditions of poverty in a country that was on the way .
one hospital &apos;s hospital without borders , in a refugee camp .
the kriegsmedizin is so efficient that the percentage of soldiers that survive , which is a verwundung survival , in that war is much higher than in any other way .
to make sure that as much as possible , can be wrong , we have all of those procedures in the election .
so you &apos;re going to make it .
but this is a broad and pretty heavy topic , so i had to be myself .
the size is the population -- here &apos;s big china , here , big india .
and in all the eastern religions , there was the level of japan in japan .
because death is going to be kompensiert with a more different child .
and what &apos;s the cause in qatar ?
they have a great lehrwert .
all religions are in the world , in the situation , they can achieve their values , and adapt to this new world .
and then , like all of our generation , we lived in a himalayakloster .
eight day eight .
in india , my 150.00 friends , and i tür from door to the same picture with this same picture , to every single house in india . we made over a billion .
that &apos;s the überwachungssystem .
i asked them -- it &apos;s all grippespezialisten -- and i asked them to tell you the questions they want to ask them .
i think we owe the gphin of the gphin and ron st. john , i hope , ron is somewhere in the audience -- he &apos;s the founder of gphin .
larry brilliant : first , they &apos;re not pissed off because of the injury ?
have a klimawandel-ngo klimawandel-ngo , &quot; the &quot; the &quot; group group . &quot;
why should we have a positive impact on the world , in the world than a company ?
they save 85 percent of a led to a led to an old light bulb with an old light bulb .
sometimes people think that 100 percent is pretty hard to be , and we had this conversation in the company .
a solarpaneel pays in seven or eight years .
from our 17,000 managern in the very long period of time , the 47 women are women , but that &apos;s not enough , and we want to end up with this gap and that path to the high management of management .
there was a equation in my family , like , like , if you &apos;re intelligent , you &apos;re not spirituell .
this , &quot; he said , &quot; is the structure of reality . &quot;
anybody who &apos;s going to take it in the shoes or the shoes of the ears .
to the end of our mittagessens , we went to the openness of others .
and as i would return to bangalore , and often in many discussions of my friends , where we were living in the freunden of the meinen , while they were heftig over new kneipenöffnungszeiten , where a drink costs more than what they &apos;ve lived in 14 years old .
he searches for forgiveness , and said that he wants to improve the life of his child .
this kontingent seemed pretty happy to be happy , and it had no deaths to live , although even dozens of friedenssoldaten were killed in liberia .
and we &apos;re responsible for that ?
it &apos;s troubling -- not ? -- that the media &apos;s media have such a bad job , that a small group of activists in the way that information is capable of information than the rest of the weltpresse combined .
j yep . that was the front page in the guardian , and it was in all countries around kenya , in the tansanianischen and south african press .
j the impact on the people who were working on it , were dead .
and there are lots of information .
i &apos;d be interested in just what we &apos;ve heard about -- i &apos;m curious about the opinion of ted audience .
and we said , &quot; oh , tell us more .
so you &apos;re careful to be careful with the term hackers .
and just a month ago , it was passed all the alles of isländischen parliament .
and from all these numbers , i &apos;m going to start with two or three variables .
this piece can be shown very different , depending on where you &apos;re hinstellt .
first i read about it in a klage arztbesuch , which is between the ärztekomitee for the ärztekomitee economy and seven fastfood-restaurants .
so this research is so the best zubereitung for a chicken that doesn &apos;t allow us to leave it to a chicken , but with not too much for a long time to get it up , and a marinade from lemon juice , brown sugar or salzwasser .
and then the next summer i was working under the line of dr. basu at the unt-gesundheitszentrum unt-gesundheitszentrum in fort worth .
and this insight is an incredibly important for the effectiveness of chemotherapy , maybe for many different types of cancer .
for example , we &apos;re volatile compounds of chemical pollutants that are in our schools , and found the workplace .
because all of these solutions are , of course , they &apos;re sustainably and they &apos;re langzeitinvestitionen -- langzeitinvestitionen for our generation and for the next generations .
and immediately called a voice : &quot; a kangaroo . &quot;
after the conference , after my talk , people came to me and women .
it &apos;s hard !
a prosthetic is not more for the need for need to need to have a lack of governance .
we &apos;re all different from different perspectives .
i was as an beijing to be known as the olympic games .
about 80 percent of these microblogger are young people , under 30th , 30 people .
and they &apos;re most unemployment , inflationen , anziehenden anlehnen of the banks , werterhöhung of the renmenbi , nachfragerückgang of europe and america of the products that they produce .
they have a kind of vehicle that you can put on a piece of chicken or fish , and it looks like the cattle .
people think about questions : will we continue our environment to continue to continue to continue to continue a higher bips ?
there is nothing to eat , but the conditions were ideal for the winterruhe .
now , the series left was not even before , so they &apos;re the first one that you see .
mars is similar to mars than the earth , it seems to be the same as lebensfeindlich .
sousa was scared that we will lose the opportunity to lose this , quote , quote , zitat , they would take us .
but more importantly , that bmi used diagnostic tools to generate the new arrangements to build new forms of manufacturing that they &apos;re sending off to their clients . then in the year , when ascap was watching the gebühren of the pink , the majority of the channel to bmi .
and i ...
for the memory i &apos;m going to do , i &apos;m trying to do as good liberaler , and i &apos;m going to demand a little bit of a government to demand , a mistake , right ?
this realization is unheimlich zersetzend , unheimlich unheimlich .
okay , i &apos;m not going to give you any alarm here , but i just noticed that the person on the right is a liar .
&quot; honey , you &apos;re not looking at it , no . &quot;
another study that showed that , in fact , strangers were three times in the first 10 minutes of their own .
here is a little bit of koko with her kittens , koko .
i &apos;ll tell you .
don &apos;t look at a look at the eyes .
we say , &quot; yes , &quot; while we shake your head .
science has been very much more of the more indikatoren of the city .
look carefully , and you &apos;re going to see the verräterische smile .
so much more sophisticated world can be good for us , a little clearer to be in terms of our moral rules .
and that &apos;s not true , right ?
you know , we often think that speech the world that we live in , but that &apos;s not true .
so what if you &apos;re a exzentrischer , if not tragic , witz , harry , fungiert than ethnic hetze .
six months later , no one , no explanation , they were free .
that &apos;s what i &apos;m interested in .
when i was 10 , i read james baldwins , &quot; another country , &quot; and i was broken .
a new song i would like to be a , a , .
so i took a little time to study coke .
and in the remote areas of africa , it &apos;s hard to find a good road .
how do you get incentive based on the impact that you have to act on this remote control ?
so i &apos;m not going to be so attractive to ansprechend me .
they &apos;re waiting for being cut .
much more people would have been born .
i &apos;m going to tell you two things . first of all , what we lost , and second , how we put it .
here you can see the largest part of the living creatures of the florida of florida .
if there is no fishing yet , because it &apos;s geschützt , or it &apos;s großartig , it &apos;s great .
after a few years , after five to seven years , the fish come back , food , food , and then the algae comes back .
you can see the boundary of the schutzgebietes , because there are boats all the boats .
if it &apos;s so good , if it &apos;s so good , how much is it going on ?
so the protection of the shoes and the ocean has become a sink for funding to funds and philanthropischen institutions , and that &apos;s not acceptable .
in the coral coral , we found that the pyramid is the equivalent of the serengeti , where five lions come on a gnu .
okay , enric , i thank you for you to have some spiritual spiritual . thank you .
it has been turned out to the longest creatures of the ocean .
they come to the submersible -- they come with the eyes in the windows and you get to the submersible .
in other , we try to work with our partners at woods with woods -- this world -- this world , this unerforschte area -- the unerforschte area -- in the lab .
bl : these worms have no verdauungssystem . they don &apos;t mouth mouth .
what we &apos;ve seen before was out of the pacific .
we &apos;re going to try to show you the pacific in the hd .
these worms grow several inches in the week .
the concept of bestandsbewahrung is futile .
and the rest of the one percent of the time is to have any percent of the formula that you can apply to the situation .
they also have the mathematical structure , which is from rastern , measurements , beschriftungen , dark , dark , etc .
the students must have to do these . you have to work .
and the best part , or one of the best parts that we &apos;re not going to get the answer from the antwortschlüssel end of the lehrer-version .
what &apos;s the small hadron collider ?
here you find the fastest growing in the world in the world .
it &apos;s privatschulen . there are no government schools in the slums .
this is a computer that was installed at the moment , by a revolutionären sozial , unternehmer entrepreneur named sugata experimente who were typing the most heroic experimente who showed that children can learn from a computer that can learn from a computer .
now , the key is motivation , and in particular ways .
this is a school in a van in a van in a bus , which is the fastest growing of the city of asia .
you should turn it into a mcdonald &apos;s .
there are tremendous , schools , hochschulen , hospitals , to innovate , and informal environments , communities , communities , communities , social networks .
every child from 15 , which is going to have a place in a school , 2015 , in 2015 , will be able to get a state .
and as i look at him , this scene that i &apos;m looking at me , which i &apos;ve been looking for the tears , and i &apos;ve been with me for 25 years .
here &apos;s another parents from teenagers ? all right ? all right ? and you have to cook for them -- and they &apos;re all night every night for two , three or four , it &apos;s ridiculous .
he sits everywhere , and they would like everything !
these gay , people like me , like , as separate citizens , are treated as a doctor , and it &apos;s right to our nose .
there are people who have to have scared of their job , so they don &apos;t show you who they really are , here &apos;s not just about the home , it &apos;s not just north carolina ; in all states , it &apos;s legal .
think about it .
and i was scared .
about three years ago i read a paper in the new york times .
who were my grandparents ?
they &apos;re helping us to be what we could have .
so , the evolution works .
and in fact , here &apos;s this insect .
i &apos;ve got a little bit of somebody on somebody .
it didn &apos;t just apply to 43 to 44 degrees fahrenheit , for about two days , but it holds a constant temperature .
but the contrast is going to be in about that . they &apos;re pouring in front of the background .
here &apos;s the americans &apos; russians , and yes , it was -- actually , a game .
she started telling me about it , and all parents here will recognize the schlüsselworte .
i have a irische .
our lives is defined by data , and the presentation of this data is to create a fantastic interfaces that can tell the great stories .
i also have a look at the various perimeter , and you can pick what you want to highlight from the remains .
it &apos;s a beinloser man who &apos;s sitting in the box and control that schachspieler controls .
a sammlungsgeschwindigkeit of about 11 sheep a hour , which is a stundenlohn of 68 cents .
and in the reason you can do -- what you see on the left is the originalframe , and on the right , you see the frame , and you &apos;re being interpreted by the right people who was being interpreted by 16 people who had no idea what they do .
and in the bell , inventor , aaron koblin : and we took all of these pieces pieces and they put them into another mechanical turk .
but we knew that we had the right person to take care of us and to build something .
and underneath all of the individual acts that people have submitted to the project .
thank you very much .
so i made reihen of images , and they put them together , and they put them together in portfolios .
a unvorhergesehene consequence of that , that you &apos;re always going to see one part of his picture , and that leads to a very free net .
and sometimes i have a emotional reaction to news , like the earthquake in haiti .
then i walked 50 miles , then 60 miles .
it &apos;s like the different layers of which we are made , and what we &apos;re presenting to the world as our identity .
another glasprojekt is in a public library in san jose .
so every building has its own personality .
it may be easier than ever before , and to help you get a good job .
i don &apos;t think we &apos;re special materialistisch .
it &apos;s just too strange .
you know , in the middle ages , if you met someone who was very poor , you called this one &quot; eureka , &quot; which is the happiness that fate , the fate , not hold .
and that &apos;s going to make the youngest dish with angels and trompeten , and the sky will open up .
i told you the action of madame bovary .
what i think i really talk about , is successful and failure .
we should make sure that it &apos;s our , we really are the u.s. most of our own ambitionen .
alain de botton : a freundlichere , sanftere erfolgsphilosophie erfolgsphilosophie .
if you train them for these sport , they don &apos;t smile .
you know , you &apos;re floating with beschlagener goggles , and you &apos;re going to have 60 trains a minute , you &apos;re never really going to be a little bit more sophisticated , you don &apos;t see well .
they &apos;re in the liquid .
my breath is down on three atemzüge that minute .
and they should worry about me , i didn &apos;t have to worry about it .
i swam with this thing .
it &apos;s the only schwimmstrecke that interest me .
that &apos;s already already today .
the gateway can be a smartphone , or it may be a special eingerichtetes , like many of these things are special gateways , because they &apos;re not so good .
many of you have received the phillips phillips .
this is a very important part of our lives . we should be a third of our lives .
ok . let &apos;s now go from sleep to the sleep .
so we can change medicine in the pflegebereich , in all of the history , in all of the history of frühgeborenen or ungeborenen children to the seniors ; the entire spectrum of disease -- i hope i hope you &apos;re a sense of what the world &apos;s all about .
so i hope i &apos;ve convinced you -- the implications on the krankenhausressorcen are hugely enormously and the impact on disease are equally impressive in all these different diseases and more .
how do we create working societies ? longevity .
and in the novel , a particular name is going to be created , and he says , maybe that &apos;s not the best way , and it &apos;s destroying the whole system .
and so they wouldn &apos;t be there .
and she &apos;s a great thing .
that should be a dünsten , should be faster .
maybe you ask yourself , how we do this schnittbilder .
this is the only student in the world , in the partielle differentialgleichungen .
this is the finished hamburger , the finished &apos;s hamburger , the finished &apos;s hamburger .
a talk about the robot is also a talk about surgery .
and surgeons were more than doctors and doctors .
but ultimately , the end is the equivalent .
they had to give her rate movements with the instrumentation .
i &apos;ve talked to you about the big , complicated robot .
and as you can see , how it comes out to do anything useful , cannot stay in that way .
and we don &apos;t need to be even in this makro-blick .
we &apos;re here to talk about accidents .
but we had a problem .
okay , now , it was partially my fault .
we have not just shown that bacteria can be the solution , but also that openness to ungewissen the openness towards the ungewissen and the cost of the risiken discoveries .
the film that we &apos;re going to see is going to see , they made the weltausstellung for the weltausstellung in new york .
i &apos;m not an exception .
it kept on . they always have always always doing things better .
they didn &apos;t say , &quot; our style are curves . let &apos;s make the house . &quot;
i think in my family , we were very lucky . because we &apos;ve learned from design .
go , very well .
ed : and then embassy row is a historic stätte . there &apos;s in the history of the story of the pariser diaspora here in front of where the message has been going on .
you see this chair ? the orange ? that &apos;s the organic chair .
because it &apos;s part of where we want .
it was nachrichtenartikel full of outrage , they were filled with speculation . they were anekdotisch . no commercial information .
one of them is known : the population . the population has increased two billion people on almost seven billion people in the last 50 years .
brent lawson : nice to be here .
you see the lines check when the population is happening .
before i talk about the cost of talking , i have to be very clear to very clear that i &apos;m going to be very clear to realize that i &apos;m very sure .
so , liberation actually .
but recently , we can , for recently , thanks to technical progress , now the quanten-levitation and quantum locking .
and first , a few strands of magnetic field inside the inner , but the superconductor like it , if you move their movements , and so they &apos;re stören .
so this round thing , i can also expand of course , to form a strange rail .
and it was inspired by this quote from douglas adams . the situation is from &quot; the situation is coming from the galaxy . &quot;
because of course , they don &apos;t explain how to do that if you want to do it and have no schmelzanlage .
but even though they were not convinced , they said , &quot; okay , we call back . &quot; -- you &apos;ve never got .
tt : yeah , i have .
so , it &apos;s so much to say , &quot; what will happen if moore &apos;s law to be in the bounds of the bounds ? &quot;
today , you can buy half a billion , and they &apos;re better , because they &apos;re faster .
but where do we get the software ?
larry page has a passionate talk on our gründungsveranstaltung , where he plädierte to put this big challenges of humanity .
they wanted to catch the fish .
it may sound itself , but it &apos;s incredibly frightening that many american gerüchte of the many american , greater than the last person to come to the last , or maybe i might say , maybe some of the time or maybe ...
so the tsunami can be seen as a kind of bahnbrechender moment , a moment where the blogosphere &apos;s sozusagen .
probably you probably put them within three to five percent of the number of the number of the geleebohnen in the glass , and it would be better than the estimate of 90 percent of them .
somebody has figured out , so , in fact , link other , etc . , etc .
he ended up his erläuterungen , and i &apos;ll wait on a 300 pounds of heavy heavy on paper . he says , &quot; this is all i want to leave . &quot;
so i &apos;ll show you a little bit of 30 seconds of the thing , and the skin without the skin .
that canopy in the sea is above the surface of the earth &apos;s surface than all the other species combined .
many of us , i &apos;m locked too well , that the exploitation of the ocean is only in the last 50 or maybe 100 years ago .
this is a wires of our vehicles , our eyes and hands on the bottom of the bottom .
so there is a barcode on this product that &apos;s exactly what the computer is exactly what the product is .
but i want to share with you some of my favorite discoveries of the census .
we don &apos;t know why they do that , we don &apos;t know .
this is based on a brand-new article that &apos;s going to be in the fachzeitschrift .
but that &apos;s not all about it .
as an architect , i got to confront this .
mitchell joachim : don &apos;t build a house , you &apos;re growing it !
i find that very interesting and very unorthodox , because what you &apos;ve heard in the last few days is to go into different directions , directions that are specific and unique for problems .
now , we all think that shelley obviously , obviously , a great romantic poet , many of us , that he wrote some wonderful essays , and the most famous one is called a named poesie .
i &apos;m going to read you this .
and at a certain time , at a certain time , it &apos;s siedeln on rocks .
but let me show you the latest robotertechnik .
if you used to radio , before the digital radio , the radiosender einstellte , and &quot; krrckkk &quot; on the gewünschten channel , that was this noise .
the basic idea of bayesianischen is that you have two sources of sources of which are the implications of the conclusions .
that means that i have to make predictions about the future .
now , there is a very clear example where a von sinneseindruck feels different than when he was produced by a different person .
and in the meanwhile , i got two daughters .
so they knew the rules that you have to play with the other person playing .
if these dots were cars on a rennparcours , you would have no idea what &apos;s going on .
we &apos;ve shown that we can explain to a huge part of the data -- people actually plan their movements all the way to the negative consequences of the sex .
this is from the vorbeiflug of marine trade , iv .
mars has been the biggest einschlagkrater of the solar system , the hellas-becken .
this is my lieblingsbild . it was just taken off a couple of weeks ago .
the oldest stone on earth is only 3.6 billion .
and the result of our treffens was a raketengetriebenes roboterflugzeug called ares .
we fold it , and we transport it in a raumfahrzeug .
this is about tilamook , oregon .
i believe in the packaging , let &apos;s look at this -- &quot; eight to 12 . &quot;
and there was a guy who sold these weapons for lego , because lego -- the dänen -- no , they &apos;re not on guns .
and then there are some examples of some examples of some examples of stuff , are really sculptures .
i have to tell you , for me , it changed in this evening .
perhaps most importantly , the impact on other companies is enormously .
in fact , politics is rang .
in brazil , there are 29.000 ethanol-zapfsäulen , whereas the united states is only 700 , and armselige two in california -- and within three years , the percentage of flexible-fuel-vehicles percent is in the same percent .
that &apos;s not unwesentlich . biokraftstoffe are a really big thing .
scientists are explaining us -- and these are just estimates -- that we have to halve the growth of greenhouse gases and that as quickly as possible .
i can &apos;t wait to wait what we &apos;ve tedsters against crisis .
there are fewer people who are still available to the noch , and then you get this plateu of the curve , and you get this classic curve .
b is the edge of the network .
and that &apos;s happening at any time nodes .
the red dots will be the grippe-fälle , and the yellow dots are going to be friends of the people .
would you get immunity to the populations-ebene ?
and there is , i think , three ways that can be used to be used .
the building was in construction to collapse of the venezolanischen economy and the death of the bauunternehmers of the &apos; 90s .
although it seems to be a totally place , if you see it from above , there &apos;s a whole network of wasserwegen and channels that connect every house every house .
in this tradition , the future bride are going to bring all their possessions , which they will soon bring their new husband .
what a place like the torre david &apos;s david , is this kind of skelettrahmen , where people have a foundation that they can do .
we can only ask , &quot; how are the rentiere of the weihnachtsmanns ? &quot; and you know it immediately and what we want to ask .
it has replaced the workers by technology .
you can see the links in the screen a few symbols that show what to be in his right arm .
they are older , and they &apos;re getting older .
or even , if we &apos;re going to get a lot older , our cars , to get people to visit .
they were disappeared in a moment .
it was always obvious that we can &apos;t win .
the two specialists behind the curtain will help me the outcome of the screen .
one of the journalists said , &quot; what &apos;s going on ? &quot;
the evangelikalen are hinzugekommen , as jewish verbände .
i think there are some of the reasons , actually , many reasons , but here &apos;s just a few of us to focus on .
he was attracted by the flames , he &apos;s killing it , he was like a motte , a little bit of a adrenalin-junkie .
let me go from door to door to the international community , and see if someone &apos;s polizeikräfte or troops for those are these .
but for sergio , it was too late .
he saw them .
samantha power about a complicated hero of a complicated hero .
this creates jobs and possibilities of all the wertschöpfungskette .
but today i &apos;m going to talk about the world &apos;s garbage zugänglichkeit , because this year , last year , and 2008 during the hungerskrise food supply , for every 2,700 calories .
and i go into this shops , if you &apos;re there , the way out into the fields , to see what you can get , and i &apos;m noticing you can &apos;t get food .
we see changes of the participation of school in schools .
i want to talk about something i call digital food .
and what i found is that instead of taking the subventionen and other things , invest in a school program .
thank you very much .
we could do that same thing in cancer .
they &apos;re not going to go to a brustkrebsklinik .
it &apos;s not abstract ; it &apos;s the interaction with the environment .
it &apos;s a umwerfendes device , not because it tells me how many kilokalorien i verbrauche , but because it &apos;s been überwacht 24 hours .
that &apos;s never been shown .
so the leistungskraft of this magnets is so large that we can see this technology , that technology can see this technology .
that you don &apos;t have to shrink the tumor .
if the magnet is big enough , and your resolution is up , and you can actually start to get all the proteins in the body and start to understand the individual system .
most of us find the reassuring , and interestingly , 12 vibrations of the world is about the atem-frequenz of a schlafenden human .
so , if i go to this -- -- longer as a couple of seconds , they would feel uncomfortable ; longer than a few minutes , and you would leave the room in tree .
that &apos;s all of the truth . and that &apos;s the tune that &apos;s at the time of the world at the time of the world .
and i stood there with two very good friends of mine , richard weber and kevin vallely .
while we &apos;re getting miles and miles from sastrugi überqueren -- gefrorene eis-schneeverwehungen , who could be hüfttief .
as i &apos;m here today , and i &apos;m talking about you , i &apos;ve been going around the gesamtzeit of about five years .
just 10 kilometers from the coast of walking and in 381 feet .
the ocean , climate and weather , they hold the temperature and shapes the chemistry of the world .
one-way-reisen , there are easy ...
this is the result of that , if you don &apos;t know that there are boundaries of what we can take out the oceans .
in the past three years , the u.s. for example , gut quadratkilometer quadratkilometer quadratkilometer meer .
we need tiefsee-u-boote , new technologies to the ocean .
most of my early career , i wanted to figure out how the wings of insects can generate enough force to keep in the air .
let &apos;s look at this idea of simplicity .
this is a beautiful picture of visual interneurone : a mouse from jeff lichtman , and you can see the fabulous images of brains that he showed in his talk .
they selektieren a zellsatz , to establish some behavior , another neuronenregler , another neuronenregler , and you can think that this is a very complicated system in a very complicated system .
our mission is it &apos;s a detailiertes and realistisches computer model of human brain .
it &apos;s home and drinking tea .
if you look at the surface of the neocortex , you &apos;d find that it &apos;s made out of little components . g5 processors , like in a computer .
how many of the typus tree are there ? where are they ?
we can look at the tissue , and we can change neurons .
we can upload all these neurons , every single one in its own processor , and we activate it , and see what happens .
henrsy markram says that the secrets of the brain is going to be solved . mental illness , perception : they &apos;re made of neurons and electrical signals , and he &apos;s doing them with a supercomputer that modeliert the brain with 100,000,000,000,000 synapses .
it would be two or three thousand bombs .
the air force started to build smaller models , and began this .
that &apos;s what nasa did to get a acht-mann-version to mars , to mars .
i &apos;ll tell you a little bit about irrationales behavior .
it &apos;s a fantastic time to write . because there &apos;s so much less of the people you can get .
the lower level ? yellow .
if you ask people that question , think it &apos;s something that has something to do with culture .
the countries on the right , the ones who give a lot of a lot , you have a slightly different form .
i &apos;m going to give you another example .
but to get it back , it &apos;s going to be more complex .
a online abo for 59 dollars .
the general idea here , by the way , is that we don &apos;t really know our präferenzen .
in fact , in medical limits , this is our view .
and radio waves are limited .
infrared -- you can use to use the schutz with lower energy .
their intensity can be very rapidly , and it can be very quickly , very quickly .
they &apos;re critical to be critical .
but that &apos;s just the way .
cars have led-scheinwerfer and led-rücklichter and can communicate with each other and through the datenaustausch traffic lights and so on .
dna is what &apos;s going to be mean .
it &apos;s actually not so many data , so many data .
you have the apotheker genome , and it &apos;s the power of it to be a maßgeschneiderte medicine that &apos;s better than today -- it &apos;s no side effects .
it &apos;s really just -- it &apos;s only 246 genes -- but we could completely figure it out .
we &apos;re not running as a little organisms on the world alone , but are part of a big ecosystem .
the consequences can be bad -- if we &apos;re going to be or the earth -- but that &apos;s just the episode of a ours .
now i &apos;m here , because it &apos;s a kind of graben , where the training is that we have on the one side of the people who think you &apos;re a dog , first of rules , human rules .
they &apos;re just as &quot; schlagbar , &quot; just to beating . and that &apos;s why they &apos;re going to beat .
no , we &apos;re going to make &quot; great , sit . &quot; -- bumm , he can try to go after six to 10 .
they &apos;re like the golden retriever .
and i would say if you don &apos;t want it to be , you should not be .
not just with the puppy , but with the rest of the family .
these are beziehungsfähigkeiten are so simple .
their children are easy to train .
wk : i want to make a windmill .
so , and this windmill -- does it work ?
wk : yeah . i still think of power to work with energy .
because even though i &apos;ve used science in songs , it &apos;s sometimes very difficult to make them sound .
and even more importantly , if it &apos;s accompanied by selbst-bewusstheit and sprachbeherrschung , how in my case .
one is a white flash of light .
64 multipliziert .
let &apos;s look at the third question .
the desert takes a mile or two per year .
homo erectus made the same tool for 30 generations .
you can teach them to practice a little bit of tauschhandel , and there &apos;s also a reziprozität , but also in fact , a reziprozität , but the exchange of an object against another .
it &apos;s the wealth of the wealth , at the satisfaction of the own needs , time .
we &apos;ve reached a species .
but there is no evidence for that .
and when people started doing objects like this far herumzureichen , that was a clue that an exchange between groups .
but who knows how to make a computer mouse ?
but i &apos;m also about the connections that people are going to bring , and that &apos;s not even a gewesenen possibility of ideas to meet and mate , and i &apos;m sure that technology will continue to continue and improve the more complex things .
this is as high as a 42-stöckiges building . i &apos;ve got the liberty here as an comparison .
but we don &apos;t talk about it , we don &apos;t take it seriously .
they &apos;re just gone , these feelings , they &apos;re gone .
if we think about the herrstellung pan-viraler nachweisreagenzen , and then , it &apos;s usually the fast development of the problem , because how can we discover things that change the time ?
i talked about that -- you know that situation , if you don &apos;t get any chance in the hospital ?
what about real people ?
we sequenzierten a part of their viruses ; it &apos;s new , so far , rhinoviren rhinoviruses .
after 10 days , she came back -- still a fever -- she has hypoxie -- little oxygen in their lungs .
it didn &apos;t even sequenced a lot of them .
it &apos;s a classic retrovirus , but it &apos;s completely new . nobody has ever seen it before .
a huge battery could happen .
we &apos;re going to create something that &apos;s going to fit in the kostenpunkt of the strommarktes .
i got a flüssigmetall with lower dense breast cancer , a flüssigmetall mit , and a geschmolzenes of the bottom , and then the salt between .
but david is young and smart and he wants to build a doktoranden-stelle , and he builds a doktoranden-stelle , and he builds the first metal of the chemical composition .
so what did we learn from all of that ?
this video was taken in the aquarius-unterwasserlabor , six miles before the coast of key largo , about 20 meters below the surface of the sea .
and quickly realized that our garage wasn &apos;t big enough to project this growing project .
i started to look for maria montessori and how they found these umsetzte and how they found that kids find themselves and they don &apos;t taught to be taught to be a open kind of simple way .
evolution often is a way of being that we voted in , but it represents a big number of possibilities .
i &apos;m going to be a little bit to the stage of space .
our cities are in trouble , because many of you are on shore .
there are also stars and so forth .
so if we think about nonverbales behavior or body , how it might call social behavior , it turns out to be language . we think about communication .
this expression , as a proud of the jessica , was studied by jessica tracy , and she showed that people who are people and from birth to blind people , do that if you &apos;re going to win at a sportwettkampf .
so i thought about it . you can see this person , and you can see how they &apos;re interested in , and could you get them to do it , and then they would get more ?
what happens when you go on a rollenänderung , what happens when you get on the allerkleinsten stage ? how does the little manipulation of this tiny , these tiny little einmischung ?
this is happening in the lab . the little exercise for just a few minutes , where you can really do that ? that &apos;s why we care about .
these things , people are actually sort of , you know , your true self . they show themselves .
she was completely depressed and i said , &quot; i don &apos;t have anything . &quot;
they need their body , privacy and two minutes . it can affect the other way to have another one .
lachse swim to get their laichgründen , and leberegel kapern kapern an ant , and you &apos;re going to go into the brain , and you drive a blade of a jeep .
and you have to have a kind of autoaufkleber , you have to have a answer .
so , it &apos;s like i believe richard and me , i think that these ideas are not abused .
and of course , you &apos;re essentially extinct .
but under all of these ideas that are thanks to our technology all over the world , are a lot of toxic ideas .
and like , in viruses , we should not try to cross them .
and in my game , you &apos;re übergestikuliert .
we put some ideas on the legs , we went to tour .
i know you &apos;ll tell me , &quot; t there &apos;s not in the music . &quot;
audience : t , e , d.
nobody hear each one . no one can be trusted .
you &apos;re going to see the orchestra in a kind of mürrischer revolte .
i don &apos;t want to be able to be able to be able to do that , but we need to be better if it &apos;s to answer the questions that you need to consider to the consequences and the reactions .
they work in regierungsbehörden . they &apos;re driver .
five dollars can save a lifetime .
they &apos;re making about two dollars a day , just a erziehungs-fonds on and i explained to me that they &apos;re not heiraten children before these things are done .
finally , from desperation , they went and konsultierten a wise lady .
it &apos;s not even new .
and as you &apos;re telling you , if you &apos;re angry , you &apos;re going to keep the best talk you &apos;ll ever be bereuen .
okay , the great majority of us .
his message was basically union , the interconnection of everything , and the unit of everything , and his basic value was respect , was kindness of kindness .
who &apos;s fighting to be on ?
you start to go in israel and palestine , in jordan , in jordan , in syria , in syria .
and so more and more wanderer , and i &apos;ve now been a conversation for a lot to support their family .
just go to somebody with somebody else , from another culture , from another country , with another ethnizität , which is kind of different and get them in a conversation , listen to him .
i start to start where the story started , 1985 in zentral-australien .
now , before she herkamen , who had the opportunity to achieve the option ?
you see here -- 35 percent of this fewer famous houses , in which 50,000 people live living , 35 percent of the houses had a funktionsfähige shower .
21 percent of what we &apos;re going to fix is follow from baumängeln , things that actually built around the wrong .
we did this . he besorgte besorgte .
we found out later that in this region , the main interest of the main system of disease and death is death .
and one thing about everything we did , the middle of the 2000er sagte , the 2000er sagte said , &quot; how slavery and apartheid is not naturgegeben poverty . she &apos;s the work of people , of people .
i don &apos;t care if you call me an lesbe .
it sounds really abgedroschen to say that from here , but if you &apos;re trying to apply it , it &apos;s amazing .
with this testimony , i &apos;m going to think of them in believing children should not leave their community to live in a better way .
this is the recent sensitive of zertifizierte workforce in america with the bronx bezirksbürgermeister .
this is a picture of the bronx the bronx the kinder who empfing children in his house , not in jail , so they felt themselves .
we gave something back .
if you &apos;re a big kids with small zusammensteckt , they &apos;re the big , thick man in the middle , which is cool , and they create these things that are incredibly amazing .
now , you might have a wonder one of these children .
hold children from these shops .
stephen ritz : a teacher who &apos;s the south bronx begrünt the south bronx .
second , i bet you &apos;re seeing here as a laien , the difference here is a erhöhung increase to this sharp line .
to 10 : 06 suffered a heart attack .
people with migraine who have a aura with nervösen neurons -- here in red -- that &apos;s three to five millimeters to the gehirnmitte .
the problem is that 30 million americans have migräne , and we need a behandlungsmittel . i think we have now .
my first wish is that the reaktive neurostimulator for epilepsy , the rns , for reaktiver neurostimulator -- a spitzenmäßiges acronym -- for treatment &apos;s treatment .
lawyers take cases on the hope in the hope for fette , anteile anteile , which the geschworenen of the poor patients of pity .
a year and a half ago , four of the vollzeitbeschäftigten of vollzeitbeschäftigten , in ushahidi , which is , incidentally , in swahili , &quot; heißt , &quot; also ted-mitglieder . &quot;
where do you know what &apos;s important to do ?
so i thought , &quot; i &apos;m going to talk about death . &quot;
i have the first time to get it here .
these people are calling the barriere , because they &apos;re really going to be out of the process , you know , you know , in the world .
they have to use as a platform to develop their lehrmaterialien and auszuhändigen , which is in 84 countries around the world teaching teachers .
yes , books , maybe 100 or 1,000 spending a year .
it doesn &apos;t tell you that it &apos;s like all , or ?
how do we protect it for the future ?
so that &apos;s not very hard .
the days of the pilotprojekte are over , if people say , &quot; well we &apos;d like to have three or viertausend from our country to see how this works . &quot;
no , it &apos;s not a laptop-projekt . it &apos;s a bildungsprojekt .
you can use a couple of thousand kids using two megabit .
so it &apos;s like a electronic book .
everybody says that &apos;s a 100 dollars to be able to do that .
and that &apos;s the markteinführung .
they click on things around and stare on screens . &quot;
he says , &quot; no , no , no , no . there &apos;s a better way . &quot;
we all play , &quot; i &apos;m going to lucy all the way to a big assembly line , and we can &apos;t keep up with information and we can &apos;t keep up .
thank you very much .
i think most people think that a friend of mother , always a hiv-positive child .
that &apos;s not possible . that &apos;s not .
it will all be fine . they &apos;re going to live .
first of all , the mutter-kind-übertragung .
two years ago , one of the mentor mothers came to me and told me a story .
how do you build a better health care ?
the außergewöhnlichste thing is , just as simple .
if you look at the volume of gray substance in the age of four , 22 years , it takes them in childhood , which is this chart . it gipfelt in early youth .
the idea that your father in the public was singing , was to get it out .
this is the gokart that we built together .
after the first year , it was invited from the ars museum in austria , and i &apos;m happy to say that it stayed online , 24 hours a day for almost nine years .
but in the night , while we zusammenpackten , i asked the tele-schauspielerin , as the tele-regisseure decided that they would kiss sam .
and here &apos;s the result .
a place where my family has been working since four generations since the world .
i have no idea what it has done with x-ray , but they &apos;re immensely findig .
the first thing you see in the krokodilbiss is the terrible part of the bisses .
he &apos;s using it to take my leg back up , and i get me back to a vehicle , and i can get me a doctor .
it was a depression in the ground .
and she said , &quot; well , it &apos;s about it . &quot;
we calculated that 200 years of the direct world is the end of the direct kontaktes of the world .
it just as easy as a metaphor for the memory of memory , but our brains are not perfect speichergeräte like technology .
she &apos;s the mitbegründerin of my favorite scenario .
i would like to think -- thank you .
and i can assure you , corn is in all kinds of things .
you should know that in any community , the number of hofläden already have been increasing .
i have three tauchexpeditionen in antarctica .
but tell me where they lie and what we &apos;re in . &quot;
we also explored the surface of the islands -- a very important nistplatz for birds , one of the most important vögelnistplätze in the pacific ocean .
and we &apos;re faced with the rest of the world faced a problem .
he coined the phrase &quot; reverse fischfanglizenz . &quot;
of course , the tiefseegebiete and the open sea unbeschädigt , but the korallenteil , everybody likes to look at in trouble .
here &apos;s the pacific , with huge meeresschutzgebieten and huge umweltschutzzonen .
now there is mehrsprachige , immediate , automatic übersetzungsdienste available for many of our devices , even on the smartphone .
it &apos;s a endless debate , and there &apos;s no no answer to it . but if you &apos;re a computerfreak of a computerfreak as i are , they say , &quot; well , what are you saying ? &quot;
instead , he has very carefully documented whatever happens when technology comes back to the first time in a setting and in a community .
so there is , of course , two different possibilities .
this is a blue field -- it &apos;s actually a yves kline paintings .
i mean , it was at least as it made me happy .
now , of course , there was a question that i &apos;m looking at for a while , is , well , i can do more of the things that i like to do in design , and less of those i don &apos;t like to do ?
and here it is .
they &apos;re standing in a terrible situation without the way .
they &apos;re going to be in hospitals .
as a 15-jähriger , i was considered a lot of the begabt in college , because i knew the mulitplikationstabellen memorized , and i know how i have to use logarithmen , and i can quickly work with the rechenschieber .
i &apos;ve seen this value of older people in so many of my friends who have in their &apos; 60s , &apos; 70s and 90s , &apos; 80s , and the &apos; 90s , is anlageverwalter , farmers , lawyers and doctors .
and the christian ikonographie turned out and made kruzifixen swastikas , young jewish men in the united states and canada and superman that also sich back to the bible .
the case of granada , the last muslim muslimischen enklave europas europe , the last muslim europas europe , the last muslim europas europe , the last muslim europas europe .
the biggest guy , rughal , don &apos;t want these rocks are updaten . so he tried to stop the updaten .
and one of my favorites is al-batina from yemen .
&quot; and , when , when the articles comes out ? &quot;
rughal : there &apos;s something to do something that we can do .
&#91; &quot; the 99 &quot; &#93; .
it &apos;s dangerous if one group of themselves is an extremely identified .
naif al-mutawa : from islam , islam &apos;s superheroes .
let &apos;s look at it .
let me highlight it for her .
let me show you this .
and when i started designing the designing a little bit about myself .
so you have the eye and then come to the concepts .
but of course china has also been a tremendous population .
but what that is , though , is that this kind of visualization of information is a form of information technology .
it &apos;s actually a delight to be concerned with them , because they &apos;re visual .
the eden-kopfnote is after the eden project in the u.k.
why don &apos;t it smells like potato or veilchen ? so there are two theories theories .
and one theory allows a less to work .
now after a few months of the fact , i discovered that there is a kind of molecule that you call borane , and that &apos;s exactly the same vibration .
that &apos;s the basis of the device that these two people built by ford .
they made it ... and it &apos;s exactly like coumarin .
that was a good thing .
now , at the time , is a series of things that i want to do for you .
and she had no idea of the context that she was landed .
norman !
i said no one , neither my mother , neither my mom , not my sister , my brother , my aunties , my aunties , my cousins , my cousins , my cousins , my cousins , my maternal , no großeltern .
i reports . i was telling you that i had two things , i had two things , when i left the home i wanted to do , and that was one of my family and the other was to write poems .
and this is how we &apos;re looking for them .
and then you hope that one of us can come and find out there .
he had a skoliose , and he has to be penibel from others , female and probably a lot of smaller familienmitgliedern , to reach his age of 12 .
is it a good evolutionary adaptation or it will lead to the other way that the shortest planet exists on earth ?
but will we do that or are we going to take nature down ?
one day , a few weeks or maybe a year later , i was with my kinderm in a store for a store for künstlerbedarf . i wanted to buy a bastel-tag .
that meant a fundamental change for me .
my hint : about 70 layers of personal , matt-schwarze auto-grundierung .
you know how i really am ? this project is just for me , and i &apos;m just so far to me , and i &apos;m so far to buy a chinese newspaper of the san francisco to buy the bird .
when we bergen away the spektakulären blue bergen , in the west of sydney , it was a perfect herbsttag , sun , sun , the smell of eukalyptus and a dream .
&quot; no , it &apos;s too hard . &quot;
and if you ever walk again , then only with a laufgestell . &quot;
i remember my father in wheelchair is out there , and i was on top of the top and down , and the first time the sun was on my face .
they said , &quot; we &apos;ll lay you down to you , because we think that &apos;s good for you . &quot;
she was going to give me the telefonbuch and i called the school , i buchte and said that i &apos;d like to put a flugstunde .
and i said , &quot; jap . &quot;
and mom and daddy ? never have up .
i &apos;m in this world , but i work in a purely instinctive .
it &apos;s like a anish kapoor of a richard serra .
how to do hell i do a phone in three weeks , when i evolved these things over millions of years ?
so each of these elements could be in the wall , like a kind of kunstobjekt .
in his days , he was the highest in british .
i look at a single oberflächenstrukturen of them , and how they were going to -- it &apos;s basiert , and it &apos;s based on furniture , but it &apos;s not the endmotivation , but it was made from aluminum , as opposed to aluminum , as opposed to aluminum , and it &apos;s grown .
this is the car the future . it &apos;s a wassertröpfchen .
if you put it on the next architecture , it feels like it &apos;s absolutely true for me .
that &apos;s my studio . it &apos;s underground .
it was made from kevlar .
after i did my dr. dr. medical doctor , i was lucky to be a member of a forschergruppe that was used to study the ocean .
there was one of these rippenquallen .
and he uses the red bioluminescence like a scharfschütze ein a infrarot-fernrohr to get the red light , and can you see it without seen .
so they use it to find an eat and partners .
i urge you to give you a different science that used to use for hundreds of technology .
that &apos;s a magical place .
so i made the value of the schlafes .
and on june 19th , i heard a lauten bang on the disk that changed my life and a duck .
and here &apos;s the ducks .
after the price of my life changed .
another example of the secret of glasgebäuden in the lives of birds .
so , for example , if i do this -- this is the sound for purple .
the longer i &apos;m going to do it , i can hear music with music and compose .
one of them is &quot; i &apos;m a dream of martin luther king , and the other is by hitler .
now , you can see more more effective , that the former rechtsberater are the hauptgeschäftsführer .
you don &apos;t want to say anything about unbedachtes , which could be used against a verwendet . &quot;
absolutely critical .
and what happens when teachers want to make order ?
and why not ? she didn &apos;t dare to know law . why don &apos;t you dare to do that law ?
it &apos;s that freedom is a formale structure .
because life is complex . and here is the hardest and largest change : we need to be the authority to the interpretation and application of the law of the law , and the anwendung of the law is wieder .
a free society needs red and green lights , you will soon be going to be performed a völligen standstill .
setzt für to the interest , the kreditkarten-unternehmen can be able to calculate the gebühren that you can take .
well , if you think about it , it &apos;s really difficult to get out of the lineal columns with a ruler .
he had a very bad job .
he had only one spielzeugpistole .
but the problem with rules and incentives , because they &apos;re the very happy process , and they demoralisieren the core activity in the very same way .
so smart sind are better than nothing , but it &apos;s hard to imagine that any wise of people can get aufrecht for unlimited time .
why did this idea spreads ?
people want to be tugendhaft .
it was a extraordinary time . i &apos;m going to take the mentality now , which we &apos;re doing -- the other day and the rest of the world .
this was bert , the turtle .
we have this with a complete realitätsverlust .
what i want to show you is what they need to carry around 34 pounds of uran .
what would you have if they had nuclear weapons ?
we get down and get the truck you just saw , anywhere in the finanzviertel .
part of the problem is that the katastrophenplaner itself , is overwhelmed from the gedanken disaster .
it was sent me by someone who is a kenner of the zivilschutzmaßnahmen . the fact that it was hard to get america .
there are a lot of black sheep out there , who have the wrong things and you have the problems .
we can show our results . we can make things better .
how can we tap them up ?
it &apos;s rentabel , a dangerous bunch of things .
imagine we could , because if we could , if we could , we could achieve more .
governments that are most advances , the governments , the governments , the governments , the ways to enable value , instead of seeing the government to the actor who say the most fascinating .
maybe i can cut here , the brain , and i can change my cut .
i want to take away .
come to a moment with me in the 19th century , perfectly 1833 in the sea .
we certainly could certainly be so productive , if facebook or twitter wouldn &apos;t cost us much time .
they were wirkten on the british government to get money for the babbages machines , because they thought that these machines have huge practical effects for society .
these days not only did less wealthy men , but they also regten them to see the tellerrand , rather than just answering questions .
i &apos;m going to tell you how i learned about life .
once you start looking at the very small things -- this person has written a whole article , and he said , &quot; hey , that &apos;s bacteria . &quot;
and all of them are not old enough , they have no idea how these infection happened -- that &apos;s through that capitalism .
there are about 10,000 programs that are angesiedelt .
this is the frequency of the 26 letters in the alphabets letters of the alphabets in a random gewählten of the 26 text .
wherever life is , you will have distribution , you will have distribution , unlike this distribution .
hot hot hot too hot hot hot hot system .
the cop says , &quot; are you sure ? hey , buddy , you &apos;re sure you lost this . &quot;
this is the data from one survey in the single district in a single district in zambia , from a few years ago , i &apos;ve added .
as you see , bruce had much hair better at that time .
you could talk about 10,000 or 20,000 dollars , if i had the time , or it was in my plan , and i was not just in vacation .
instead of teaching people how to put the paper on the cell phones , we should build software that allows them to do that , without having a practice and without my favorite .
this is less than i earned when i went to two weeks as a consultants .
and then we understand that if we want to change our trajectory , in life , or in the balloon , we have to change the height .
that can be in the spirituality .
and that &apos;s why they need meteorologen .
i promised me that i would take the next time i would take the world , no fuel , regardless of fossil fuels , to be secure , not to be threatened by the tankanzeige .
i think you need a pilot in the plane who can talk to the universities who can talk to students , with politicians and can be able to do it in a human adventure .
and what is the goal ?
that &apos;s why all people who believe in these online guys , welcome to be part of this team .
now you just need one laptop .
anyway , for us , africa was a magical place .
the next thing i want to do is want to create clarity , is what this problem is and what it &apos;s not .
that &apos;s crazy , really , if you think about it .
let &apos;s stop for a second for the nonsense .
the fact is that we can see the first generation of the disease and this extremes of poverty in the eyes , you see it over the ocean , say it , and you don &apos;t have to stand .
it &apos;s about the nerves .
this year , this year , for us , particularly for the leaders of the g8 states that are in the neighborhood that are looking and look at the cure .
people find that slowly .
and with this one campaign , as the screen , my organization , data , and other groups have the energy and the enthusiasm from hollywood to the hinterland of hollywood to the hinterland of america .
step : step for step , a nurse , a teacher , a hausfrau , and saving lives .
the idea that the internet has changed all their lives -- a country can change the country -- and a continent that it just has to be so hard to be able to get to be able to get to the digital , and they &apos;re just like to bring me up with me .
lips , not lips , but volcanoes .
now your job is to see what this shape is going to be , and which is kiki .
now , if you &apos;re not just gefängniswärter , then it &apos;s a sentence , literally false .
if we solve a problem or something new , we compare what we know about what we &apos;re doing .
nadia al-sakkaf : i &apos;m glad to be here .
you can &apos;t fit in all of these images .
pm : i don &apos;t think i don &apos;t .
how are they handle with it , personally , but also with your mitarbeiterinnen ?
some of my reporters are arrested .
that clearly clearly a different picture of yemen .
my heart was a long time ago .
this is a list of side : if you take too much salt , like a erdnußbutter and marmeladen sandwich , you land on the intensive care system .
but soon i showed symptoms for rechtsherzinsuffizienz , and i had to go back to meeresspiegelhöhe , knowing that i would never see my home again .
i sat there and i talked to the chefchirung for transplantationen and i asked him what i needed to do , could do it to me .
i &apos;ve been on a dozen machines that kept me on life .
thank you very much .
interestingly , one of these geburtsschäden also has been in the u.s. in 200 percent .
and also , interesting , that the same companies that are sold to the 80 million pounds of atrazine , which is the brustkrebs-förderer , which is the antidote to the ultimate firma .
we also entered as a wasserorganismen .
what if you were to tell us our kids to tell us if you had a day of a number of people : i had a little bit octylphenol , some artificial moschusriechstoffe , and a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a rock star .
the problem is that you oakland in my village , oakland , in most of our villages that we don &apos;t see that connection .
here &apos;s what the ansammlung ansammlung am next to the airport of los angeles .
i offered five cents for each investment for each flaschenverschluss .
the wegwerfgesellschaft can &apos;t be eingedämmt , it &apos;s global .
you see , in red , the spread of the küstenmammutbaums .
they &apos;re like a mouse that look at the foot of a elephants , and the largest part of them are in them .
they extract from their hängematte and vogelgezwitscher from all directions around us .
redwoods have a tremendous surface that extends into the sky because they tend to something that you call reiteration -- repetition .
strebebögen geben , the canopy experience , just like a cathedral , and help the tree , longer .
it &apos;s absolutely herzzerreißend to see that .
but recently , all the doors have been the doors and the walls are breaking down .
that was 25 years ago .
let &apos;s take a look at the example of the first time .
how do these people do these people with these infected computers ?
and you can see it to watch how we work -- how sicherheitsleute work -- and try to find a way to get the sicherheitsvorkehrungen that we meet .
you &apos;ll notice that you can see there &apos;s a internetadresse , unionseek.com / ioo.exe , and if you open this image on your computer , this program will come and ausgeführt .
and if you look at the pictures of the scene , you can see that the hallmark of the mercedes is the mercedes .
we have to find any way to ensure that everything is playing , even though the computers are .
but i didn &apos;t have anything .
that person is carrying a consultants .
why should we believe what he says ? &quot;
what about his future ?
so that &apos;s the way that the way we &apos;re disappearing , no one understützt the 2011 .
it would be good if people were aufmerksamer , and this kind of calculation seriously would take care of taking and try and change things , but it would change things in two types of ways .
that means that we can see a copy of a copy of it , if you &apos;ve only used one part of the originaldatei , that in slow motion , and a schlechtere and tonqualität .
and the happy few , jill and kevin ? well , they came back from their hochzeitsreise and saw that their video had spread like a lauffeuer .
thank you .
you &apos;re going to go into the distant .
that &apos;s what he taught was to do , since he was five years old .
i &apos;m grateful for the fact that i had a mentor mentor as a mau , who taught me how to browse .
what is it in life today ? not 10 years ago .
what do you do with what you &apos;re going to do and make it happen ?
it didn &apos;t have the -- didn &apos;t -- and i didn &apos;t know -- technology . i didn &apos;t have the proper manager .
in this moment , consciously or subconscious . in the moment you &apos;re going to focus on , you can focus on something , you can turn it up to a bit of a sense and whatever it is , it &apos;s doing emotions .
you ever did what did you do , and then after that , i was like , &quot; i was like that . &quot;
in death , and god in his infinite wisdom , gave us another human need , the uncertainty .
but that &apos;s true : we can do it . we can do it through intimacy , through prayers , through prayers , through the ecosystem , by the way .
and there are seven different beliefs . i can &apos;t go through it because i &apos;m through traveling . the last element is feeling .
so , the author of the family in the occupied of the occupied is a woman in new york , who would have died when he was in the work , and this man who wanted to be a terrorist and clearly clearly .
instead , i &apos;m interested in creating tools that can tell you a great number of people to tell their stories , people around the world .
the color of the particles is equivalent to the type of the feeling -- happy , positive emotion , shining feelings .
we see , &quot; i feel like i was all day long . &quot;
and when i go over here , it starts to walk the list , and there are thousands of emotions that are collected .
the 10 topics of ultraviolet radiation is out of and circle the time .
it &apos;s called &quot; universe : &quot; we &apos;re unveiling our modern mythology . &quot;
we can click on this and see this very expensive image of betty ford , as they &apos;re going to be the camel of their male .
you can see , also , see , if you like to read , like to read , you want to read the zitate .
so humans worry about clouds that are in the ways .
and they go into life . she has tens of thousands of dollars in nearly 100 countries around the world .
they just need one step out to go out and notice that , that &apos;s so common , so commonplace so negative that everybody else is missing .
so you look up , they admire the proper beauty , and they always keep the head in the clouds .
the hätten of the 25,000 footage that would have done that was like this , &quot; 25.0000 , good , good .
and you know , 10 years ago , it was about 10 years ago when i got the fördergelder to buy my first grafikcomputer . it was a huge engine .
these footage came from a virtual autopsy .
here you can see how the knife in the heart is in the heart .
it &apos;s a little pen , a little pen that has built in his inner very , very fast schrittmotoren .
now that &apos;s a really interesting project .
so he does it .
so , very talented people .
i went to the children as possible to get out to bring the academic stuff with the real world .
it &apos;s not all about it , but it &apos;s an incredibly leistungsfähige summary of everything we know about the basics of nature .
i &apos;m not going to go into the details , why we imagine the universe so imagine , but it &apos;s got that aus out of mathematics and trying to explain physics that we know .
in my career , i always nagte something in me .
in 2001 , i attended you while i was a forschungsaufenthalts .
we got a lot of bewerbungen .
this is the state of the state after the first year in 2004 .
he &apos;s just graduated from the doktorstudiums and was filmed with someone who &apos;s all known .
every one is going to have a panafrikanische studentenschaft , but on different scientific disciplines .
i have my first computer when teenagers in accra and it was a really great device .
he explores the brain using mri and he &apos;s saying that this is the most beautiful brain that he ever has scanned .
the next few slides i &apos;m going to explain to you that briefly .
transistors will be smaller to enable that , and that has made our technology better .
our netzhautchip is behind this lens here .
i had so a gut that we &apos;re wrong .
so in this sense , it &apos;s a very simple object .
so , we know what a schwarzschild radius is .
i like to call them the primadonnen of the galaxywelt , because they &apos;re kind of angeber .
we can see that in our galaxy more detail than anywhere else .
and that brings us a factor of 20 , an argument of the 20th century , it brings us a factor of 20th .
so there was a bunch of alternative alternative to the idea that it was a supermassive black hole in the center of the galaxy because you could put a lot of stuff there .
it enters a lot more than one more powerful than the other , and the cloud is ripped apart apart .
and i hope that i &apos;ve convinced you that that we have a supermassive black hole in the center of the galaxy , and the center of the galaxy is in the center of the galaxy .
one day , i was in the streets of new york city , and i saw some kids between the ages , cars and fire baseball .
for example , the people in the 11th of the 11th are the stücke that are so endeten .
in the first eight , centuries of this tradition , this tradition , and the big thing is , &quot; what is to be in the way to the god and to prices .
and by new and improved instruments broke the age of the virtuosen .
but a question is : what happens when the music stops ?
michael thomas thomas : music and feelings of time the time period of time .
we &apos;re going to be a beginn at the beginning of a new drachenzeitalters .
to 1945 , it took it per 100,000 year .
so i &apos;m going to talk about musikkomposition , even though i don &apos;t know where to start .
wow , a volunteers , great !
but recently , my interest was given to look through a new view of a new way of looking at the way that there &apos;s where these things can create really cool .
well , i think this is the most fundamental development development of a phenomenon that we call &quot; crowd-accelerated innovation . &quot;
but the element of the desire is really the most important .
we get an embrace talks of them .
let me imagine this point of sam haber .
but even when you take the screen once you weglässt , you will have more than just words .
thousands of individuals and organizations share their knowledge and their data online .
it &apos;s not crazy ; it &apos;s happening right now .
how webvideos weltweite are encouraging innovation .
one : i have to be a service of the audience and talk about what i &apos;m going to give to him instead of saying , &quot; what i can &apos;t offer .
and they &apos;re having fun to have their own , ultimate or worst sessions .
well , you can &apos;t compare it .
they keep them alive and give them the sugar , so sort of a verhaltensimpuls that we call superpower .
this kind of testing do this , ok ?
somebody asked me why ? &quot;
and the thought , he could reverse the waves . he couldn &apos;t .
i think there are three major changes in the areas of transparency , and in the areas of transparency , and nachprüfbarkeit , where people have a real power .
how do we do that ?
my bridge-coach , sharon osberg , who said , all over the world , has more photos from their back of their head than any other .
11 of 14 countries .
and second , in lehrer teachers , teachers and fragebögen mittel as a helpful diagnostische , because they have taken on specific areas that have a fortbildung sense .
so i wish all of a beautiful weekend .
and that &apos;s how to read and write , always becomes simple and cheaper .
biohacker work on their own work .
now , you might ask yourself , &quot; what would i do in a biolab ? &quot;
if you have this whole world solche , this can lead to a perspektivenwechsel , who is going to be biotechnology , a biotechnology .
the kingdom , his laws allow him to give up to fremde or abzuschieben , who &apos;s a economic risk or a sicherheitsrisiko or a risk for public health or a risk of the state .
these laws are a schlag to science and based on prejudice and ignorance and a umschreiben of traditions and a selective religionsverständnis .
why are you going to be pregnant when you &apos;re positive ? &quot;
one of 10 hiv-neuinfektionen affects people who are injecting drugs .
so that social capital , the condoms on the gefährdete bevölkerungsgruppen , not even the police are being tracked , beschimpft or willkürlich .
here are born , kids were born , people died .
office office on personal work are already becoming obsolete .
they were walking down the high seas , the sidewalk underneath the road , and you get from a end to the other , without crossing the fahrstraße .
people say , &quot; we don &apos;t want to live in tiny apartments . &quot;
also , jobs , they were going to be shared .
their liver is ergibt oil .
and she killed the 12,000 sharks to the time , using only a hanfseil from the landzunge bay in keem island .
we know very little about them .
so this tag is finds the place of a shark , depending on the time and the sunset , the gentleman and depth .
let &apos;s look at the nukleotide , which has to be passed on the genes that passed away from the parents , and we see that basking sharks , compared to the first trial , a factor of ten diversity in the world than others .
so , refined les these research and found that the size is the 9,000 .
and what was fine . we got wet . we don &apos;t have a problem .
and i thought , &quot; hey , i can build . &quot;
so if we can take the gender of the spectrum , before we take a sample , we can tell the geneticists , whether they were from a male or female .
so i decided to give myself the händler .
their bodies are being used by macheten , and they &apos;re used to be used for any zaubertrank to make money -- people are going to tell you a lot of those stories .
no business with no matter .
my journalism may be on other continents or other countries , but in my part of africa , but it works , it &apos;s about corruption , ask the people to say , &quot; where are the evidence ?
aa thank you very nice .
i was raised in downtown manhattan in the early 1980s , two blocks of punkmusik .
i wouldn &apos;t be as a transsexueller .
and they had ever realized that people are ever aware of a victims of their diskrimierung ?
now , in 29 states , in more states , more than half of the country , because of the sexuality will become fired .
and eventually , i understood that my mission &quot; gay &quot; to photograph &quot; schwule , &quot; because there was a million different schattierungen of gay .
at least i hope it &apos;s harder to be more difficult to protect their human rights .
one : the world is , the world was , and it &apos;s always good and evil , because evil , yin and yang are the mensch-sein .
and third , i had access to all the 1,000 pictures that made the soldiers .
three ways : the prevailing kind of reasoning called &quot; the prevailing kind of reasoning .
this is stanley milgram , a jewish boy from the bronx , and he said , &quot; could the holocaust happen , right here and now ? &quot;
&quot; my lord , who is responsible when it happened ? &quot;
stanley milgram , and i have been schlossen , by the way , the high levels of high school , at the james of the james monroe in the bronx .
here are the guards with the symbols of power and anonymity .
entmenschlichung of the other . entindividualisierung .
alexander solschenitsyn says that the border between good and evil through the heart of every person in the heart of every person .
and i got the experiment to the next day .
and he said , &quot; i did what everybody could do , &quot; no big deal to jump .
it &apos;s a mystery that was really hard to be .
we have a self .
but on my left , is a delle , which is marks through the red arrow .
there is only one referenzpunkt , which is the body .
i promise i don &apos;t say anything , except it &apos;s going to be scary .
and the autobiographical self has expanded , the vorstellungskraft , imagination , imagination and language .
thank you . thank you for hip-hop and anita hill .
now i &apos;m telling you this -- i &apos;m telling you , and i &apos;m telling you , because i think feminism has partly to be the task , to admit that aesthetics , and fun and fun .
we don &apos;t want to be a heroine .
you can see , i have no idea in fire .
they talk about vorstandssitzungen , she started friedensorganisationen , they organized fahrgemeinschaften , they tröstete friends -- all these daily acts of the care and creativity .
i mean that this is the selbstwahrnehmung that &apos;s different from the homo sapiens of the former menschheitsformen .
in fact , this is a sensor for brainwaves that the electrical activity in my brain is reading that talk .
we erweckten many prototypes and products to live with the lives that you can control with thought , how gedankenkontrollierte appliances would be , or a schwebenden chair .
the headset is wireless with a ipad or smartphone .
how these kids can use their new awareness to your recovery , will be many of the detrimental and weitverbreiteten social stigmata , which people are diagnosed with different , and see , as different as different as a different approach to see .
she understood the power of human narrative and that the value we &apos;re seeing on people , change , and growing .
and said , &quot; how do you get to celebrate ? &quot;
my skills and my possibility and my possibility .
and i &apos;m getting to , and you were unerwartet , they gave them .
that didn &apos;t stop in the specialist , not to look at my eyes .
i walked a track i knew good about .
and it &apos;s very , very slowly , it &apos;s very slowly .
i didn &apos;t really believe in me , not really , not all of the stocks of me , all the little ichs in all of us .
that &apos;s me . my whole i am .
what we have is the same thing that works the same thing , but one of them is feeling great , and in the other , with only one small change in the posture , they feel awful .
but i think it &apos;s another debate that needs to take place to control the amount of control that we have about our tax .
for 0,01 percent of this money , you could actually install the zügen in the trains , which is not the duration of the journey , but what the pleasure and the mean would have been improving more .
i &apos;m not going to do that in the full of the one .
sometimes , sometimes the lines are very , very long .
i think the danger in the world today is that the field of the natural field is understood as a vorausgehende discipline to human psychology .
if the average answer would have to be 50 to 60 percent .
it will tell you that they don &apos;t hurt themselves , other people .
yay !
they &apos;re 20 , 30 years .
but that doesn &apos;t mean that i have a coin with my head on either side .
it &apos;s not hard to solve this problem .
but that &apos;s our skin from the visible universe .
thank you .
with hyperscore , we have a hyperscore , actually very strong effects of kids in the world , and now with people in humans .
it &apos;s a man , rich , successful , powerful , for always life .
hello . my name is dan ellsey . i &apos;m 34 years old and i have zerebralparese .
this is actually the score of dans piece that he &apos;s got in hyperscore .
odysseus would say , &quot; well , we &apos;re going to do a probelauf .
there &apos;s first one of the present self .
i have to write five pages on the day , or i had to give up five dollars .
it &apos;s not possible that this is going to work today . &quot;
and i &apos;m going to show you some of these tools here .
the last thing i &apos;m going to show you is the last verhaltensrelevante of time , is something i &apos;ve done with hal hershfield , who was introduced me to a proud project , bill sharpe .
it &apos;s pretty good that it &apos;s not about the people , because if one of the faces , the other face of the face is finster .
this is one of the reasons that we &apos;re doing for western science and baukunst , actually , in the first few centuries of jahrhunderten , in the first few centuries of persern , arabern and türken .
x is the unknown because it &apos;s not a &quot; sh . &quot;
so not how it surprised you , if you &apos;re talking about treating mental illness , you probably tell stories of the verstecktem , shame and discrimination in all of the world .
a little more than 30 years ago , the nations of the world in alma-ata and gave this legendary explanation .
what &apos;s going on ?
if you look at the stage of species , you &apos;ve heard of fish .
you look at this profit , you see , you can see that almost 8,000 of those dollars are actually subsidies .
this was the early 2000ern , when india was going to be driving his behavior -- as a means to the recovery -- to china , china with eight , nine , nine , nine percent , and said , why can &apos;t we do that ?
it didn &apos;t get a glückliche to not have a happy situation , but they have trust and the courage to say , &quot; we &apos;ve got that .
green carbon , so the emissions is durch by deforestation and agriculture , and the other carbon , we form 25 percent of our emissions .
richard feynman was a very complex man .
we loved it to win .
i didn &apos;t know what these things are meant to , dick , also , sydney , also .
i also liked these intellectual machospiele .
and he said he &apos;d have had exactly the same relationship with his father .
there was a theory .
he did it 1968 .
they don &apos;t move , and because they &apos;re not moving around the course of the experiment , you don &apos;t have to worry about how they move .
we removed the whole vinyl , and the zolatone color that these are just fantastic bedeckte .
many of these ideas fins , the produced wohnwagen was a airstream .
if you think about it , their kids are going to send their kids to the tinkering school , they will come back with prellungen , kratzern and blutig .
but let them play under their own conditions and trust me , they &apos;re going to learn things that they cannot learn from dora .
if you want to throw a device , you don &apos;t do it .
i think that &apos;s all . that &apos;s number fünfeinhalb . okay .
so here you see the sick knie on the left , and here my wife in the morning , in the morning , four months after , in aspen , in aspen , and in good .
how about a completely bionischem knieersatz , not just the parts ?
this is one of the seven existierenden existing sputniks that are not shot in all .
and so it came to buy that in 1455 druckerpressen , begann westeuropa , to first , hundreds and finally millions of individual , little bits of individual , which should be sent out of the hell in the sky .
but how does our imagination work ?
but we never think about the hidden compounds .
as a edison invented the light bulb , she looked like this .
you have to be quite smart , and even though i don &apos;t have a hochschulabschluss , it doesn &apos;t mean that i &apos;m stupid , because you can &apos;t be stupid , and it &apos;s been going to be able to be able to be far in the world .
they literally have the door .
if you listen to the stereogerät of their heimanlage , they &apos;re listening to both the same speakers .
we have the problem that the antenna crisis .
once again , thank you .
that &apos;s why i &apos;m particularly interested in the systems and anordungen .
i recently got some kind of sophisticated barocke bordüren from anspruchslosen .
and i drew for every person your own special card , and i wrote her name on their own name , and they &apos;re in it .
i &apos;m sure i can see how you errötest .
and i &apos;m convinced that it &apos;s ersterbenswert , my valuable and limited life on earth is exactly what it is .
in this mode , he tried to keep his position .
i thought i &apos;m a little bit about how nature creates materials .
we think of the future technologies , we start with the beginning of the world .
and if you look at it , you see the amino acids with the ph-werten , where they have different charges .
and through a sequence of auswahl-evolution , you can go from a billion fishing , which is what you want to do , like a battery or a solar cell .
in this case , you see sauerstoffblasen .
if you ask people the question : where do you go when you get something important ?
i was on my desk , i used to use my expensive computers .
and then , what happens -- sometimes you have those days in the morning , or you &apos;re going to wake up at eight or when you got up , and you say , man , i didn &apos;t really get good at that .
in the office , most of the ones and the distractions that people actually prevent people from work .
we all know that that &apos;s right . they would never experience a spontanes meeting that &apos;s not going to be the staff of staff .
and meetings and managers are now the two main problems in companies , particularly in offices .
maybe all two weeks , or every week , once the week , no one can talk to you .
you know , to be honest , i &apos;m going to do this for seven years and have no idea how the future will look .
but if you ask people to the three more important things that you carry on , they don &apos;t matter what culture , which is gender , which is the gender , which is , most people , say , the key , and if you own one , the cell phone .
but this is a very large but we have the tendency to forget .
now , i want to give you a practical example of delegation .
they take 10 percent or 20 percent provision , and then the owner of the power takes 10 or 20 percent , and there &apos;s the rest of the betrag , and there &apos;s the rest of my family .
it challenges the norm .
and he somehow has a appreciation of the value of the value .
at the same time , the way we see the ausbreitung of these mobile devices are actually a expectation of availability .
our current reality is less interesting than the story we &apos;ll tell about it .
what &apos;s what we &apos;re talking about ?
dean ornish with us new research showing how the aneignung gesunder affect a person on the genetic level , and say , if we &apos;re getting healthier , better , better , exercise , and more love , our brain actually reproduce our brain .
i &apos;ll tell you who said it .
within this context , we can start to experience regrets about different things .
when i went home , after i got my tattoo , i stayed up all night .
but i want to suggest that there &apos;s a fifth fifth .
i mean , even the stupid answer to all of the things we can put us back in qualen .
and as i said earlier , i &apos;m a perfektionistin .
i thought i would try to write my ted wish , trying to make what i try to achieve and how this to do that .
no india . now there are at least half a million .
and i thought that somebody in this entire world has been thinking about the organization of the kollektivgütermärkte .
and so we did it to do that .
listen to this : less than four people who have been treating one of the one of the one of the time that were treated , they stopped the einnahme of their medicine , or vernachlässigten , in a way , their treatment .
it &apos;s worth a try and i think it would be successful .
the pulte are not rechteckig .
if the turbine is used , they will generate 8,000 watts of electricity , and day and night .
and people bring their green industries , hopefully their green restaurants , with the green school .
now , collective women from bali is food on sägemehlbrennern and they use secrets that are just familiar with their grandmothers .
we need someone who comes and studied this .
the green school is a model that we built for the world .
my tongue , kehlkopf and stimmbänder were still healthy and not . &quot;
then apple alex turned out , the best voice i &apos;ve heard .
there was a reason for that .
the sprachfluss is not natural .
but that &apos;s not what it is .
initially , the internet was a hilfreiches tool . now it &apos;s something i &apos;m going to do for my real life .
it &apos;s human , it &apos;s human , disease .
you all know the test of artificial intelligence , the turing test .
i &apos;d been a architect , and my grandmother asked me , &quot; what are you ? &quot;
we &apos;re just two sides of pages as a single page , because it &apos;s how it &apos;s true .
so what is the lesson behind ?
one day , but my grandmother said , &quot; no , this time you &apos;re not going to be north .
it schäumte and horrible things happened with me .
all of the hope is all the hope for my cure .
so they went to their lagerräumen , and they all collected their überzähligen furniture -- they gave me to me -- they gave me to me and pfannen , bettlaken , everything .
you don &apos;t know how far away this road is and you don &apos;t know if they &apos;re going to go and her it and then her cars , and they had a terrible accident that she brought into this situation .
i thought that for some reason , the time had been left and only for family and friends .
for example , the understanding of the molecular structure .
he took me with the tempeln of nikko .
can we say we &apos;d have the symmetries of the alhambra in the alhambra ?
i can &apos;t turn it up because i &apos;ve built a little bit of a distance , right ?
if i put a magic train , and then you have one of them , you get a third .
galois has put a series of laws for the same way that these tables , they interact .
one of those symmetry is called 6-3-2 .
instead of all the mess , i want to know how many digits are going on . ok ?
i need your name . symmetrical objects -- please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please , please ,
one : because intelligence , maybe shorter lebensspannen .
thomas edison had a software-unternehmen of today today .
it was discovered , but even the 1940 were made of commercial victims and the cosmic amounts of them .
it was the origins of the xerox-kopierers , who had his 50th birthday last year .
for me , the lesson of unintended consequences , that chaos has now happened . let &apos;s do the best one .
it works with every computer and browser . negative , minus , minus , and the text is going to be smaller .
that doesn &apos;t need to take it extra extra dimensions .
and so , a kind of information , from which i &apos;m inspiring to inspire me , my real desk .
a means of a mittel would be like a rasteranordnung , so that you get the traditional desktop . the things are in charge .
now i &apos;m going to get to my music with my music , the heart of people and there are no borders .
but i think the point is , it &apos;s metaphors with the bite , and with such a bite today , i want to suggest that we &apos;re a bit of a bisschen math , not just finanzmathematik , but mathematics in general .
and he said , &quot; well , there &apos;s 2,000 physicists at wall street and i am one of them &quot;
you can find them here : this is a book about flying , which maybe you might have in amazon .
these are not finanzdaten ; that &apos;s culture .
you can actually be very , very far .
and it &apos;s not the money , that &apos;s actually so interesting .
here we go . lauter !
i want to tell you a secret .
so , intersections without traffic lights , so with stoppschildern , saving lives , but there &apos;s one of them .
the answer is to allow cars to get out of this side of the road .
warren buffet had this : i think , in fact , to say , say , what &apos;s going to do and what it &apos;s not and that leads to a rising of the cause .
in fact , we &apos;re seeing the only known disease because of the living in africa , in africa , is actually living in africa , even several things that have been formed by the malariatod .
this means that the economy in these areas are , because it just goes so much .
but that &apos;s not a handlungsplan of us .
not only was weak ; she &apos;s going to be weaker .
a teacher &apos;s viertels is going to be the leistung of its class -- measured by prüfungsergebnissen -- in a year , 10 percent .
but it &apos;s not a relationship to be a relationship to be a better teacher .
&quot; what &apos;s going on ? &quot;
and these free courses could not be available in the internet , but you can also do dvds in the internet , so everyone has to have access to a dvd-spieler .
conventional vessels , like this cup , takes eight to 10 hours to burn .
the sculptor richard serra is how he thought he was an maler artist , he was a painter and he lived his high school .
when i look at these photos , i riech the smoke at my clothes when i went home to my family home .
my parents were great . they said , &quot; we know that you &apos;re afraid , but let &apos;s just go tomorrow .
but is it so bad to keep us to the way to make such powerful ?
this is a general general in boston .
the pathologist takes the conditions , friert it , zerschneidet it , it would be under the microscope and then the bottom .
so in this collection , a solution to that dreiteiligen molecule with a farbstoff , here , here , here , here , in green , injected in the vene of a child , can be normal , normal tissue can not separate .
with farbmarkierten lymph nodes as part of our current current , the surgeon after the individual nodes , the lymph node , where cancer begins .
if nerves are damaged , they can be verursachen , and you can get in and pain .
if we put these two samples of proben ...
we know that this is doable , and we &apos;re hardwired to realize that this is a bit of realisieren maps that we &apos;re realizing that it &apos;s too .
and this cell is one of the thousand different types of things we learn .
it will affect the healthy circuits as the sick that you want to fix .
and one in the summer of 2004 , we tried it , and it &apos;s got the first time .
we &apos;ve shown that already , already , is a brief sample of these cells to learn to learn .
and it goes . now .
i want to end with a story of what we think maybe may be clinical use .
now you can see that the animal actually is actually the walls and can go back to the little platform and can use your eyes .
buildings are colonized in the air temperature microbes that are hineingelangen through the windows and over mechanical belüftungssysteme .
and if you &apos;re out there , then the air line in the general , which are associated with pflanzenblättern and schmutz .
obviously , i &apos;m a very strong person , as you can see , so i didn &apos;t have any worry , this thing &apos;s 20 .
the same thing for the question of who was after 9 / 11 , in my neighborhood alive ?
and you can get a list .
one of these things i &apos;ve been experimenting with is something called google , and you just take a abstract term , and you &apos;re looking at google and then you take in these results of somebody .
this is britney spears . i mean , ok , interesting .
if you have the second side here , you &apos;ve got a most of the second .
what was a normal of a few years ago -- the tell stories of the story between generations -- now is rare .
in 1939 , the film is the film as most of our members .
was the story of the story ?
why do we don &apos;t see that with the same passion like that ?
in california , she &apos;s sent it with a warnhinweis : &quot; this product contains chemicals that are being seen by the most fundamental california as a matter of cancer , geburtsschäden and other fortpflanzungsschäden . &quot;
so we may be able to develop a änderungsstrategie , the humility , and for my career , it &apos;s a unglück , that the words &quot; humility &quot; and &quot; architect &quot; for &quot; the &quot; &quot; ewige &quot; not mentioned more in the same passage .
i don &apos;t know if you remember his answer , but it was , &quot; the stone won &apos;t be endete because the stones are ausgegangen . &quot;
and that can be a lot of fine , but we &apos;re gebaut in houston , and all the windows are closed , and all the windows are closed , and with the full products that they &apos;re obviously not in a verwendung for use of the use of use , is actually a vertical gaskammer .
if we look at the word competition , i &apos;m sure most of you use .
since we &apos;ve been able to put the 4,000 most pervasive industrie-chemikalien into a database that we &apos;re going to provide in six weeks .
now we have 160 kilograms of heavy heavy heavy heavy schwere the internet programs .
we started commercial and mixed using buildings to structure , so that all of the people have centers and places where they can stay on .
and this is the berüchtigte nsa-datenzentrum in utah .
and that &apos;s not true . let &apos;s tell you that we knew all of that , because we didn &apos;t know .
for example , they give me the datensammlung at microsoft on september 11th , in yahoo , yahoo , in 2008 , and then the other , google , facebook , apple , apple and so on .
i selected sweden because sweden has similar laws like the united states .
and whoever always tells you , he didn &apos;t have any too long time thinking about it .
their email were read and she talked to the un-hauptquartier and she said , &quot; if there is no concept on privacy , there cannot be real free , and therefore , there cannot be effective democracy . &quot;
many people , if you &apos;re seeing a fresh brain , say , &quot; usually it looks different when you get a brain . &quot;
all these empty areas , are the areas that we take out .
and the nature of a certain cell , his biochemie is basically creating an individual , by the way that the 25,000 genes are turned on and to see what they &apos;re switched on .
now , experts come into the game and making basic anatomical anatomische .
we take that the markierte , and put it on a sogenannten .
so what can scientists learn from this data ?
they look at the whole genomes and they try to find a aktivitätsherde to aktivitätsherde the ursächlich with the genes .
whether that &apos;s the individual genetic background , or your experience , we don &apos;t know .
we know how to do poverty , we have to do more and more for ?
so here are a few more questions .
how can you know ?
so what is the problem ?
well , before it was all right .
and it &apos;s been made a lot of experiments that came all the same conclusion , so i &apos;m going to just talk about one of one .
so what is the best ?
we need this kind of information . we need more of it . and we need to move the politics .
and maybe we start small , with things where we are safely , they &apos;re safe .
poverty is more mutmaßen than research on earth , and a lack of data on the effects of hilfsmitteln brings the question of how to do this , but clark-medaillen-gewinnerin esther , it &apos;s possible to figure out what entwicklungsmaßnahmen and the damage -- with help studies .
so we start , because africa is in a certain way , in the way .
and the legend reported that alexander &apos;s alexander , through this desert .
but you could say , &quot; invest in africa with 1,000 languages , and it would not move there . &quot;
so we look at the countries , and the specific materials and data .
i want to talk to this out of the perspective of kapitalmärkte .
in tanzania , the last week of the city was called the standard .
if i had to ask you , &quot; what was the world &apos;s börsenmarkt mit with the world &apos;s world &apos;s world &apos;s world ? &quot; would you think of the egypt ? &quot;
because there are amazing opportunities .
&quot; god is the journey that we &apos;re all want to be inspired and to feel one with the universe that makes life .
you &apos;re knipst a switch -- there &apos;s electric light .
i don &apos;t know why , but that &apos;s what they thought .
i &apos;m going to run that to the walk , so that you can kind of , and i &apos;m going to describe my responses to see when i first saw this .
that &apos;s exactly what happened .
ok , you change , raise your right hand .
kt : yeah .
kt : no , no . i just see the road .
i couldn &apos;t see through the blindfold .
again , again .
kb : how often did you love ?
let &apos;s close your eyes , in five , four , three , two , one .
if you want to be released that the pressure released , they make a aufwärtsbewegung , but only if you want the pressure released .
do you want to try it ?
they &apos;re very specific at a certain level , and if you feel the sensation , i want you to throw the glassstück into the bottle .
there is one of the things i want to share with you .
ready ?
my hand is here , here , in lebensgefahr .
kb : ok . you think he &apos;s here , yes , yes ?
first , first tells us keith barry , how our brain can engineer our bodies -- with a trick with a trick , and then he would have the audience to the audience in some breathtaking kunststücke in the gehirnmagie .
i &apos;m aufraffen .
that &apos;s not for one of these , one of them . that &apos;s all of the four .
i saw that both religious and nichtreligiöse people are obsessed with morality .
the basislinie is almost zero if there is no stimulation to the ausschüttung .
you get the message from the computer : &quot; person 1 , they sent them all of money .
we showed that the gift of oxytocin is the generosity to einseitigen percent annual increase in 80 percent .
i just found the molecule .
he asked me , &quot; what should we do ? &quot;
in experiments , we have testosterone .
that tells us that we invented this ritual to connect us with this new pair of emotional .
and it &apos;s very easy to get a brain to the oxytocinproduktion .
to get the device to run , you need lots of people , lots of people .
or should you be about that ?
they said , &quot; you &apos;ve given us a device that &apos;s only working on english . so we taught ourselves as a tool we can use it . &quot;
i decided to destroy my own argument by making a long statement .
absurd . but i had to follow the victorian norm .
how will tomorrow be tomorrow ?
we have to undo this imbalance , from an threat to pleasures .
i think it &apos;s exactly what the focus on the focus .
i &apos;ve got a very incredible questions -- &quot; when was the beginning of the world ? how will you end ? &quot;
and just one last thing .
maybe we should go to the next bit , because i just lost the lost .
shivdutt went to local katasteramt in uttar pradesh and found that he was going to be in the official unterlagen .
so that &apos;s why this is the domain of ungeordneter .
polygamie is in the privileged layer that &apos;s able to break up multiple mitgiften and several households .
after these four kids , you see zumras younger sister who are killed , they were killed .
and finally , there was a single person who sat on me and later his participation , so i had to verpixeln him , so he had to unkenntlich it .
with 16 , children have to leave the orphanage , although they were often nowhere to go .
one of the interesting things is , of course , the combination of the naked hand , and the technology , and of course , what he said about our young people .
now , my career could continue to continue a little bit longer .
and i said , &quot; well , how do you hear it ? &quot;
from him from the sound of the resonanzkörper .
or we do this and think that &apos;s what blindness is .
rain . not bad . not bad .
and individual takt , but why can &apos;t i do that if i &apos;m going to learn a music ?
and in this steigernden demonstation , the pigeon perkussionistin evelyn glennie , why hear the hearing of music has been able to make a lot more than sound in the trommelfell .
and it became so large to the point where there was a festwagen last year at macy &apos;s thanksgiving , s parade and rick astley and &quot; rickrolled million people in television .
but that &apos;s not the interesting thing .
cp : you have lucky that it &apos;s not going to transmit live .
peace and love got mentioned .
cp : yeah , but you still don &apos;t know what they should think about it .
that &apos;s 10 times longer than the mammals needed to reach their maximum body , and they all have to conquer all those habitats .
we &apos;re very much like the dinosaurs , and they &apos;re very unusual in our family attitude .
basically it &apos;s a country that had no containerverkehr for our work .
this is an adult orinoko-krokodil in his jaw .
paul has never been able to see a fossil record .
these are all landtiere . there &apos;s a number of options .
i was an artist and i started drawing .
the question is -- and we wondered that question since this question since centuries -- how to bring these kids involved in science .
bad news for derartu tulu -- some other people had the same idea , and the olympische goldmedaillengewinnerin , and paula radcliffe , which is a hugely immensely , the fastest marathon-läuferin of all time .
show me a animal with schwimmhäuten and gills , it has something to do with water .
we don &apos;t have our physical strength , because we are the largest memmen in the jungle .
now emily baer -- one of 500 läuferinnen and läufern -- they &apos;re moving on the eighth of the workforce , under the best 10 , even though they &apos;ve done all the erste-hilfe-stationen in the erste-hilfe-stationen , to take their baby back in the baby -- and denoch 492 participation .
that &apos;s all we could do .
but maybe it &apos;s different .
stop focusing on this stadt-marathons , where you failed , when you have four hours .
the surgeon has been to interact with things , not with people -- with not a social way of thinking about a social way of thinking , of course , and the people really would help us accept robots as an essential of our everyday life .
cookie monster is very , very bad .
the remote-projektmitarbeiter was a sea from our group , where they were three different technologies to interact with the participants .
and with this technology , you can become so active participants in your own grandchildren , in a way that it &apos;s not possible today .
and the third way was a simple diary with the sheet and the pencil , because that &apos;s the standard-methode that you normally used when you &apos;re a diät- and sportprogramm .
another important idea is this notion of the realitätsübergreifenden persistenz of the character .
i &apos;ve got style , and i &apos;m going to be very hard , because it &apos;s not drum , it &apos;s not going to be the n , but geseh .
it &apos;s gone , it &apos;s not far . i fire : &quot; bam ! &quot; the screen falls between two geparkte cars .
if he was writing about a broadway-show , i was on the door .
i &apos;m going to show a number of photographs and films , but i do fernsehproduktionen , books , books and a little bit of a ad , everything with the same concept .
and in photography , this teaser is going to be , they &apos;re going to be begierde and voyeurismus . what you can &apos;t have , you want more .
as they settled into the collective consciousness without knowing that we know , and how that happens .
it &apos;s very kommerziell .
and then you get the photograph that he &apos;s going , and suddenly it will be quite serious , and maybe less .
eighty-five percent of global energy consumption is in developing countries -- not in the west -- and yet 90 percent of the resources in the west .
just too . look at the location in mauritius .
but if you &apos;re talking about , we &apos;re trying to do the same thing in nigeria , then all of us .
they enable the existence centers , and we can use the experience very cleverly .
it &apos;s got to be part of the solution , that &apos;s important .
and we start with a biomedizinisches technical program , so we can bring local people to fix the equipment .
autism has a very large bandwidth , from very few -- the child doesn &apos;t have a language to work and have the ones to work and engineers .
i love the film , as they all have my projects nachgestellt , and that &apos;s the spinner in me .
now , what i learned was because i was not so gesellig , my job is to sell and not myself .
another thing is the sensory problems .
in other words , a problem with the equipment of a mitarbeiterproblem sandwich .
in the movie , dr is called .
i made praktika during the &apos; 80s , and i learned things and learned how to do tasks .
another very aussichtsreiche idea is it &apos;s the kids of some of the many pensionierten of a number of vielen .
tg : i have passion for that , that the things i do , the world i do .
it &apos;s a distributed reality that can link and link systems and systems can be , or just a digital storyteller .
the fifth time i &apos;m standing on this coast , the kubanischen küste. , i &apos;m looking at the way down the distant horizon and i think that i will do it , all the way across the vast , dangerous wilderness of a ocean .
but it was deeper , but how much life is there ?
and then we have our grundregel that you never really tells me how far it is , we don &apos;t know how far it is .
but honestly , all of these are the talk that i had to do was just to go to überstehen the schwimmtrainings , they were very different .
thank you very much , and much fun on the conference .
and that &apos;s perhaps the tragischste , he lost his sense .
he joins the army . the army gives him a rifle .
so what happens when a medium suddenly has a lot of new ideas in it ?
they had to synchronize rasch what other philosophers did , but otherwise you couldn &apos;t have the right kind of discussion .
but there was a programmer that decided that that wasn &apos;t the best way of work .
each of you can do changes and you can work them to work , even if you didn &apos;t know anything about the existence of the other .
this is called &quot; diff , &quot; this thing on right here .
something more bedeutsames that can happen , is that they can acquire a new streitkultur , schwurgerichtsverfahren , schwurgerichtsverfahren , peer-review , peer-review , right ?
don &apos;t try to do what others do , a little bit better , because that doesn &apos;t really take you very far .
and if you tell you , you don &apos;t , you don &apos;t hear them .
six to nine months to the next season .
but we tested this rover ausführlich before we put them there -- or , or this one rover -- and they have made that everything works .
so we sent a spacecraft on mars , it &apos;s called phoenix . this probe will land in 17 days , seven hours , seven hours , so you can put your light in the light .
and that would be bad .
we &apos;re here as we &apos;re talking here , the next rover that we want to send to mars .
and i know many of you have meant in the last few times that these airbags are really cool things .
there were two main projects that we have been especially interested in .
it &apos;s like the circulation on the ground , but because it &apos;s so cold , it can &apos;t be no water , because water would be frozen .
today i want to talk about how these exponentially technologies are going to understand .
so we look at how exponentially technology affects the health care system .
this is an example of this paradigmenwechsels .
there &apos;s a wireless wireless waagen .
and i think many of these technologies become help us to be better connected and to take more time to our patients , to focus on the important elements of medicine that are being augmented by this kind of technology .
the current trend in medicine is but exponentially , in the science of medicine .
and we come to genomics , as 10 years ago , the first human genom-sequenzierungen were done , the cost of a billion dollars .
thanks to the websites , like patients , or the verwaltung of their data on microsft or google health , it &apos;s always more important to all of these possibilities in a way of a partizipative way .
we used the cells from the bone marrow to treat a patient with heart attacks , we &apos;re capable of a verbesserte herzfunktion and higher levels of the building , using cells to a heart attack .
my poem is called &quot; dirt . &quot;
their cats , god knows how many , the pinkeln , your flure , your flure , a widerlicher gestank .
as you &apos;ve walked against the zersplitterten , the stage at the road , brummt , brummt , not look at me , &quot; can you help me ? &quot;
i was scared , a unterdrückter part of me would be out of control , and i would be trapped for the schockierenden of her gestanks .
but i &apos;m afraid that ricky comes from and his home .
if we love to love , they hold me around me around me , i &apos;m there , and not there .
we &apos;re looking for images that are critical to critical topics , the grenzübergreifend , the most grenzübergreifend , the religions that are transcend the religions that are going to bring us up , stand up and to do something , to act with other words .
in &apos; 80s , the stigma was a tremendous obstacle to have a tremendous obstacle about this disease , or they also just to mention .
tiny : photos that changed the world , the world changed the world .
i had read a lot of books and land- and seekarten .
i could see the flag on the wheel , well , ah , aah , aah , a glorreicher moment , and the music was going to be a crescendo .
finally , at the morning of the day , we got the startsignal , we got the helicopter -- two helicopter in the tandemflug -- which is me on the edge of the packeises .
i knew there were more open water there . and i had a geheimwaffe .
i had this idea , but i had something .
this looks like this view from my tent when i got this schicksalsschweren call .
and just out of the air , i saw the picture .
and she was used to go back to shore , and all five died on the rückreise .
and that said a jewish man , so that &apos;s very much .
but some days later we thought our students with our students , and we said , &quot; what would be if this betrunkene was not in this condition ?
one day at the last 10 years of küste miles from the entlegensten regions of the pacific , saw 20 american american minds of their ship in the ocean .
but in some point , most of the things that have learned to have these visions , and become grown .
they have the same structure .
some of us tend to read their fears more than others .
right , fear is a startling gift of imagination , a kind of hellsehen in the everyday , a way to look at a glimpse of the future when time is , your appearance is going to look .
nothing happened . no violence . nothing .
we brought them into each of the arab world -- international , global , global , through our english channel .
they were separated from their people , from the masses and now we &apos;re seeing one after the other .
thank you very much .
because we discovered that it &apos;s the people , and people want to be informed -- she empfangen the stream through our internet .
and frankie said , &quot; i &apos;m a 22 thing in row , and i see the needle on me , and there &apos;s blood everywhere .
you want to share a needle just as little as you want to share a toothbrush , even with someone you &apos;d get to .
so this is a overview of all the trials of the wissenschafts-olymps in the united states , and this is the study that are effective , showing that nadel-austauschprogramme are effective , pretty much of it .
so you can see these grim images from africa .
now i &apos;m saying , oh , well , great präventions-strategie .
ines is a transgender-nutte on the streets . it &apos;s a girl with tail .
she was 105 years old when i was this photograph .
hey , hey , black-eyed susie , hey .
and a little bit of banjo . here comes a little medley .
we were with the car at gatesville , texas , texas , where i spent my early childhood .
and mother was just like the car .
we try to put it together with this old song . i sing , there &apos;s a long white robe in heaven , i know .
originally by the gebrüdern dopyera , who built the &quot; dobro , a tool with hölzernem body and metallkonus , where the sound .
well , that &apos;s easier to do than done .
we were not stupid : we put in about five feet a little bit of a piece of plywood .
as a drumsets , i thought , i was thinking about the idea why you can &apos;t take the oldest musikart , which is &quot; hambone , and they combine with the latest technology ?
now , i think it works because scientists are connected to a ethic .
it &apos;s significant to show something in the room , because it &apos;s critical , not in terms of where other things are , but in terms of the absolute notion of space , who was god .
and in a relational universe , the only thing that happened only to be able to make the only possible explanation that it &apos;s somehow creating itself .
and you understand some things better than others , and therefore there &apos;s a dauerndes gerempel and giving the politics .
there &apos;s another tedsters that was talked about two years ago , jonathan haidt , who &apos;s been doing his work in three different levels .
and just to make it all there .
while five months he was going to experiment with a complete küchenmannschaft .
it wasn &apos;t very successful . and so on and so forth .
or philip glass or lou brothers or the chemical brothers that they &apos;ve played all there , they all had their own casa da musica logo .
after two weeks , three weeks , four weeks , five weeks .
a little bit of a little bit .
and it &apos;s a transition that &apos;s exactly how much the identity of the living living has to do with the memory of the dead .
but the büffelopfer and the rituelle rendition of wealth is also described the status of the deceased and the family of the deceased .
if we could expand our definition of death , to embrace life as part of our lives , and perhaps the death of our lives and maybe vielleicht death as a fear of fear .
i wanted to finish my show with a dance -- -- -- -- -- -- ...
you talk about the water in the water , and the relationship between darwinism and the fact that we &apos;re all naked , less behaart and that we can swim right .
ok , gordon , come on .
&quot; and now she has a kater . &quot;
eight years of history history , eight minutes of my show , just so close .
and jack nicholson says , &quot; i want to be a better person . &quot;
&quot; do this world to a better place when you can .
so i give you the message in advance : not auszusterben .
where are the little ? &quot;
here &apos;s the guys again .
how you can imagine , it &apos;s a beinknochen , but if you go into a museum , but if you go to a museum , and say , &quot; don &apos;t you mind when i &apos;m aufsäge your saurierschädel , or ? &quot;
and you could argue , you can have a clue .
so we &apos;re losgezogen and a few times , and we found a lot of small animals .
so we now know that torosaurus is a ausgewachsener triceratops .
looks like , as could it even gets bigger .
we wanted to make a atmosphärische architecture .
all the water of the world are served here , so we thought that after the water is moving through water and water , you could drink the building .
the drill was a roboterarm .
and then you get up in this glass elevator in the vorhang-fassade .
and after that .
this is a guy from salt lake city city . so that &apos;s what you see .
&quot; hineingezogen , &quot; -- as if they were seduced to commit a gewaltverbrechen .
it &apos;s not sure that this would be like this , if the redakteurin would have been a woman .
by the way , wired , &quot; has taken the hearts .
and you analyze the news , they &apos;re talking about when things are missing in the new york times .
these particular plant filtert filtert and other chemicals out of the air .
m the most of the time i met dawn when i &apos;m aufstehe , for trying to figure out what &apos;s going to happen .
and then -- remember that condoleezza rice was wearing a jewelry , and it was criticized ?
pm : are they on resistance than they did this for the grundprinzip of their foreign policy ?
when i was secretary of state , we were only 13 women in other countries .
thank you for us today .
malaria : there are eight countries in sub-sahara that could reduce their sterberaten rate .
for daten-freunde , how we &apos;re a erogene zone , and it &apos;s fair to say that i &apos;m a sexually aroused of this datensammlung .
to be precise , in your capital , some of them want to be in those heavy times , who are kürzen and lebensrettenden programs like global fund .
in the contrary , it could save many lives .
if we take this metaphor of a genome , seriously , you have to seriously take seriously , then you have to consider that chris anderson is a computer-erzeugter object , like jim watson , craig venter , and all of us .
you design something like a cell phone , and in very very , very much language you see this cell .
this is normal dna , which you hold for normal dna .
we heat them up , add a little bit , and it turns out to the siedepunkt , and you cool it up to the siedepunkt and you can fixieren the short strands the long strands and it turns out it &apos;s a structure .
so that works really well , and you can build patterns and build shape , ok ?
you zoom in in you , there are only four dna strands , and you &apos;re sitting on them , you &apos;re sitting in the single teilstränge that can be described if you can adjust it .
we have a very competitive experiment where small changes -- little mutations -- something that is a square of a size , and it &apos;s something much bigger .
and the research computation are molekular , and to understand that and get it better in the handle , like feynman said , we need to build something to understand it .
but as we saw it , we had three kernziele : a world-class ambulanzdienst , to offer the vollkommen ambulanzdienst of the vollkommen and universal for everyone to be a medical center for a medical amount of energy .
in the modern era , where time is a good good , and the battle is hard hard , and the ordinary glücklose of human beings , and pays the bribe just to come to go .
in my last 18 months , a lawyer , against small and large korruptionsfälle , who &apos;s completely geschäftlichen betrüger .
sm : well , the anfallenden cost less than 200 rupees .
this is the global footprint of all the tedx-talks for the last four years , the world &apos;s energy efficient , from new york to the small new zealand here in the corner .
in a way , a lot of content is doing a few things to make it easier .
so we use these netzwerkmotive , to find unique talks , such as many different talks , these are all kinds of different areas that are much different , like that , the essential for their topic , and those who are really creative between grundverschiedenen fields .
no wonder that it &apos;s going to take my colleagues , because the truth is hard to digest .
the work of the hausmeisters could be as good as a hospital in a hospital .
ted is a ubiquitous place .
how do these things do things like this ?
second for you , for you , for you , the modernen of modern american education , drehbuchartige , step for the first time .
and they said , &quot; would you be willing to have a atommüll-endlager in your community ? &quot;
a way to do this . teaching more ethic courses .
why ? because they &apos;re happy to do something that &apos;s right .
bill gates has spoken over the importance of education and in particular , the kipp is going to be doing . &quot; knowledge is power . &quot;
barry schwartz makes a passionate call for a company that has lost in the bürokratismus , and he argued that rules often fail , incentives and practical wisdom will help us new .
by the way , dean , the arm has got to adjust a 50th percentile , so 81 cm from the small fingers , and he has to weigh less than 4 pounds .
it takes another nine to make it easy and useful . &quot;
he does that , what i was going to do is &quot; darpa .
boys and girls , you &apos;ve already given them .
it was amazing , how positive they were .
he wants to help . he told me that he wants to go back to help his buddies .
how do we get out ?
it can be war like a tragedy or a farce .
ford came out . they spreizte a leg , and then the other .
in london , i lived in a glaskasten room with nothing .
and i &apos;ve been gezittert . in my first attempt , i just wouldn &apos;t have my breath for a minute long .
there are tiefenrekorde , where people are as deeply as as possible , as possible .
it &apos;s 1,95m &apos;s big and weighs it .
because of motion , i &apos;m going to get the oxygen to the movement of the movement .
then his hauptkonkurrent came and broke his record .
and there was no way to slow my heart rate .
after 14 minutes i had these fürchterlichen kontraktionen like this need .
as a magician , i try to show people that seem to be impossible .
so thank you . they &apos;ve completed the institution .
tamara tamara , you take that ?
now , even now , the human may change unwissend unwissend through the abfallprodukte of his civilization .
in africa , humans have 600 million and two billion pounds of kilo meat .
first , even if all the co2 emissions today would be european , the global warming would continue .
and then we saw a case on the east coast of the united states , and it &apos;s moving over every year .
today there is another movement , and the movement that &apos;s going to save the earth .
pharaoh ramses of the fifth , whose picture we see here , died .
so i want to give you a kind of schnelltour , umd , so , let &apos;s end with what that change means : i want to explain what the consequences of this change , and our biodiversity , but also how much of these changes influences our culture .
and if it only was about it , it &apos;s really interesting .
and this is actually coming up with this one genetisch chinook , which is a genetically modified chinook , which is from the corner of this lachses and another speisefischs , so he grows much faster with much less food .
that &apos;s actually in reality , and no real animals .
we took this animal out of his autonomy . &quot;
in other words , this was the first creature in the history of this world that had a computer as a parent -- it had no organic parents .
paul root wolpe : it &apos;s time to question bio-design , and it &apos;s time to ask the time .
if darwin would only have the nasa .
melanin , in its different forms , there &apos;s probably over the world for billions of years . it was always recruited by evolution , as it &apos;s often happened .
and it was only in the last 5,000 years with the number of frequency and distance .
evolution helps us .
tell it to go .
so old and he also antik his job , so it &apos;s very complicated and very simple -- and that &apos;s the same time .
you measure ... and measure ... and measure ...
i sort of ertappt myself , a geometry of things that really didn &apos;t have any geometry .
she was like this in the time of 1875 to 1925 , a remarkable era , in which the mathematics was in the world , from that world . &quot;
langwierige measurements , big brownsche movements , ... 1,33 .
and that &apos;s what &apos;s a little bit about what &apos;s going on .
this was one of my favorite writers that these islands were the same as the großformatige , anyway , anyway .
should you remove the breast ? should you get you ?
right ? it must be an fat , and it &apos;s koffein good .
anybody ? it &apos;s a lot harder .
this can happen in a medical environment .
and why not ?
a few months later , it goes back to the market when prices are at the highest , in the so-called magersaison -- if food is scarce -- because they have to feed their family and no choice .
that leads to very high handhabungskosten .
and almost three years ago , i decided to leave my komfortablen job as a senior job in the world bank , and in my geburtsland ethiopia , after nearly 30 years , after nearly 30 years .
we build a system that serves all the marktakteuren , the integrity , trust , efficiency and transparency , and the small farmers helps to deal with the risks i described to deal with .
we believe that these initiative needs to adjust the initiative political will , and we need to adjust the financial system , and also the most fundamental legalen .
my answer is a sandsteinerne wall from bacteria verhärtetem , which is erstreckt by the desert .
they &apos;re threatened by ernsthaft the existenzgrundlage of millions of people , especially in africa and china .
a problem with the plants of trees is that people are so poor that they &apos;re abholzen trees , to use them as a feuerholz .
and , after the einmaligen cost of 60 dollars for the bacteria that you never would never pay to be bezahlen , would cost a kubikmeter cost about 11 dollars .
in a time of unprecedented population and speed , it could be a desaströs .
the world is showing me the opportunity , and i picked up .
our goal is a resource veröffentlicher , so , and completely , and completely , that one single gebrannte is a single gebrannte basis .
all these eggs , zysten , bacteria , viruses , all of the gramm in one gram of human exkremente .
it &apos;s a wonderful tool to abfallbeseitigung .
you may think it &apos;s just good karma when these men rühren shit , but it &apos;s also economically good because they save a billion dollars every year .
in horror , they found that the family had no toilet .
at the speed of the speed , we &apos;re going to get the target , we &apos;re going to get to power people with sanitation , not achieve .
this reefs in discovery , jamaica , were 20 years , most of the most studied coral reefs .
he also got the slaves that were brought to the antillen , the song farewell -- &quot; aki rice farewell are -- &quot; aki rice are &quot; -- is a charity for the importance of the stockfisches in canada .
and we have this in the last 100 or 150 years .
i &apos;ve talked about millions of times , but it &apos;s amazing .
the other species of climate change is the ausbleichen of the corals . it &apos;s a beautiful picture , right ?
that &apos;s not selling .
and yet , we &apos;re laut , according to our best wisdom alone .
what i saw ? stars , satellite , blinkende planes -- typical himmelschrott .
and what would be behind this gummimasken if it were ?
so , at all , i was embarrassed , because i hadn &apos;t read the novel &quot; in the time .
and it was so successful that it was even verfilmt .
faro is a living city , and to come to the beach , she said , you would take a bus and then take a boat .
one of them was called joseph and he asked me what i did , and i explained .
and so we put in the trap .
the companies are providing goods for households -- and we &apos;re in the way , and we &apos;re doing better , and that &apos;s better , so that we can start to spend that income for more and more and more benefits .
the ersparnisrate , nettoersparnisse , was under zero in 2008 , soon before the crisis .
you can hear the thoughts of the five-year-old .
and at the same time , the solution is clear because these are not require to change human nature .
we have to actually invest in the notion of a meaningful wealth that offer the possibilities that people are doing .
first of all , it &apos;s never going to be able to attract , so it might be to have something feilen to their sound .
i painted it directly to the man .
it was about space and light .
this photograph was taken by prudhoe 2002 in alaska , to see the minerals management service in the field of their lives , ölteppiche in ice .
another aspect is that it &apos;s going to be moving down to water .
and that &apos;s actually really pervers .
and then of course , of course , john d.
it was also reason for the national park act , the clean air act to act clean water .
they have abschlüsse in politikwissenschaft , in economy . they &apos;re entrepreneur . they &apos;re not supposed to do what they do .
if you look at people who have chosen $ 50 years in the years , the two kids have maybe three jobs or more , and then you have to commute .
we have to figure out the whole thing like rationalisieren , and you can find more about these politics .
the first person is certainly sure you &apos;re sure .
here you tell you in a filmbericht filmbericht , &quot; afghan star &quot; of her friends &apos; her , because they didn &apos;t agree , and they said they &apos;re going to give her friends to give democracy .
last year when i was here , i spoke about my swimming on the north pole .
it feels like someone behind you and you &apos;re going to beat you on your head .
and we sat down , and we besprachen , which was something wrong with mt . everest .
bloggt about it , tweetet about it , talking about a hundred percent , and there &apos;s very , very , very few things that cannot be achieved , if we can use our whole power for that .
this is a zustandsdiagramm . it &apos;s a very simple computer .
can we get a kind of selbst-replizierungs-verhalten ?
now what i &apos;m showing you here is that we can create a 2d-form -- the b -- aneinandergefügt from a string of components , the extremely simple rules of the components .
these are three minutes .
and if you saw amy smith , they talks about how to collaborate with students in haiti with communities .
and it may be that all of us seem to emerge from reality today , and it connected to it , to connect with the numbers of problems we need to solve .
we &apos;re increasingly increasingly aware that we don &apos;t have to take the entire stadtfläche approach .
okay . i also have one .
can we connect to the natural ecosystems around us by connecting us back to the example , and we can bring more highways and that renaturieren ?
and you can see , the death of 65,000 deaths per conflict per year , a year in the 1950s , to 2,000 deaths per year per year , a year in this decade , so terrible that &apos;s terrible .
because we did something really right , and it would be well really well what it is .
they want to be the generika .
if not , one of the two are updated , isn &apos;t it ?
the developing world used soap and water , vaccination .
and now i have the prokopfeinkommen on this axis .
and remember the beginning of the last century , that was very bad . until this so-called großen leap forward .
and see how it grows ? and how hundreds of millions of millions of millions and billions of people get in asia ?
here we are . we have a continuity in the world .
look at the world . that &apos;s the world .
they get clean water . they buy food for the poor , they rotten malaria .
and we have to do the way we could take the world with facts .
don &apos;t make it quite africa . don &apos;t do it .
it &apos;s not sustainable . and it &apos;s not going to happen to a supermacht around us .
and many of you have heard the term &quot; memes , &quot; the evolution of technology is something that i &apos;m very much like to do , so you already know , one of the first things you had was a little handaxt .
my argument is basically that , well , yeah , most of our lives are always part of our lives .
and that &apos;s pretty new , and i think there &apos;s even worse -- this ability -- because of developments in the form , in techologien , that can be used as a weapon of the biotechnology or nanotechnology .
i &apos;m doing my best , okay .
&quot; yahweh is our erlöser , &quot; he &apos;s gerettet the people who saved the people , &quot; which is a pretty sophisticated sozialstruktur .
we only have six countries civil wars , which means that media is just about six countries .
so , how do we put our money together ?
none of these countries , including africa &apos;s erfolgreichster , botswana , has changed his own food .
during this development , we were , the africans , the africans , in the edge of development , and umsetzung politics in our countries .
the overhead , mostly vetternwirtschaft , costs billion billion .
we &apos;d like to interview it . &quot; and i said , &quot; great . &quot;
and now we &apos;re 14 of diseases , two of them , even heilbar .
in the last 10 years , and as hope for the future , we &apos;ve seen the beginnings of a science of positive psychology , one science of what makes life worthwhile .
and i think there are three different -- and i call them different , because they &apos;re gründen on different interventions , it &apos;s possible to have one rather than the other , three different happy life .
but it turns out there was no an old trauma there .
you don &apos;t see the debbie reynolds .
and what you find is that if you do something fun , the rechtwinklig .
when i was last 30 years ago , i thought if i was good enough to make someone not worried about not to be afraid , not even i would make him happy .
a polar bear in the arctic of schwimmt , from paul nicklen .
but this so-called &quot; snapshot &quot; occurs when all the parts are together and not just the event , but also my emotional connection to the event .
nick -- again , with a automatic camera -- thousands of photos of this .
sometimes you can tell a story of a story story on focused .
we want to find solutions .
and then somehow everyone goes up and jump .
thank you .
what &apos;s more important is that this is a fotometrischer process that you can only capture in three seconds , and we can have emily in a period of less than a single afternoon in several different gesichtsposen and -ausdrücken .
emily : image metrics is a markenfreie , leistungsgesteuerte animationsfirma .
and i ended up with it .
in the reserve there are some pretty neat primates .
but i was from the west and working in the east .
all throughout erze , all of the abgebaut dump , animals killed the forest , the forest , and so on .
here &apos;s coltan , and gold .
one day we met with the oberkommandeur .
the elephant just verweste and they took the stoßzähne .
i don &apos;t think someone can be able to push , because google does the right thing , even if people use google , to connect to .
corneille ewango -- a hero of the regenwalds of the regenwalds of the regenwalds of the regenwalds of the congo .
we have almost no longer to have it , from a market journey .
they don &apos;t have to pay for their budget .
i should be aufklären , which was something that happened with these experiments .
democracy needs a perfect equality , but they need citizens who share a common life .
the united states as a foremost nation in the years , there , where the line is going to look to red .
we have this gift in the 1970s and &apos; 80s years back as women are in the erwerbsleben .
electricity was also helping the emancipation of women &apos;s moral emanzipation .
a profound fact of technologie-optimisten is that in the first half of the 20th century , the improvement of life expectancy is so fast as fast as the world &apos;s half of the 19th century .
this was the essay i was able to get in the 11 years , and i got an 2 + one .
i &apos;ve got some of the long time , the long time , between five and 15 , that would be my nebenbeschäftigung and led to a sense of failure .
so if i think of creativity , i think , is that sense of the sense , or the unvermögen of the the context that i see in life is in life .
this is what a single thing says because they don &apos;t have any living creature .
and they &apos;ll get more surprising to it .
and i had to find what to do with history .
how are we going to do festsetzen , which is the responsibility and the causes of a court ?
and they have to be in all possibilities , including that i &apos;ve never looked at before .
i hope you &apos;ll see it , if i look at these examples , because i &apos;m talking about everything you could spend your time .
now there are magazines over water .
people pay the full cost for both of them , and the only thing they have in common is that they don &apos;t have anything .
the corners of abrunden , on the middle , that &apos;s the great market .
these guys are going to represent the lauteste auto-stereoanlage of the world .
but you don &apos;t have to be ozzy osbourne -- you don &apos;t have to be completely überdreht .
so what you have to do is to figure out who it &apos;s interested in .
nine months later , i was sprayte on the tahrir square . because i was a picture i saw in my newsfeed .
thank you .
most often , the cultural legacy in us , and the past and the past .
my first reportage geographic , where i realized that you can &apos;t possibly bring environmental environmental issues in a documentary of the story of nature , i had sattelrobben .
these are lions and tigers of the ocean .
and because i love sharks -- i &apos;m kind of obsessed with you -- i wanted to do another , rather positive story about sharks to talk about the need for deals .
after i left bimini , i learned that this habitat is going to be planiert by a new golfresort .
they also have the verfangen of fischereigerät .
but the fish came back and back the population , and the population , wuchsen forests , wuchsen forests of seaweed in the shallow water , wuchsen water .
she lives in the jungle in the jungle , and this is matahari , her second son , the way the son of the second orangutans , i rescued , dodoy .
it was a biological desert .
then you see the returns and starts to measure what comes out .
so how do we break this cycle ?
and you need bacteria to bind the nitrogen , and without those , without those , it will not be a performance .
the humidity is 10 percent higher .
so we can really change the climate change .
in nord-suoahlisi , it &apos;s the genossenschaft , there &apos;s a democratic culture , so you can save the justiz to protect the own system .
the spiralförmige vortex of the opening , a paddel on a kanutrip .
i &apos;ll show you one .
reuben margolin creates kinetische sculptures , beautiful works in the pattern , die , sich , in , in nine minutes , he verzaubert us with his meditativen art , and nature inspired by mathematics and nature .
every city has their own design .
23 years later , they asked us to come and get this idea .
this is the italian portal , the ukrainische park , the polnische park , the japanese platz , the german park .
i &apos;m going to talk about consciousness .
either it doesn &apos;t exist or it &apos;s something else , or something else , a computer or anything , but not a case of science .
people always say consciousness is hard to define .
you cannot be at the existence of your consciousness .
it &apos;s a digital program in the brain and to create consciousness , we have to find the right program .
we &apos;re constantly bringing the objectivity and subjectivity as the attributes of reality and the characteristics of the world &apos;s ansprüche mess .
... don &apos;t you find ?
but i also meet people who do what they do , love , and that might not imagine something else .
we don &apos;t teach american history in the u.k.
teenagers don &apos;t wear a armbanduhren .
maybe later , not immediately .
no , no , it doesn &apos;t .
i couldn &apos;t take this thing to work , no matter how often i am , or how much i &apos;m going to do .
but we have to change from a industrial model to a landwirtschafts-modell , where every single school can flourish .
so erez and i wanted to figure out more about it .
the reason that &apos;s the historic report is going to be digitized in a rasantem speed .
and she went to her . she said , &quot; okay , so you &apos;re serious .
she took a group of students at protest in the streets .
i stood on , i put a tea , sat down and everything , and i &apos;m here -- still almost a year , but here .
so , peace direct data , they &apos;re so stärkt the back .
he wrote a book called &quot; creation to democracy &quot; with 81 vorgehensweisen , to gewaltfreien .
it &apos;s not such a kultisches thing .
in fact , chris worried , and he said , &quot; look , you know , you &apos;re going to see this photograph , you &apos;re going to think that you &apos;re still one of these crazy artists , who don &apos;t do much of that crazy . &quot;
it &apos;s an object for the mind .
and the solution i &apos;m going to do is actually placed the biggest übeltäter in this massive volcanic operating room through the planet and the daraus of the biosphere .
and so i said , &quot; what would t t -- call it t1 , where they were verstärkt , in the denominator -- we call him t2 , bring it out , where you can get the effect ? &quot;
and he was a huge unterscheidungsfaktor on the market that has increased our sales and profit .
we literally won the marktanteile .
but five days later , back in atlanta , i got an email from glenn thomas , one of my people from the meeting california .
so , frankly , a lot of us , who work in industry work that the industry is threatened by technology and possibly entformt .
and , in fact , we need to give someone to convey for us , so we have a experience with a mentally divine ?
the arts , whatever you do , is a store of invite us every time us , if they &apos;re zusammenführen to us , to look at our versus curiosity and curiosity .
the three sisters of the three sisters of ahn hauchen with her passionate music musizieren , with tedwomen , and they start with tedwomen , and they start with tedwomen , &quot; anschließend , &quot; and then they &apos;re playing a hinreißende , verführerische version of astor piazzollas . &quot;
the manchester handwerker handwerker genossenschaft is named after my quarter .
he makes a bunch of money through the special furniture for the rich people .
we &apos;ve taken the syllabus of the american kochinstituts , which is what &apos;s going to be the harvard &apos;s harvard &apos;s harvard , and we kreierten a gourmet-kochprogramm for mothers in the million-dollar-küche in this downtown downtown .
we realized that you have to give you flowers and have sunlight and food and expectations and herbie and herbie and so on the spiritual cancer .
these kids who were given to all over the world that flies by public school , and that &apos;s what you &apos;re capable of , and sunlight and food and good music and confidence .
and it has worked for all the way to work today .
and i &apos;m going to allow you to take the concert , and i &apos;m going to give you the music . and should you decide to sell them to sell you to sell a agreement that the money will be used for the help . &quot;
this is a room for nancy wilson , who was built her album in our school last christmas .
the brown building is that you &apos;ve looked at you and i tell you where i made my biggest mistake .
he came to me . he said , &quot; man , that &apos;s a fabulous story .
and so he has a group of people .
bill strickland tells a calm and amazing story of salvation through art , music and unusual risks .
and the first is that the ausgangszellen ausgangszellen to the brain , the code of the brain , and the result is a netzhautprothese that produces a normal netzhaut-output .
but there was the limitierenden factor , the problem with code , and how you could allow cells to bring better to normal , and so that was our contribution .
they cover us with a unseen körperschutzhülle , the attacks from the environment , so we stay healthy .
but if bacteria grow and double and they &apos;re all beteiligen and all of it , these molecules are going to make the molecules over the cell over the cell .
now we know that all bacteria can speak to each other .
this is just a photo -- a mikroskopaufnahme of your skin .
bacteria are incredibly arzneimittelresistent , which is what &apos;s going on is that we kill with antibiotics .
in fact , bacteria have a collective behavior , and they &apos;re doing tasks that they could never do alone , if they could act as individuals .
it &apos;s a great honor for me to get to this conference .
or the first one that come in the hall .
but if we think about justice , what we need to think about , what we need to think is the actual nature of the fraglichen activity and qualities that are worth you , and they &apos;re worth them , and they &apos;re located .
what would you have for a reason ?
charlie , what do you say ?
here it is , how it &apos;s auslegt .
so , aristotle has flöten , golfwägen , and the heftig question of same-sex marriage carve right .
michael sandel : the lost art of the democratic argument for the democratic world of the democratic argument .
a lot of people said , &quot; well , you know , they &apos;re not supposed to be rural guys to tell us what we should start to do with our time .
and i think that &apos;s good -- the future humankind can make a decision .
if that &apos;s what it means that it &apos;s called the for us ?
i claim that the pace of the therapieverbesserungen is going to be .
i &apos;m going to be the nonsense of nonsense .
we know that this threshold is because we don &apos;t get any altersbedingten beschwerden , before we achieve an mittleres age , and that even though the damage has been born since our birth since our birth .
that means you have to do their homework to understand whether this is true .
audience : hi . i read somewhere in somewhere , the average life expectancy is the average lifetime of every one of them on the planet every year .
not one of your media has this one .
it doesn &apos;t matter how we do our profit .
she &apos;s going to the center of reykjavik and setzten on the agenda .
but i can &apos;t have a design-argumente , which is the schlagkräftiger that are schlagkräftiger than the arguments i &apos;ve learned from economists , epidemiologists and umweltschützern .
the gesundheitsargument is something scary , and probably you probably know a part of the arguments .
fourteen americans die per day , the dreifache sterben , the amount of times in the 90s , and almost everything comes from autoabgasen .
he clearly got sense of humor .
politicians and marketing-leute have scared of them , öko as &quot; lifestyle-entscheidung . &quot;
second , because we have ausgerottet them .
so we thought , &quot; we &apos;re going to try . &quot;
there you find some astonishing animals .
immediately , the government says , &quot; enough -- that will go , &quot; and people are going to get people to do every single person that you saw .
he may have thought he would have been born the hässlichste baby , so he may have a little help from the outside .
i asked peter , whether something changed . and he said , &quot; no . &quot;
we want to talk to africa : the next chapter , &quot; and this is : a healthy , lächelnder , beautiful african .
but most importantly , you have to be eingebunden into their lives , and a kind of productive environment can make things done .
we can connect it all ?
we were on the side of the biafra .
i had to go through the legs of these people , and i had to crawl out of my sister with my sister to find a window .
you know , we need to use all well .
and often i don &apos;t see a african staff under them .
now the question is , how do we use that good will , that &apos;s going to be a good will to get us ?
you &apos;re undiszipliniert . &quot;
we have ibukun awosika in nigeria with the stuhlfabrik .
and with this idea that artistic creativity is a product of a product product , i took this case , so we can study them , just like we can look at any complex social process .
the way the way was applied to the 90s to study very complex processes .
i want to try and learn that for them .
and then i &apos;m in the control , here , games .
how do you study rap scientifically ?
there is a massive brain activity that &apos;s been involved in bewegunsgkoordination .
i want to say that probabilities and statistics , that &apos;s the mathematics of games and glücksspiele .
that &apos;s very zeitaufwendig , and it &apos;s not pleasant .
but keep the thought for the whole time of the eight seconds .
in games and virtual worlds , for example , can be used to use their expressions and intuitively , to control a avatar or virtual character .
otherwise they &apos;re very quickly . and without a stabiles grid isn &apos;t possible , so children die .
another statement of esther was that we react to a tragedy like haiti , but this is a andauerndetragödie .
it &apos;s produced by the malaria-parasiten , and it &apos;s a very interesting kristalline substance .
we have every road , every village , almost every square centimeter .
in your bluray-player , a very cheap blue laser is a very cheap .
audience : yes !
what &apos;s interesting is , although we &apos;ve got all the time gekillt , we never did it , the flügelschlag in the air .
this is the restaurant house .
this orangenbaum that you see here , actually , in fact , in a autoreifen , which was made from outside and zugenäht .
so , water is a big aspect .
&quot; metal &quot; and &quot; earth are &quot; a &quot; earth . &quot;
the idea is not yet .
they don &apos;t even enjoy the show .
thank you .
i could show you this animal here .
once it touches water , you should hear the water , you know , air .
once we sequenced these two genomes , we asked ourselves , if this is the smallest genome of a self-replicating species , could possibly be a little more effective genome ?
and so , we realized that when it worked , we would have a real chance to have exactly the same time if we could get the education chromosome to the bacteria .
so , care is unumgänglich .
the last eventually , the last one is a quote from robert feynman : &quot; what i cannot even build myself . &quot;
but actually , we &apos;re actually living in the field of the actual notion of the korans of the paradies , the 36 times as the gardens , defined by fließende streams . &quot;
but the more you add the more you lost .
and that number is 72 , that &apos;s never before .
this is a nests of a tires colony , and that &apos;s the nest entrance .
this is a colony that has been founded by a queen in the previous summer .
the patrouilleure -- this is going to be a magnifying glass -- they &apos;re a interesting group . they go early in the morning , before the first group of foraging .
and interestingly , it looks like it &apos;s like about the kind of the colony that just aren &apos;t doing anything .
the nest maintenance take all the time and put them on the äusseren edge of the beach and they put it there .
they &apos;re going to give us a nahrungssuchenden , but somehow , not to get .
and we did experiments , which longer is the longer a ant out there , the more the simple hydrokarbone on their surface is changing the ants differently , and that &apos;s how they &apos;re different from different work .
they cover the whole earth , except the antarctica .
here you see that the cost of all the people in the world are about 89 million barrels of oil , and the annual cost is three trillion dollars .
and that &apos;s what we do for four percent of the world &apos;s population .
that has nothing to do with it .
i have a stake where we can use the natural gas .
and when i was in the windkraftgeschäft , natural dollars a whole nine .
why don &apos;t you worry about that ?
so that was just 500 million of them .
it never was getting the underwater , or something like that .
tbp : i have lost 150 million of the wind , ok ?
some have 5,000 . many have more .
there were dotcom-fieber . and there were goldfieber .
ourbeginning.com. is a event , and they &apos;re verkünden in the world .
this is work in lower manhattan where you built the first elektrizitätswerke .
this was in maybe six different colors .
i mean , you didn &apos;t want this thing to be the light socket .
a friend of mine told me this story : the one came not only and wait , but then they had to wait to wait , but then the fachmänner had to be there , for the third time , they had to call somebody .
and so i &apos;m going to be a more clinical language , and so maybe it may not be so warm to you so much that the way to say about other talking about compassion .
and here is the basic idea that migefühl did not lead to the good guys , which is going to be paid for the people .
basically , it &apos;s about when you &apos;re my enemy or my rivale , if you don &apos;t belong my friend or my family , i &apos;m going to get a lot less to apply the golden rule to apply them . okay .
or so , the results are raise the results . this is a zero-sum game .
every shape of the interdependence is , nicht-nullsummen-beziehung , forcing you to have a humanity in other .
and they &apos;re going to explain you , they &apos;re going to tell you that america don &apos;t think of them respect and they want to dominate , and they hate america .
most of the diseases with poverty , but in the case of cancer at children children , kids who died at cancer , mostly from the wohlhabenden families , mostly from the wohlhabenden families .
a week died a child , but nothing changed .
because you simply don &apos;t get this kind of energy and time , if it doesn &apos;t really care .
that &apos;s why he didn &apos;t really want to say something .
openness isn &apos;t the end .
now , the dominant krebstheorie would say it &apos;s a single oncogene in one cancer cell in one cancer cell , and that you can power the leap into a krebsopfer .
what does that mean ?
we found a kind of zähflüssiges material that had the right extracellular matrix , we put the cells inside and lo and behold , and then you can see the zellen , and you see what we &apos;ve created in a culture .
and of course , we &apos;re now asking , where we &apos;re going now ?
and so i want to finish with a poem .
we have a hochkarätigen journalist who was caught by abschreiben ; a boy who &apos;s so many fingierte silk enthält that you took it out of the shelves in the new york times .
it sounds like a eigenartiges book , but it &apos;s actually about new types of lying .
he wrote very , very positive reviews , and surprise .
and you had to bring four good friends of your personality .
that &apos;s really bad . why is it so bad ?
i can lie to lie ; once they were talking about it and then they were .
they told me how big that was the bath , or said , the einkaufsmöglichkeiten are so far away from the hotel .
yes , right there . okay , glass , glass , go to a picture .
and you want to take your eyes .
but it really opened my eyes how often i often have been coming from the life for email , social networks and so on , although it really wasn &apos;t really important or dringendes .
i read peter and the wolf with this beautiful band .
and every one that then went away , i walked away .
at least for me , because if i &apos;m just doing the same thing , i &apos;m going to do very , very boring . i &apos;m very quickly .
i &apos;m like i don &apos;t know what i see is what i see .
are you going to be nervous , ashleigh ?
im : do you worry ? you see so sweet .
anyway , i &apos;m not saying it &apos;s good , but just that it &apos;s not langweilt , ok ?
if you have the sahne to long gebuttert , it becomes buttermilk .
i call it the era of the citizenship -- what people have different choices or ethnic , but as a citizens , all the way to be equally equally .
in egypt , i was discovered .
this had been studied in london , in yemen , in yemen and bestieg in amsterdam &apos;s flugzeug to attack america .
there are no ideas and narratives and leaders and symbols that are using democratic culture to the base of the base .
as a anecdote , we can show that if poverty would be the only factor , well , is that the richest family has been saudi families .
what happened was a political coalition that was going to be zusammenfand for a political goal , and that was to remove the leaders .
these tools become more socially , and they &apos;re going to be technisch by the technically really boring .
he ermittelt the limits of the individual networks and then they put them .
and because of social networking , chinese students studied the abroad , or companies from the rest of the world in china , there were people on the world that have been hearing the news .
and finally , the chinese were going to lose the chinese .
we &apos;re always more in a media landscape in media , social , allgegenwärtig and cheap .
but everything in the consideration i &apos;m going to be like i &apos;m still as much as i did .
and my fourth abstecher , i was moved to everest , a comet , and hyakutake .
this looks at the eisbruch , the first 600 feet of the aufstiegs of the aufstiegs of base base .
and that &apos;s in camp 4. in camp , in camp 4. .
and there were climbers on this summit ridge .
we also got the bad news that beck weathers , a different climber , in this storm in the snow , collapsed and died .
it &apos;s so heikel to work that i sometimes actually syringes spritzen directly through the clothes .
this bergsteiger was schneeblind .
and i can only do just how he made it .
and so he &apos;s going to be able to turn back into the taten .
that &apos;s sherpas that &apos;s the sherpas .
and the fourth thing that i think is really important is to be extremely relevant , &quot; ideas we &apos;ve got to share . &quot;
but today , 60 years , through the unternehmerischen rise , were unternehmer , and they &apos;re carrying in very large , to society .
it was enige people who wanted democracy , because they &apos;re going to bring the ideas to wolten , and the universal wahlrecht , parliament and the same thing .
the third thing is again , the cities are the cities .
the second is the beschäftigungspolitik that we have , which is very difficult to make a lot of jobs for companies that 93 percent of the indian jobs in the unorganisierten of the neighborhood .
so if you &apos;re a young country , you have the chance to make a modern rentensystem device , so that you don &apos;t have the anspruchsprobleme when you get older .
you have to give a clear important strategy to what matters for india and important for the world .
so the government is to choose even more .
although some people on the left is not like to hear it , actually the revolution of markets , the losung , the government is not a clue . &quot;
they don &apos;t fear the masses .
hence this whole feature of mistrust between the volksvertretern and those who are represented .
dreiundvierzig dreiundvierzig .
every one of these kohorten would be erfasst , two years , for two years .
david cameron used to be in 20 million pounds in a social design team , to support this idea .
toby eccles : investment in the social change in the social change .
i &apos;ve been working . &quot;
why ? are you too tired to get to the wange ?
even when i &apos;m with my friend named jack there , i say , &quot; i &apos;m born , jack , jack , jack , jack . &quot;
if you haven &apos;t found it , my name is tom thum , and i &apos;m a beatboxer . that means that i just heard all the way you &apos;ve just heard , and just with my voice , just with my voice .
and lastly , with this one , i can actually wieder- my sounds , wieder- , wiederholen .
our people had to try to find about 5,000 different mischungen to find the right thing .
don &apos;t listen to those who can &apos;t be able to do that . everybody can do that .
on the right side is a ultraschallwandler .
and i &apos;m going to give you a few examples .
you see the blue beleuchteten .
his wife said it was &quot; the happiest day in their life . &quot;
many patients are going to be able to pull out the strahlentherapie .
the results are better than the surgical surgery .
he can stop the surgery , right now .
canal street , i know .
and that &apos;s where they really do much of their creative inspiration . so it &apos;s a industry that &apos;s going to be in both directions .
and that &apos;s why they want to go to the next trend and the way that they can .
and their jokes , like the modedesigns of a modedesigners , really just within that aesthetics .
you need a lot of lawyers and a lot of time ago , and the dealer decided that that would be too expensive to expensive .
these are the two main hauptsächlichen of pretty binary representation in the logic of the urheberrechts .
and i want to thank this place to do this , really , really , to make that very modische presentation .
and i got a boat to a remote fjord , and i realized that the food i should not meet , not aufzufinden .
i think this is one of the most fundamental and robustesten things on the planet .
there are numerous ancient eiben on friedhöfen all over the u.k. , and if you &apos;re getting , you will realize that the eiben was there before the churches .
here &apos;s the klonische creosotebusch , which is about 12000 years old .
i hope that i can find these organisms , can help their remarkable robustheit , and i think , to have to get to the teil of their fortdauernden longevity in the near future .
let &apos;s put it on something else .
and 20 years later , we still use mobile phones , but they also create their own mobiltelefonnetze , like this , which is used by the drogenkartells mexikos in all of the 31 states .
what did you do with it ?
what could terrorists do today today , is using technology ?
recently , the u.s. has given a al-qaida-mitglied in the united states , that these remote drones in the u.s.
and as we see here , we turn ourselves into action .
now , the mortality rate is now 70 percent when you caught it , but it &apos;s hard .
it will be so many people killed that the only way the einzig beerdigung of funeral in the nicht is möglich like this outside of ciudad juarez .
but on the other hand , i hear people , like you speak from fear , a certain aversion on the risk of the risk .
and by the time , she was working in colombia with the u of the u working with the u , with the goal , to maintain their culture and language , with two other colleagues of the farc and tortured and killed .
and there are no group that would be more susceptible to this kind of manipulation of manipulation than young men .
patient capital is uncomfortable for the people , the simple solutions , light , categories , because we &apos;re looking at profit as well .
but all the community , all different sizes , also the shia and sunni , would sit down and pray . &quot;
because , for the sake of the hochsaison , if you &apos;re full of the juice , she &apos;s beautiful , it &apos;s green , they &apos;re feeding the world , they &apos;re going to be able to get into the sky . &quot;
but not a faces ?
ok , now , let &apos;s look at this three portraits .
i tried to make my wife a little bit about my wife .
why i don &apos;t do my wife , regional , regional failure ?
but here &apos;s the problem . because a company gives you an binden of cotton and it works .
muruganantham : i see this thing in the hands of my wife , &quot; why do you get a little ekligen ? &quot;
now we can access this , that &apos;s what we can access . okay ?
and it was so beautiful that i was over the last seven years .
and then i conducted a huge amount of training . i swam in a eiswasser .
it was actually happening that the cells are einfroren and dabei .
and my good friend david saw how i was . and he came to me and he said , &quot; lewis , i know you &apos;ve been to be 18 years .
the prospect that they could be in 30 , 40 years , is a very furchterregender , very furchterregender .
england , america , japan , south africa , the congo .
it &apos;s about about 380 trillion gallons of total growth of the earth today , which are still erschlossen and nurtured .
now that may be the end of the story -- okay , we just replace it all the way through conventional , renewables -- but i think that &apos;s still more than the story .
very special material that the abalone shell makes itself , millions of abalone , all the time , every day , every year .
and the idea was basically the idea that i &apos;m the brush in the hand of great personalities , and i would interview .
but i wanted to have interviews that are different .
in fact , my first interviewpartner abbott abbott , the 97 years old , and the abbott was full of the life -- i think it &apos;s so possible .
we know the big sprüche , we know the great moments , we know what we don &apos;t want to share , and the purpose of the thing is , not to make it ridiculous .
when we were alone , i was her audience .
it wasn &apos;t this armdrücken , but it was a überraschungsmoment for my hip .
he said , &quot; but i understand that . i can understand that . &quot;
half of the body was the other , the other .
this is a säuglings-intensivstation in kathmandu , nepal .
i don &apos;t want to do a beautiful things .
there is a certain way of treatment , it &apos;s called austauschtransfusion .
it &apos;s not the paintings that we have created , but what we actually have .
another example : again , an stupid mother .
thank you .
no , we &apos;re talking about 10 million , 20 million dollars on the swiss bankkonten , on the bankkonten , in the ministern , from the the ministern of the president , the high levels of state of state .
they even zollten the answer .
most of the great companies are now critical to believe that they need to use very strict guidelines to bribe , and so on , to bribe , and so on , to bribe , in the bribe , and so on , to bribe , and so on , to bribe , and so on , to bribe , and so on , to bribe , and so on
if you want to go into a restaurant , if you look at the menu , then you would expect you to put all of it on the map ?
and that was the first time i thought that the expression on their face actually reflects what she &apos;s holding from him .
well , he &apos;s split his life .
this french painter , the 18th century was known for his name , but occasionally people , but occasionally humans .
unfortunately , these days now spends their most recent time with a number of other orphans in the archive , and some of them are beautiful paintings .
the first time i put it at a dinner party dinner to honor her parents to honor .
&quot; i congratulations to your &quot; wedding , james .
my father lived most of the time in east africa .
i &apos;d like to show you six minutes .
lancelot imasen : but our movies , they &apos;re stories that people can identify with our people .
so it &apos;s a young man to really get out of what &apos;s going on to think about , he has to think about certain negative things and all of this , or any untugendhaftes .
franco sacchi : so much , so little time .
i think this is really the theme of this session .
franco , you &apos;ve described this as a drittgrösste film of the world .
it &apos;s basically a cd . a kompaktdisk .
now the art conversations . oh , that was fantastic .
that was really fantastic .
video games can be very profound , even though they &apos;re completely geistlos .
we &apos;re showing &quot; portal , &quot; because you &apos;re going to be able to create new spaces .
so time , space , aesthetics , and then , most importantly , the most important .
on the way i had to shut back a few bridges behind me .
everything refers to the bauherren and students who were going to meet the first meeting of the first meeting , that they &apos;re being killed .
so i made some sketches on napkins -- small boxes and morandi-artige things that i think i was drawing .
it &apos;s one of the most beautiful pieces i &apos;ve ever done .
this beautiful object , which is swiss , for me to get an intimate beteiligung .
and one day , i had one -- oh , the other way .
i have the verzinkung and the copper to the copper , so it &apos;s wölbt .
and that &apos;s my cafeteria .
and it reminded me why i was like to agiere things like my house so defensiv .
it was never done .
the dome was a wish of the bauherrin .
it was attempt to turn this little piece of land -- it &apos;s 30 foot -- in a central foot , using these areas and the wohn- and dining room in this pavilion , with a high space in this brain .
they call this &quot; plan coupé . &quot;
here it is .
from the building in the background , it appears to be a vorbeigleitender .
our state doesn &apos;t want to be galleries , so — and when we met our new public , he said that this was the right shape .
in barcelona i was asked to do a fish , we &apos;re working on foot , to foot on foot , which was built by skidmore , owings and merrill .
can we not show cleaner burning ?
and one of the things that they found was that they didn &apos;t brannten .
and these are our hausgemachten briquettes .
and he has the problem of the health impacts of verbrennendem wood and charcoal .
it &apos;s a place where , for instance , if this was india , that &apos;s just three of us just one of us .
so you can &apos;t use the same concepts like in the united states , to rebuild things .
there &apos;s a big difference .
after surgery , it &apos;s all normalisiert .
now , this is not surprising . but we asked them to use their honesty and intelligence , and intelligence and aggressivität .
he married . he had a son named jerehmia .
is this business with our outer design and our employment with this kind of phenomenon ?
now , i want to tell you a little bit of the surgeries that we &apos;re doing , how far we are and where we want .
we can replace the sequence of the bone structure , but we &apos;re not very far with replacing the weit .
my topic is food in schools , because this is about social justice .
and the next one is bio-lebensmittel .
people talk about sustainability . but we should figure out what that is at all .
do you know , everybody thinking , they always have to eat more and more food ?
and then they have rausbekommen , hey , we can sell the stuff to kids .
and this is a typical essensplan , a typical essensplan .
the things that we might do at home , and so important , we need to teach kids in schools .
we have to educate the employees .
this eight billion is by two dollars and 49 cents -- so much money , the government is willing to be willing to be prepared for a lunch .
as a little girl sitting on a hot hot summer with me out of me in the sun .
when i go to a party , and people ask me what i do , and i say , &quot; i &apos;m a professor , you &apos;ll matt her eyes .
i want to know their selbstsicherheit , all of you know about their innerstes creature , which they &apos;re a professional in the store .
don &apos;t make the tension . i want to be a verzaubert .
it &apos;s a documentary about the dokumentarfilm in consciousness .
when i got closer , i expected to recognize all the details of most people , their clothes and so on .
where do you know that it was what they did ?
see it ? who doesn &apos;t see it ? that &apos;s going to help .
we start gemächlich . some examples .
now , jeff hawkins has his efforts , a good theory , big theory in neuroscience .
and the verkehrsplaner in london said , &quot; what she &apos;s asking you with : &quot; who &apos;s been doing in your house -- &quot; i mean , nobody is in charge . &quot;
now , congestion pricing were introduced in stockholm at stockholm , 2006 , and the first picture is , here &apos;s a picture of stockholm , a typical road at the 2. january .
so , we made this enormous survey with lots and trying to figure out who &apos;s changed and where they were disappeared .
and then i went for twenty years -- from eastern central asia -- through the mountains of the caucasus , mittlerer east , north africa , russia .
what do we know from the todesdrohungen of the taliban who are going to be genagelt to the doors that car would send their daughters to school ?
the world changed .
i was in my office , my desk was cleaned , i had the blue trennwand-teppich on the walls .
and there was two of them .
there was something that was .
how amazing is this ?
now i want to talk about some other patients that do everything in your power to improve health care .
and then i realized that the page of google earth , we see where we can fly to every address .
we are , they &apos;re most of the most underutilized resource in health care .
umkehrosmose von is a membranfiltertechnologie .
here &apos;s the resolution . a wonderful creature , right ?
they &apos;re not taking their environment with sound waves . i &apos;m talking about the flughunden .
in the united states , the annual cost of mrd. dollars in the united states would be belaufen in the united states . so , we can bring bats in the case of wealth .
why should we care about aging ?
if you look at it and look at the night sky and look at this beautiful , flying animal , but i wish you smile , and thank you very much . thank you very much .
europe had to be gezerrt in the economic development development .
the boom of the resources is not pumpt geldmengen in the process of not all , but many countries in the bottom billion .
so what goes wrong ? why is it called &quot; ressourcenfluch ? &quot;
and so the countries of the bottom billion , a very ausgewogene politics .
a few economists arrived at all , just in time , and said , &quot; why don &apos;t you try to make the value ? &quot;
in this moment , in this moment , a billion people in the world are stuck in poor countries , and how can we help them ? the economist paul collier is a significant plan , to get compassionate plan that we can close between poor and rich .
we have no one who they &apos;re creating .
here he &apos;s got a englischsprachigen surgeons in africa , that basiswissen that need to be eingriffe eingriffe .
so what we did is , imagine that you would put a lecture and could talk to the same time with the people in their native language .
&quot; grundlagen surgery . &quot;
14 years ago , i came across the first time to this ordinary material , fischnetz , which has been used since centuries .
he asks me whether i could build this as a dauerhaftes piece for the city .
so we were able to create a little atomisierten nebel to create a trockenen fog , and in testing , it turns out that he can be shaped by people who are interacting with people and move to be able to move without becoming a naß .
they were in their geschäftsanzügen in the grass , they &apos;ve seen the verändernden patterns of the windes of the windes , which they didn &apos;t know , and shared the wiederentdeckung of the wonders .
and it &apos;s also been also me that this is a tremendous risk for our society .
when peter is moved his arm , this is actually a yellow spot that you see there , the remains of the activity that geschiet in peters mind .
if you do this , what are you going to do ?
and to say that these changes are also able to extend the death of the death that can be a claim about a fact that is true , of course , or wrong .
now let me ask you what i don &apos;t say . i don &apos;t say that science can be accessible to that space , or that we have to have scientific answers to any profound question .
now why would this happen a objective morality ?
now , as high is the probability that this is a gipfel of human development ?
on the left , you see edward witten .
we live in a world of technology technology and these technologies can &apos;t be un-erfunden , it &apos;s always more simple things to break down as they together .
but then we have to talk again over well-being in a larger context .
and what &apos;s his natural enemy , which means the means of the good bugs that we talk about ?
it &apos;s a parasite , no zweibeiniger , but a parasitäre light , two inches long , schlank , slim , a quick and wendige fliegerin .
and if we blumenwanzen that good blumenwanzen for example , in a paprika-feld , you go to the flowers .
in israel , where we &apos;re on mars -- this is the equivalent of 10,000 israeli dunams -- biological schädlingsbekämpfung in süßpaprika , 75 percent of the pesticides .
third , to raise awareness of the farmers &apos; potential to the potential of this potential .
automobilretrofuturismus is one of my favorite writers .
it &apos;s still a lustiger to make the hirnlosen rich work , as a irgendwen , and i &apos;m doing that often .
&quot; urban absurdism &quot; -- that &apos;s what the new yorker needs .
her einstiger was fay wray , and so that -- i wasn &apos;t too much enough to say &quot; take the drawing . &quot;
or the collapse of the union , only several decades , maybe several decades , maybe within a decade , after time , when the soviet union was the soviet union .
because there &apos;s 80 percent of the same exist that really eat insects .
they &apos;re at the beginning of nahrungsketten .
why do we actually actually actually do that balls in the soup , but it &apos;s already gone in the soup ?
it &apos;s a 25 kilograms per person per year .
so far , we &apos;re going to decide for that , or to five of the sun .
we can raise them a little bit more at the cost of rainforests , but it will soon give you a boundary .
and you might think , well , you &apos;re not available at all .
my three minutes do not have begun , right ?
he said , &quot; please , we need to put them on the table .
and i saw a sign .
even when the canadians is hintergehen , they do it in a way that &apos;s going to be .
and in this book , the little lewis would find the great idea .
this is a linealwerkzeug . and on the back , there are some other gadgets , messwerkzeuge , messwerkzeuge , and scales to make some of the personality . okay ?
right . so , so that &apos;s going to use it .
there &apos;s a quality of craftsmanship and precision that &apos;s just amazing and remarkable .
so , the first robot i want to talk about is strider .
it &apos;s just going to be just showing that if you have cameras , or other sensors , it &apos;s a meter 80 , it &apos;s one meters of 80 , you can über over obstacles and dererlei hinwegsehen .
for example , in this case , although the left and the right wheel with one axis is linked to one axis and so quickly turn off , and therefore fast , it &apos;s fast fast .
welcome to romela , the robot mechanik mechanik from virgina . &quot;
but the cool thing about it is the benutzerschnittstelle .
as he does , it &apos;s like this , this was our first one , and it was a erster , and ...
but what &apos;s the secret to our success ?
but only by a funken of the imagination is not enough .
in this way , it &apos;s very important to be very important in this way .
innenstädte , who are going to be geisterstädten .
there &apos;s no pool of good teachers , and only eight percent of the people have a bachelor- or a higher degree .
there is a complete blank in bertie county in bertie county .
the goal of the game is to have all the time to ride at affordable &apos;s , then the team won &apos;t .
but in the last few decades , but a lot of money , that was something that was intended for the ted , absolutely .
and after walking out , and the neighbors about what they &apos;re buying for food and why , and why , it &apos;s a homework .
it &apos;s really impossible to produce large kahle of surfaces .
i want to invite you to follow my journey of the umdenkens and to follow .
after four months , it &apos;s got hervor , and now they &apos;re trockenzeit at the eight months before .
here &apos;s a couple of results : a few results .
this global act is going to lead to the same extent , climate change , how it does fossil fuels , maybe even more than that .
when i learned from these two things , bekümmerte me very , very personal reasons , and for reasons , for reasons .
it has a very good ausgestattetes pediatrisches das , which was part of the ronald foundation .
after treatment , we let the child make a series of simple sehtests to see how his vision can accommodate .
the answer is in motion . i want to show you in the next video .
i had to discuss my wife with my wife .
we pursue these forschungsrichtung and hopefully , hopefully , hopefully , soon enough to report .
and then , i got to behinderte from this leichtathletikveranstaltungen for physically behinderte , and i thought i don &apos;t know , but before i &apos;m sure that i &apos;m going to look at it like this .
but this was in the fall , and then as the winter anbrach , he said , &quot; you know , you &apos;re good enough .
ss : well , it made aimee to the paralympics of 1996 , and it &apos;s very excited . your family was with -- it &apos;s a big thing .
i tried to do every one that i could , auszufragen against who , so for who i am , i &apos;m going to do this ?
i always had everything and now i thought , what ?
you can be 2,44m . take it off . &quot;
moderator : aimee and the designers will be two to ted , and we &apos;re going to talk about the design .
she got someone who came over and the shoes .
but it &apos;s almost impossible , the actual equivalent of the economy , unless we use math .
or to the whole jobs .
and yet , again , the mathematics : mathematics is sometimes looking at like mathematics -- and sometimes it doesn &apos;t -- how am i going to drunk ? &quot;
in math , we use about 80 percent of time to teach people how to do three of their hand .
when people ask me , is that ?
but the automation in cars allowed to separate these things , so that &apos;s something else today than this is going to be a car and the learning of its wartung .
completely failed .
but i think we can do both both sides here .
and one of the reasons why this is so important -- so it &apos;s very important , computers in the exams .
it was winter in 2009 , and i was already blind in a year ago .
i thought i thought about my father , who was just a komplikationen of a chirurgischen of a chirurgischen surgery .
and as you can , only through the grasp of the stocks that can take away and ertasten the verändernde of the soil , and with the time , it makes a notion of where you &apos;re zusteuert .
but when i was erblindet and the broadway along , i was blessed to every corner .
if you design a city in the spirit of blind , it will give many jobs .
and to give you a sense of this experience , the article called &quot; i think &quot; i &apos;m &quot; re . &quot;
and the rangierten of the famous , which i knew -- the ten commandments , love your next , &quot; sei and mehre .
you spend money for a good purpose and it makes the emotional conversation about the purpose .
she &apos;s not a book that was written and from the sky .
this is actually the key to me , to me , to remember that , to remind me that the car didn &apos;t überschlug down here , and i didn &apos;t move on the stufen .
that was very inspiring for me .
so if we want to do this book , any kind of meaning , we really need to really have to really be able to get it up and with it rings .
so we have this wonderful progress .
the academics that is the work that is thought that was too unseriös to unseriös , so we evolved to develop a ernstere application like this optik-prototypen entwicklungstisch , which is the kappe of a zahnpastatube to a pappschachtel .
alex working on a little , a little bit like , independent kunstfilm with the name of &quot; minority report &quot; for steven spielberg , and invited us to the interface that will be used in the movie .
we &apos;re taking these boolesche surgery through because we &apos;re gelb and tapire on green grass .
let &apos;s pull this apart , i &apos;m teaching it in explosionsansicht .
we , as humans , are the ones that design things and we should make sure that our machines are helping us and build .
john , thank you to make it out .
what okolloh did was not possible without digital technologies .
but here is the point . the albernste creative act is still a creative act .
but the institutions that are represented by this black line , said , &quot; we change this deal .
they &apos;re going to be created by the members of the community .
and as all good seifenopern makes it leap from 20 years when the interest of the audience is changing .
you didn &apos;t have five days to get the way we came together , and we started playing 50-overs-cricket .
india didn &apos;t want to be a mitspielen .
the other one was cricket cricket .
was this new india ? that was another world where you could get player from wherever you got the best player for the best price .
we &apos;ve seen a games in calcutta , but something that we &apos;ve never seen before . shahrukh khan took the audience with a bengalischen song for the jubeln -- for calcutta , not for india , but for the kalkutta .
could you imagine that this day would come ?
i hope every single time i did a experience of a experience of reicher and the game and hopefully , there &apos;s the cricket-kommentatoren of the cricket-kommentatoren time to work in this business .
and you know that the anwort dogs is because they have fast in the memory of memory , how often you &apos;ve seen dogs and pigs .
why would you like to play anything in the world ?
on the other hand , if you can start a developing country , and for 25 dollars a gourmet-menü , it &apos;s a wucherpreis for a big mac .
would you spend your $ verbliebenen 20 dollars for a ticket ?
i &apos;ll give you an example .
and if the way to the other end of the city &apos;s worth of 100 bucks is it worth 100 bucks , it doesn &apos;t care about them , but people don &apos;t think of it .
well , in large , you &apos;re enormously impatient .
watch what happens when we leave out einge .
dan , i &apos;d like to hear more . you say that our response to terrorism is to terrorism , i mean that he &apos;s a kind of mental mistake ?
there are no weapons of waffen .
and so , some people are looking at the economists as a stupid people .
so , variation , and variation is one of these spielarten that requires some intellectual activity , because you always have the variation that the variation you have in mind .
&quot; no , in words , and in fashion , the same rule is fantastic when you &apos;re neu , or too , is not the first person to the new tried , the last thing that was done for the last . &quot;
and i woke up one day and said , &quot; well , maybe that &apos;s not so much ? &quot;
first of all -- my willingness to me a critical audience , and i &apos;m not to me with my story .
it &apos;s my intention to the poster of the begleiten , they shouldn &apos;t have understood .
and so , in large , and so , they &apos;re all the way to survive .
jews have often a rather nasty smell .
if the space probe , we could see that individuals have more negative to men who helped men männern men .
it &apos;s like i was heimgekommen to talk about what i &apos;ve done in this 20 years .
it feeds my mind and my soul .
they &apos;re shit .
there &apos;s a young director , hollywood director , with his friends , other filmemachern , and you talk about what cinema is .
without food , i became sick .
we don &apos;t need any problems anymore , more than the idiots .
our government was corrupt .
so for me , the idea that we have all these kids , it &apos;s a generation , we have a whole generation of children that have so much psychological to trauma , and harm , and africa has to live with it .
through the whole book , and the whole book was more than an hour of dokumentarischer and interactive animations .
what is the business that is doing this ?
it had at least the ted you , you &apos;re always staying up to be loyal to it .
so i thought , &quot; yeah , that &apos;s a good idea . &quot;
the talk still is about it .
when i came from college , i worked in southern california , and you &apos;re watching the spanish lanes on the roofs and things like that .
rsw : how does his schedule ?
the mit-projekt -- they have interviewed me for the interviewed and have sent their technical hilfskräfte to bilbao .
that &apos;s what i remember this .
and the guy looked at me and said , &quot; so , what can i do for you , mr. gehry ? &quot;
if you have four months for three months , three wishes for three years , the ideas will always get into it and living with the whole .
and one of the things i wanted to mention at my danksagung , but somehow , it was , was to thank all of the companies that i helped in mind .
but in the meantime , these things are moving around .
and this is a decade later , of hand , von .
you see the suits , the suits .
the self-interest on stilen and things is remarkable , and that &apos;s what we should be here .
it &apos;s an incredible endeavor , 15,000 workers , i think , five domes , and the sixth is going to be here .
on this level , to work the 1,500 workers .
50 percent of the computer in the world land in china .
it was quite unusual , so stefan that less than five percent of the commercials was a picture than the hauptthema .
and i &apos;m going to wish three : imax-film . i said , i was told to myself , i always wanted to do something like this .
and it becomes increasingly more important that we can figure out how to create these resources from this very highly complex complex .
traditional ways of dividing material , and they don &apos;t work for kunstoff .
the traditional way to make plastk , is going to be with oil .
at the end of this process , we have a gemischte kunststoff-zusammensetzung : many different types of kunstoff and lots of different qualities of plastic .
now i &apos;m seeing a lot of grinser out there .
and what we see is that people tend to make mistakes in the same way , and again , again , again .
maybe we should study how monkeys make decisions and find out whether they &apos;re the same as the same as we do .
here &apos;s mayday . it &apos;s going to be a token against food and waiting for it , and get food .
and they wait something to do that the market opens up .
imagine that i &apos;m going to take a thousand u.s dollars in the hand -- so 10 hundred dollars a hundred dollars .
you can either choose a riskanten loss -- like , i throw a coin . in your head , you &apos;re going to really lose a lot of .
if we were making the same amount of scenarios , the same scenarios , they would do the same things that people do ?
the person on the left is a safer loss .
maybe it &apos;s not just the people on the last level of development that stupid mistakes .
and that &apos;s the catch .
but if we think about 300 , the most often only stockwerke stories .
we need to build less with concrete and steel , and we need to build higher . we &apos;ve worked on 30-geschossigen holzgebäuden .
it &apos;s as much as we had in a year , 900 cars in a year .
kugelsichere vorhänge verdeckten my windows .
maybe even the citizens , because , in fact , they &apos;re going to come up , to fight the one of the verfall of the verfall of the verfall of the verfall of the verfall of the verfall .
sberbank , the largest and oldest bank in russia , in the ownership of russian government , is now using angestellte and citizens in the development of innovation .
we &apos;ve heard talks about ted people who have their plants with each other , and mozilla working on the world of young people to create and make videos and make videos .
and so i started thinking that the eternal mother always wondered , &quot; are all children there ? &quot;
that &apos;s empathy .
he asked them to be a message to a message , and all of the reading in their own language , which was a version of the golden rule , &quot; what you don &apos;t want to do to do that you don &apos;t want to touch the difference . &quot;
a pastor means to take care of these individual needs .
and we &apos;re doing this by some of the fallbeispiele .
there are over 180 messages in washington d.c. , d.c.
it &apos;s already already already done by parks and sculptures .
it &apos;s made from silizium-beschichteter fiber .
there are also a few limitations of the illumination of its illumination .
the bladder is a anti-denkmal .
i saw my aunt raped when i was five .
one of the things i experienced when i was trying to eat my friend , because we didn &apos;t have food , and we were in the 400 .
as a child , as young and zart , words i can &apos;t forget , not forget .
that &apos;s my story , i mean , in the form of a lesson , memory .
my breakfast , my lunch , i am going to make a foundation that i founded , because we want to build a school in sudan .
give us tools . give people farmers .
audience : yes !
the third chapter is a komplizierteres rechtsverfahren called &quot; federal hebeas proceeding . &quot;
that means more than 60 percent are for that .
we solve this task best by spreading the problem of death .
and even if that happens , it &apos;s not too late .
i remember nothing from the time when i was five years old .
the santa claus knows whether you were artig or not . right ? &quot;
but julie , you were ready for school . you were ready to be . &quot;
they looked at each other and they lächelten , in the sense that was the right answer . then they said , &quot; do you think we &apos;re all brothers and sisters on this earth ? &quot;
maybe your larger ability to cooperate and adapt ?
i think this film shows the toughest stare at modern times , &quot; the &apos; one of the wind &quot;
in the second world war , we had to produce a lot of stuff .
but we can &apos;t do not forget that it needs a fundamental contribution , and that &apos;s how many resources we use .
but now , to the good news , too .
it &apos;s maybe in latin america .
and at that point , the skeptics and the leugner of climate change .
we did a project for the wissenschaftsministerium , a big program , it was meant to -- with many , many people -- many experts were involved -- all of the evidence -- all concentrated evidence -- a dicker wälzer .
a group of people who are spending it for yourself and spend the other group for other people .
when she went to the first building , all of a man &apos;s office , and i was walking on a man who was wrong and stöhnte , and the question is , was that question , and the question is , was that question , and they helped ?
the word is &quot; pizzled , &quot; a combination of &quot; puzzled &quot; and &quot; pissed . &quot;
there is a wonderful book called &#91; unclear &#93; , &#93; things : that would be amazing life .
since it &apos;s -- now , it &apos;s now four decades -- i &apos;ve trained the best thing in this field , in the world , in the world , in the world , jung , and old , kollaborierte , choreographierte , and knüpfte a reichhaltiges of art , successes and awards .
and i found this in my dance , my dance , my power , my energy , my passion , my acceptance .
i danced between chemo- and bestrahlungszyklen and drängte , to fit these aufführungsplan .
well , it was essentially frustration .
that &apos;s like it was at once .
he put them together into something called something interessanterem , and then he placed them in this software , which i believe they had been invented by his son , and he &apos;s making this wonderful presentation .
in these documents there are little vierecke , little boxes .
i want to suggest more of -- yes , they make a beautiful website . how could i say , you &apos;re not going to make a beautiful website ?
now you ask the linked data that you &apos;re now now have now got together . 32 hits , which each protein with these qualities is with these qualities and you can look at it .
and that &apos;s what it is about linked data .
all of this will happen to have two million children dying every year , in the last year , as a year .
and if it &apos;s like , we &apos;re ready to raise feedback , feedback to feedback , to make sure that the results are really results ?
you just simply show one of the numbers there , the 5,000 -- is that number ?
my brothers started to draw my drawing and draw my drawing .
that &apos;s what i think i was fascinated by studying this area .
how many of you have a cow walking across the street , looking at the way to the way to get out of bangalore ?
it &apos;s just that we &apos;re trained to be trained to be the reality that way . and that makes the meaning .
and they said , &quot; okay .
can &apos;t you do anything , you &apos;re an artist ? &quot;
this is a box from wellpappe .
because if we see somebody &apos;s vorbeigehen , we see the footprint .
what percentage of them have been made by foreign direktinvestitionen ?
obviously , he has the last 20,000 years in a cave .
so the auslandshilfe is actually a very difficult approach to come here , because -- if you think about -- if you &apos;re going to think about today , i think , today , is the most amazing assumption that most things are very binnenlastig .
this is the place i showed you at the beginning .
we &apos;re going to be a little bit technical .
think about toyota .
you can &apos;t turn on it off , so accept it and find it a way to work .
it &apos;s very hard to vote .
it &apos;s wetteifernd and zielgerichtet .
pizza you get when you hunger hunger .
there are millions of different beläge .
so remember , if we think about sexual education and activity , they &apos;re out of baseball .
it &apos;s from the poet yuan chen , and it &apos;s like , &quot; i can &apos;t have it ertragen .
and that is , &quot; how much percent of the day you think of this person ? &quot;
in über societies , people were leaving these machtvollen gehirnstruktur .
they came home with 60-80 percent of the abendessens home .
and it really became a strong force .
and i say , &quot; why do you think that men are untreuer than women ? &quot;
no time on this were female , the women were so educated , so interesting , so as well as it can .
she &apos;s 23 she has been 13 .
i started to fagen why you &apos;re more like to fall in love with the other person .
they &apos;re going to be as long as the human race is on what shakespeare is called &quot; this sterbliche spiral . &quot;
but unfortunately , i know .
most researchers believe that obesity is the cause of insulin resistance .
maybe we should ask ourselves , whether it could be the insulin resistance for the lack of the mass and adipositas-bedingte diseases -- at least most of people ?
others , it &apos;s too much nahrungsfett .
peter attia : what if our views were wrong wrong ?
my urgroßvater , henry ford , really , really , really , that it was the mission of ford motor company , the lives of people who make people improve and help cars affordable .
and the good news is that we &apos;re now solving the big problems of cars and environment -- not just to ford , but rather than industry .
i think you can imagine it already .
but what really inspired me is the ways that we &apos;re going to start when our cars start communicate with each other .
we need a infrastructure that is able to support this flexible future .
that &apos;s one minute 59. , a minute .
i think my mother now , i think , is a kind of innenarchitekt .
the nurse has to be eingeben data .
that &apos;s really important . it &apos;s a lot . &quot;
so what &apos;s the point ?
it was great for us , because we won a lot of awards .
i was infected when i was 17 , then as a student , as a student , i was adults , who really believed me , who really believed me , and i had a lot of tassen chai me .
now it was just about the kids . we don &apos;t zögerten .
we basically gave the kids a simple task .
for our auction , we have some wonderful images for them , for a really good purpose , which is the money that they &apos;re giving us to buy a lot of hearing .
but what i never told me , and what i want to do is , is that umweltfreundlichkeit is cool .
in a way in the elegant or alternativ product , which we have großzügigerweise mittags , which we have großzügigerweise mittags , which is the maxin , which is another kind of development -- and inspired by the incredible kind of experience .
if you think about the change in our society , the zuzug of land in the cities , the 200 years has taken the same process in 20 years .
it looked changes changes , although that &apos;s been unbekannt .
so we would put models of the models under a artificial sky .
i think about a factor of 94 percent for virtually virtually .
and how do we do in this case , something like a little bit of lesbarer , especially in some places that i &apos;m talking about -- china , for example , that &apos;s going to build 400 new airports .
and this is the focus of the 18-minütigen talk -- there are no lighting in the positive sense that is healthy and our well-being is healthy ; no adequate darkness .
in contrast , the first office i showed you to the start of the talk is , this is a very old chart , which is the white-gruppe .
behind you , they &apos;re looking at the seagram building , which later , later , to a icon of modern lichtdesigns .
i find that what you &apos;re seeing here right -- how much light hits the sky and never reached the ground .
that &apos;s not very pleasant and behaglich .
they &apos;re not going to be more disturbed .
when our innenminister was , a war in india was in a third of india , about 200 distrikte , which is the unregierbar , the unregierbar , it has to do that the issue .
and one day -- i don &apos;t know what happened -- while i was coming home , i would see a honigbiene , or it would be a honigbiene , i could be like a honigbiene , that &apos;s wonderful .
gupta : but what &apos;s it going to use ? what it was used ?
to do what to do ? to break stones .
that &apos;s the only place where you could express your creativity .
they don &apos;t want to be a second choice of standards and qualitätsprodukten .
and that &apos;s what mansukh bhai did .
i had to have to my favorite .
mr. kharai , who lives with a physical challenge , only 50 inches in diameter .
assam , kanak gogoi .
this is erfreulich .
these are 3,2 billion people .
or skifahren . it &apos;s just fun , and people love it to do things and do fun things .
so we &apos;ve been working very , very hard , but we knew it &apos;s not so hard to develop the technology as the acceptance of the technology is about how technology is important .
cars are not made for the next to go to side-by-side ; it &apos;s wonderful machinen to drive between the cities and to go and think about it , we have all the problems to relate to the site and speed .
so if we could put this box here in a few years , we could have a solution for transport , electricity , and communication , and maybe drinking water in a sustainable kilogramm package , that 60 kilograms ?
implizit or the explicitly say that people who are dying , somehow in the corporate sector , and that &apos;s how we &apos;re going to do that they &apos;re either tortured or professional exekutiert or even both of the professional exekutiert .
going to be a bande , as a bande of psychopaths , the fear and horror of the städten and the press to the press , and that &apos;s true for most of the most .
mexico and the united states is now a truly international organization , the partnerships of the production in the south and global partnerships to the global distribution .
but also part of that , a monatlich magazine -- you live in the future , and we have a long time .
and after it drops to a critical price , you &apos;re going to follow , if you &apos;re successful , over a critical mass , a breakthrough .
but they &apos;re going to be very , very cheaply , and look at the interesting effect , if you &apos;re going to lose cheaper , the brands will lose the sonys and the no-names , and the no-names , the apexe , you win .
if you look at linux , linux is in red , it has 20 percent .
&quot; open , &quot; really , &quot; really , you know , the gift of the silicon valley of the silicon valley is the world .
because of some of the technologies we &apos;ve talked about .
patient capital is working between between and trying to take the best part of the one .
it had to be a second to be very cheap .
president obama understands that .
because one of the poorest farmers in the world has found access to a technology that it allows him to change his life .
and yet , these are exactly the traits that men and women were honored to all of the generations .
they remember the wirbelsturms berichtete in his blog , in his blog , in the middle of the cyclone , and he often oft it . that was only because blogs are easy to use .
i like music , and i like banjos , and i think i heard , steve martin play and i told me that i can .
i wrote this post , and i took this to einstein .
and you can see that post that post .
these little things .
and maybe i have to be schluchzen , because i &apos;m talking about it .
it was nachhaltig since the earth , except by our generation .
we need to use these very compelling use to get a better understanding of the oceans .
we studied these fish , but we had to learn how we have to keep them .
but the only size of the largest tuna that we &apos;ve ever have ever imagined .
they come together . that could be sex under a distance , and there it is .
you can see a lure -- it &apos;s teppichförmig like a seal -- and a white shark will go to it , a neugierige creature that &apos;s quite dicht to our 16 boat .
and then we give us these animals even a encore by helping us .
and the white shark .
i think he didn &apos;t thought that the records of my base were so closely .
they said , &quot; apart from that , we &apos;ve been talking about , among them are among groups that want to harm the united states ? &quot;
you don &apos;t have to waste your energy .
now who &apos;s looking at my view , seeing that i was there , and i know i &apos;ve been doing the ninth may mai for a safeway 14.79 in the safeway .
all the previous moments , i press a zeitstempel on my life .
when i started the project , people told people , &quot; why would you want to say what you &apos;re doing , and where you are ?
now it &apos;s normal .
now , you see , you see this heatmap of paris to see how incredibly fast that growth is .
i &apos;ve looked at thousands of such hours of marktplätze , and trust and efficiency are always becoming the road .
how do we ahmen to face how to face the face of face-to-face face-to-face ?
i was kind of a kind of mind in the system .
and this site gets to a day and say , 80 percent of it will get an accurate answer .
let me start with a paradox .
and here you see him in relation to the degree of inequality that i showed you on the rate of that i &apos;m going to come back .
first , the rich countries developed , developed countries , and then in a second testfeld , with the same american states -- and the more question , is the more unequal state to all of the things that schlechter ?
with devastating impact of impact that we use to do the use of the talent .
and in our analysis of the american states , we find the same thing .
the socially einschätzenden , and they &apos;re going to be afraid of this .
or for instance , why violence is widely spread in more unequal societies , because people are sensitive to become verachtet .
a year , more than three million amputierte amputierte a new knee or a ersatzknie .
they remind you how kamal that was still hielt the bambusstab .
if you wear under pants or a rock , it &apos;s very clear that they wear a prosthetic , and in societies , in which , in the way , with a social stigma , people are very sensitive .
so thank you very much .
you want to be a dirty magazine ?
i bought the vergoldete sondermodell . there &apos;s a little paper tube on that says , &quot; don &apos;t use these saftpresse , to pressen juice .
this is the results of the 20th , &quot; and &quot; stellt google just as many &quot; o &quot; , &quot; how there are pages .
so strong fear is lähmt .
but if you were to be done in this condition , the work would never be done , because you would suddenly say , &quot; oh , i found a new way to do it . &quot;
almost everything we do , is subconscious .
it &apos;s about being safe in this world .
would be the department of the rostig and would fall apart , they would never have a fahrt .
it &apos;s a very small piece -- you should not be generalisieren .
i &apos;m going to talk to kids and self-organization , and a series of experiments that might be a alternative to be a alternative education .
and at night , the day , 70 children were born in the internet .
so i could choose to be a stichproben , to make a cross-section of a cross-section of the querschnitt , the part of the world represents the whole world .
what you see is obviously , there &apos;s a child who makes the computer .
natural systems are all selbst-organisiert : galaxies , the galaxies , cells , cells , organisms , societies -- except the discussion of the smart designer . &quot;
and it &apos;s about the wiederentdeckung of idealism in this entire trümmerhaufen .
i bought a nice suit and carried shoes with ledersohle and feierte that remarkable access to me that i had to weltereignissen .
but 2002 , when my tour came to the end , i decided i didn &apos;t get to the job that i was going to go back to me in london .
i felt that something was destroyed .
and i went through . i went through these numbers .
and i went to kosovo and beriet .
the independent diplomat is part of a trends that comes in the world , obviously , obviously , and revealed that the world are fragmentiert .
it &apos;s terrible , that they &apos;re actually affected by these people who are actually affected .
this is the politics of the 21st century , and in some sense , the independent diplomat , the independent diplomat , these zersplitterung , these changes , that change that we &apos;re all about .
&quot; hey , could you get me more magermilch ? &quot;
because if we go back to the beziehungskrise , you understood that practice that a simple mistake can say , &quot; which is not , or to remind ourselves why you love something .
we feel awe , pity .
here we go .
what is the number one one ?
no . in the &apos; 70s , the richtungsweisende raketenhaft , the 1973 , the 1973 , the 1973 , followed by the top 10 , followed by the sechs-millionen-dollar-mann , &quot; and &quot; three engel of charlie &quot;
i can choose it from the island .
and i &apos;m really happy to discuss with you , i come in and say , &quot; can somebody me ask me the informed of how it &apos;s to explain how cool it is ? &quot;
next is the virus-dna stuff that &apos;s the bakterien-dna stuff that &apos;s called the bakterien-dna .
from a number of reasons .
or even worse , more education , more than the guy , who always says , &quot; actually ... &quot;
but we have so much work in front of us and when there &apos;s somebody in science , i &apos;m asking you to me with me .
we climb up the staircase and experiencing a state of consciousness .
so many books about war , the same thing that is the same thing that is not so much as a very mathematical person like war .
durkheim believed that everything that we got together , a little bit of sacredness .
he told that , &quot; selbstlose and streitsüchtige people don &apos;t get to come and not zusammenhalten without no sign . &quot;
it uses the other .
once they were all in a same tribe , they could keep the benefits of cooperation .
it &apos;s about connecting with others to connect ethical notions .
jh : thank you very much .
quickly quickly , i quickly realized that männerbereiche don &apos;t have to be inside .
and right next to the garage , he has his own trophäenraum , where he can take his errungenschaften to his errungenschaften , which is a different role in männerbereichen .
everything is always a simple and more einfacher , and here &apos;s this riesenflughafen , and i &apos;m just going to photograph it &apos;s just , i just photographed it , i just photographed it , it &apos;s just photographed .
&quot; the end of the print is &quot; now &quot; fifth time .
this book is called &quot; probes . &quot; it &apos;s a different word for quotes .
this is actually a experiment for one client , quicksilver , where we made a sequence from six photos and tried to figure out people about the printed medium of the internet .
they thought that people didn &apos;t like them .
a article on brian ferry -- a really boring article -- so i put the whole article in dingbats .
somebody told me today , there are these things that the folder is called the &quot; heißen , but i don &apos;t know what this is .
that &apos;s most important for most of the professions .
before that , obviously , obviously , no technology . but obviously .
this is not a different planet . these are things that are on our planet .
and finally , i come back to these nacktschnecke .
this is niles eldredge- , he was with stephen jay jay gould gould gould of the theory of the punktualismus .
we heard about japanern , the guns of guns .
and i think that &apos;s really important . because if you can imagine mozart before the invention of the art of the pianos -- which is a loss for society .
octopus were faszinierten me for the first time when i was very young .
he grabs it again , even a arm full of gravel , let him go -- &quot; tschk tschk tschk tschk ! &quot; -- the same thing happens .
but the point is , we were there for a month , and i wanted to get the animals to us so that we could see their behaviors without failing them .
and if you drive down to the bottom , the lovely blue water , where you have it gelassen them , and you have dunkelblauer and dunkelblauer .
but there is no sun , there &apos;s no photosynthesis . it &apos;s a chemosynthetische world there , which it &apos;s lenkt and it &apos;s all so vergänglich .
but i &apos;ve seen that the exact opposite of the opposite .
everybody speaks to everyone . then there &apos;s no any any points on a map , it &apos;s a network that we &apos;ve created .
she was a hausfrau , and i &apos;m not going , and i benahmen us like little girls . she didn &apos;t buy me a pink clothes , but knew , but i knew , was no .
my parents had a scheiden , and my sister was arrested .
cities are the schmelztiegel of civilization .
is edinburgh a horse ?
we &apos;re going to behave in our economy , shown in the corner left .
the heartbeat is to reduce , they live longer , diffusion of sauerstof and nutrients , and nutrients from the membranes , etc .
the most important thing is that the exponent , the equivalent of the drei-viertel-rate to the metabolismus , even more than one , is one of one -- so that &apos;s about -- so about it as well as it is .
they grow quickly and stop our wiederstandsfähigkeit .
looks like a hockeyschläger .
children in the 12th class are fewer begeistert of political systems .
he had to talk in a high near near near us .
my students made this infografiken infografiken as a result of a challenge that we &apos;ve been put in the entire year end of the year .
this is my favorite , because it was made the tuesday tuesday when i was the students to the choice .
and that &apos;s the same as it is .
actually , you could -- -- that &apos;s where we don &apos;t go .
it &apos;s a grobkonzept .
and he was a very important question .
and i &apos;m going to show you the 15 million dollars .
you see the stem cells again .
many of these patients are hard to burn .
the european union , the same union .
and although i don &apos;t have patents , so much of my invention , you &apos;re going to meet some of my inventions .
you know , of course , what that means .
and they have all these progress in the way that way you happen to happen , and they &apos;re all the young .
thank you all of you .
in school -- actually , i have a organization that makes a führungsding , you know , like you , they would like it , and so on .
she was also very upset , but she was so full of trouble .
my daughter -- my daughter wrote this , she told me , &quot; start speaking with humor . &quot;
i &apos;m a lot . &quot;
i want to hold your hand .
and then finally , i got a call to a call that i should talk directly to j.j. .
and i thought if i could write books in which the world &apos;s small and connected , i could give people to the problems that affect us , and maybe they &apos;re moving to improve the world .
and john said , &quot; bet on good people doing good things .
there was no specific media company that are focused on public interest .
i thought , the problem of 30-50 in 30-50 years .
i learned that there &apos;s not only a real journey to change .
what do you think how many police are on this taxi ? well ? three .
now look at that . this is the anästhesie-gerät .
well , the medical advice of the vorstandsvorsitzenden , &quot; yes , i told you that you don &apos;t , that &apos;s not going to look at that . &quot;
that &apos;s our first patient , just out of the intensivbehandlung , and now you look at this chair .
these are the grundzüge of my apparates , or our apparats .
i have to get to you . &quot;
this is in the scottish parliament .
they put them on a very special nährstoffreiche diet and treated with big care .
his app was first wiedereingestellt when he won the pulitzer prize .
but there was a lot of debates about how much of the problem , how to be that problem .
so we have the situation in the world where we have more countries that are the relationship between the citizens and the government of the internet , which is being managed by largely private &apos;s private service .
rebecca maxkinnon : get us back to the internet .
they won &apos;t do all four years of the gewichtheben in the gewichtheben and in the class in the olympics , they were the big berühmtheiten of communism , and with a great lifestyle that was done with that .
the european union that started to harvest the fruits of globalization -- they &#91; unclear &#93; &#91; unclear &#93; , it became the richest konsumentenmarkt in the history of the story with all the time in the history of 500 million people .
by 1994 , for seven years , 20 years , 20 of these boats had the adria of montenegro to italy , every single night .
let me give you the 1x1 of the organized crime , the organized crime that you have the organisierten verbrechens .
i &apos;d like to introduce you to mr. pringle .
they affect our bankkonten .
i mean , if i &apos;m a good darwinist , i think it &apos;s a reason for that .
this made him very unbeliebt . they didn &apos;t want to go back .
it has been waiting since 1960 , as a alister hardy , a meeresbiologe , said , &quot; i think our ancestors might have lived for a time in the water . &quot;
as a absolute connection , it &apos;s only going to work .
and then the fact that we &apos;re stromlinienförmig .
for example , professor tobias . he understood it .
so if it comes and when it gets to happen , who is going to be or what does it feel ?
one : i want to make as much as possible as possible .
yeah , i &apos;m talking about a few google-typen .
you see , somehow in the lives of other people , and i have the feeling that i get too much inspiration from the user .
this is called &quot; atheist &quot; . &quot;
online malprogramme -- you &apos;ve seen a lot of times .
performer and web-toymaker ze frank , a very äußerst amüsante , and tells us what he &apos;s dealing with the passion : people help build small , suchterzeugenden web-programmen .
the answer is pretty peculiar .
so the point is , say , tell people , &quot; if you give you the information that we offer my help . &quot;
and every time i talk about what i &apos;m doing at least , i want to address the very least , why the body is meaning .
so this particular instrument is called the auf-den-bauch-hörer .
they shrink and melt at the same time -- and some are all disappeared .
that would be no big problem because if we were in todesgefahr , we would look our arguments , everything that would be necessary , and find a way to find them .
this is data from the haushaltsbüro of congress , they show the realistischste projection , which would happen if the current circumstance and trends continue .
the rock is holy , and when people circle together , they unite , they can trust each other , they will be one .
so that the bloods and the crips knowledge , for which side they are supposed to vote .
for many reasons , the decades after world war ii had a historically historically time .
we are as a country .
we &apos;re going to be a nation with two classes .
it &apos;s really a social disaster , and the liberal are very worried about it .
but the existing don &apos;t exist yet . so i have to make them .
they &apos;re known since all of the architecture in .
you see these schaubildern that protocell actually moved off the light and move the dark color .
i &apos;ve been able to get me nearly three decades of hospitals . i &apos;m probably most proud of .
instead , i &apos;m a professor for jura , psychology and psychiatry in usc the usc of law school , i have a lot of good friends and a beloved husband , and i want to be here today .
i quote from my writings : &quot; i had to deal with my classmates with my classmates and val at the freitagabend in of the jurabibliothek where we wanted to work together .
and then they put me back and legs on the bed .
i &apos;ve never met a psychiatriepatienten , who would have agreed that .
i could let them go away and let &apos;s make it a ganz diskret . &apos; &quot; ha ha ha .
the american prisons are full of people who are very intricate , and many of them are there , because they never got a proper therapy .
so we &apos;ve decided to build a different car car .
these are four billion hours of hours , who are going to be a vergeudet .
in short , there were plenty of water and not very many people .
the montana brewers have done a lot to reduce their water interventions , but they still use millions of content in water .
he paid it to make the water in the stream .
i &apos;m not happy to do a problem with the ones who work on the solution , so i want to be sendungen like mad men , and films like &quot; brautalarm , &quot; whose female characters and hauptfiguren and practices .
his name is matthieu ricard ricard .
i know there are other companies in the world , but google is the environment that i know because i &apos;m already in a 10 years , so i &apos;m going to use google as a shark .
so , it turns out that google is a company with compassion because the googlers is going to make compassion fun .
you get in the morning , and i have three colleagues that made out of heiterem skies , to build a hospital in india .
there are three steps .
and i hope that compassion is also going to be fun for them .
but one day , the perfect case , it was a gemüseverkäuferin , who was sitting in front of her house .
i met with one of the entwicklungsbüros that the training of staatsanwälten and richtern bars , which is the normal tendency to the verteidigern .
people often tell me , &quot; you know , that &apos;s wonderful , but it &apos;s highly idealistisch .
in the same trance-zustand , you sometimes know when you &apos;re sitting in the new york subway and reads that beruhigende and easy feeling .
different parts of the world have a händchen for different things .
and at the same time , the beautiful work of takeshi ishiguro who made this beautiful salz- and pfefferstreuer of reisteig .
but the objects sich from the kompletten of the wasser- minenräum-ausrüstungen of the water sterilisierungsstrohhalmen , it was really very broad gefächert .
even this chair you open , and then sit down , so that you can go out and you can see that beautiful series of objects that are being looked at as design of mine ana .
what has image image because now , what has been doing ?
instead , they developed a very interesting approach to my education -- which is that they would send me to a school that they could barely afford .
my final story , and i have to have a little bit more a little bit .
and he died when the dawn came to the unterwegs to bring him into the hospital .
it &apos;s a way of going to be a way of how to do that .
very simple , the leap .
and we have to start to start asking our leaders of politicians .
my cousin couldn &apos;t afford to do that , and she &apos;s very clever .
and if you don &apos;t take you , then what &apos;s not .
so the land was divided between politics and religion .
so our political problems .
veränderer and future leaders were shaped .
he helped half in the parol .
it &apos;s the heart of medical services .
i &apos;m going to sell these simple to every single world in the world .
now , when i got this , i was -- it turns out the feststelltaste -- completely unless i understand ?
now , in a few weeks , a few weeks will be a big girls .
and as you can see , the life expectancy was very short .
life expectancy in 78. 78. .
this is the absolutely best technology for this region .
let &apos;s start with the water .
but you have to share this with the world .
the generation y seems to be anzuklopfen .
100 people gather up to a nonviolent march and a idiot or lockspitzel , a rock , guess who &apos;s going to captured a rock , and you see who &apos;s captured by the cameras . this one guy .
and it &apos;s also about humor . humor is such a potent force that can turn the game . it also played a very big role .
now , the 1-million-dollar-frage : how is it going to go in the arab world ?
and she said , &quot; i saw your talk in live .
i said , &quot; if you &apos;re going to be 500 to 1,000 or 2,000 , my life is finished . &quot;
there is nothing more than that .
and i see them .
and everybody broke out and said , &quot; yes ! &quot;
i know your dad was never in luxembourg , he was in a terrific .
the other thing that you have to know about shame is , it &apos;s absolutely shown through the gender .
i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
we want to be with you and you .
and if we &apos;re going to move and abschlagen ...
if i fell in a ameise , i couldn &apos;t see that .
this helped us have a very ethical and very powerful organization , and a system that supports them .
we have a simple fact in a retinalkamera umfunktioniert , and they make a ferndiagnose for a arzt patient for every patient .
our own compute are more quickly than that , what makes us a healthy profit , and that we can treat a lot of people free .
this is a tough task .
for example , we can bring digital content with physical mass .
wouldn &apos;t that be a chance of creating an opportunity to shape the cell ?
it was like couldn &apos;t see me anymore when i was invisible .
and also had no one ever heard before or saw this schauspiel of the creation of the face , and knowledge , because now you have this concept in their head in their head .
like bp is gestopft , the hole will be gestopft , but not without a price price .
don &apos;t really look that .
and it &apos;s also the history of modern capitalism , because it was the wealth of this country , the our system system , the system that can &apos;t survive without any growth of its growth and infinite power of architecture .
the oil is not liquid ; it &apos;s not .
now you may have more headlines like this .
great show . man , that was good !
bf : ... like , in the left .
dh : all right , please stand here , please ...
rw : can i hold it ?
dh : power is just jonglier-jungen , say , say ?
dh : then we go .
dh : the french judge ...
dh : i &apos;ve got it -- ... in order to put the keule down there with my handle .
bf : from six to seven . dh : this is weltrekord . bf : really ? dh : how to do it .
it &apos;s less known than the two , because he had this idea to build mechanical rechengeräte , and never built one .
but if you look at something , what this is very , very similar .
this is from a paper that you übersetzte .
there are plans .
you know the problem that we don &apos;t want to believe what we know .
we don &apos;t want to believe what we know .
second romeo and juliet , sassi and panno , dodi and diana , and ranjha , and that &apos;s love !
so after i &apos;m in the wheelchair , after the wheelchair , i &apos;m in the wheelchair in the wheelchair , i &apos;ve done more in the wheelchair in the wheelchair as a outside of him .
over generations , we have our children as much as millions of other species who live with us .
but it &apos;s not a normal movie .
but if i &apos;m just genommen a base of the screen that auflösung x x 800 , we would need 3,000 screens to take a look at the genome .
what does this mean for medicine ?
and so he sequenced the genomes of his children .
it &apos;s because there would be somebody in the audience who are voluntary part of the audience .
imagine that in 2016 , the foremost economic growth accounts was not only just four years of tax tax revenue , but your personal genome .
and so i &apos;m like , please , aufzuwachen and join and join the genomic revolution that around you .
and we have a flexiblen , angetriebenen bleeding with a special computer program that remains within the process of the knochenmarks and the edges of the hip hop .
hopefully , it will allow us to see this technology , to see more of these survivors .
in the branch , what the sample would take us to the sample of the gas and dies and dies .
so exciting is . he can create the siebenfache of the sooner , so we &apos;re going to get very soon in a few new particles .
the most famous charge is the electric charge .
they tell us what changes are going to be allowed . and also , it &apos;s also the other way to get in .
but that &apos;s how to work out of the same theories .
many think it &apos;s the most beautiful structure in mathematics .
the only way to have its mental health , in the midst of the uncertainty , is to learn to maintain the balance and have a perspective in life .
the pattern of dots that i showed you , actually , actually , actually , this höherdimensionalen gebildes , which is moving , moves , and on the erlebbaren tanzt space-time .
and we also heard of the story of the story of humanity through genetic ecosystem .
in the schimpansengesellschaft , we find many , many examples of compassion , for love and training .
most importantly , i think it &apos;s with small groups of women , you will give you the opportunity to give you the opportunity to give you the opportunity to the city of mikro-krediten .
and you know what i mean . i &apos;m talking about pollution .
take the ziegelmauer for all the problems we &apos;ve aufgebürdet the planet , in the environment and the social and the social . it &apos;s a message of hope .
and unwanted pregnancies and similar things , which young people are hearing better from other people , than adults .
this change , this change , change that change . change is the necessary that we need to care about the future .
working with plastic , about the first eight years , some of my pieces started to degrade and break down into smaller plastikstückchen .
recycling . everybody ended up about his book about erträglichkeit ecology with the idea of recycling .
so i &apos;m here , and we &apos;re in our youngest and the most successful attempt that &apos;s in the evolution in the development .
the author of the book is juan , our vorheriger referent , and it &apos;s going to be by amazon .
at that time , we knew that this was a political thing .
i lost a child , a child , a second , when i was 16 .
i know what it means to suffer , and if a crime is happening , one person should be a person and punished . &quot;
but what if that wasn &apos;t that ?
after a few days , i thought , but i eventually figured out that , the lifesaver-flasche .
that would add . please .
okay . the lifesaver-flasche is going to be used by thousands of people worldwide .
or we could use one of these here .
mao tse tung described them as the european civil wars , and that &apos;s probably a genauere description .
my view , ladies and gentlemen , is that this probably is probably possible by the way that we can possibly possible .
they start to see the hervortreten of a world world .
but this is not anymore .
the wechselbeziehungen of nations , now , we &apos;ve always got .
now , this last thing is .
but if you ask the durchschnittsamerikaner today , how the optimal formula is a long life , he may not be able to tell you .
it reminds me of my college at my college .
and the research shows that these years were free of chronic disease , heart disease , cancer and diabetes .
you have what we want .
we &apos;re currently in half .
and for a while , we looked at the prärien in the prärien , where it &apos;s actually a high percentage of 100-jährigen .
instead , they &apos;re talking about the next trip to nature , and they &apos;re rezepte , and yes , they pray .
it &apos;s been shown to you nine herunterzubrechen .
they tend to feed themselves .
for the small example i think here in the hand , we &apos;ve used a berührungssensor that &apos;s used to my skin , using this little light .
so they were amateure , no experts , the inventor and verbesserer of things like the sun , halbleitern , pcs , flugzeugen , flugzeugen ...
then , there were big shapes that only ever been interested in the only scientists , and no one of them just dreamed of having a davon at home .
you just have your own eyes to come from .
i mean , i mean , it was seen .
we &apos;ve got the driver &apos;s driver and examining it .
and i said , i can &apos;t bring them , but i can bring them in the weightlessness in zero cash .
we had four notfallärzte and two nurses in the airplane .
and actually , you can now show some images now , because i don &apos;t want to see myself on the screen .
no life , from the smallest life to all of us , to all of us , would be without those little micro-machines .
i &apos;m duschte on campingplätzen . i was regelmäßig .
i didn &apos;t have changed . my i.q. was not gone .
i was a writer .
so no one would have no family akzeptieren to familienplanung if you fail to fail .
and then we decided that not to use the religion , because in the philippines , the catholic church was quite strong , and thailänder are buddhist .
we were cutting our first mikrokreditprogramm , and the women who said it was organized saying , &quot; we just want to engage women to the family planning .
you can call it the coca-cola kind of reasoning if you like . it &apos;s the same thing .
and then aids aufklärung in all schools , started in university .
and then here , with the american flag , &quot; don &apos;t go home . &quot;
these are things that are being put by the corporate world .
can you imagine , at any starbucks , you can get condoms ?
he can &apos;t be scary or unheimlich .
so i &apos;m doing a picture .
you can simulate this behavior in the browser , which is what romo is doing right now .
i want to tell you about my four minutes of the ruhms .
people like all of you in this room .
she passes a elegant , like a giraffe on the african savannah , the flag on their shoulder , and i joggte -- -- on the zehenspitzen , the flag with the flagge arm , so my head would stay under the center of the thing .
i have my whole life working with women and women .
jenny is clear that the only solution is going to move the bad teeth .
they get the women to plant new trees and wässern , drop for a drop .
women and children , particularly the poor , the bottom .
when you sold to early , you &apos;re going to do the profits , but if you wait too long for all the time , until all the course of the course .
you can see the tips , but it &apos;s clear .
the challenge for the uninformierten player is whether he believes the other is fair or that it &apos;s going to be wenig , so that he thinks only one or two dollars to have been .
now i &apos;m going to give you a few relatives .
we can try it . maybe we will .
so what did we learn today ?
about 10 calories , to make an individual food that we consume in the west .
so how does this smell like that ?
and in the middle of the city in the east , they &apos;re offered to sell , they &apos;re offered . that &apos;s why it &apos;s called poultry .
and that point changes our relationship with our relationship , both both and the cities .
the word 1950s was thomas moore &apos;s moore .
dampfende haufen of humus .
we have to understand that the world is also what we eat .
it &apos;s the source of all morality , this fantasievolle act of einfühlung itself to sit down to another one another .
and i see that there is a scharfe intelligence , not just a schnulziges feeling .
in the present community , we have wolkenkratzer -- two years of bauzeit , a half to a million parts , a pretty complex and exciting technologies from steel , concrete , glass , glass .
the next project , that begs in question and look at the passive nature or to make the passive passiven , rekonfiguration programmierbar .
basically , you have an chain of elements .
when i was in beloit , wisconsin , i gave a public talk about a group of middle school .
we often look for erregern of the ideas like this .
there are legal everywhere all around us , and it &apos;s just waiting for it to be discovered .
now , could we please take the light , so we can see it ?
so we &apos;re chemical ausblühungen that are different . our species has been brought back to us .
but i have to say -- and i &apos;m going to go to hell , richard -- that i &apos;ve never liked biological exkursionen , and i think we &apos;ve just got a number of hundred million years .
everybody &apos;s talking about helping public health care to conclusions in the cost .
he realized that it &apos;s possible to take different laws that allow the economy to have the anreize to win the other way .
both of them are dark versus puerto rico , which half of people have been so many people in haiti or haiti .
one of these zones of the zones of hong kong is gehört shenzhen .
people can come to live under the charter , but nobody is forced to be forced .
so much of the people who have understood the idea of the sonderzonen that people can share with rules .
how would we like to write a grant like this ?
you thought a little more than 10 years ago , that you have to have the end of the end of this year between three and five genomes , they have already been hundreds of thousands of genomes .
if there is a lot of chlorophyll , they &apos;re very much very green light .
the number of common genes expanded a little bit , if we &apos;re going to move a intrazellulären parasite ; it &apos;s even bigger when we focused on certain kerngruppen of genes , about ungefähr .
it &apos;s going to be a bestrahlung after radiation , through his chromosomes in small pieces , within 12 to 24 hours .
let me finish with ethical and political research .
of course , it &apos;s worth when you &apos;re marshmallows .
we call them &quot; zukunftsorientiert . &quot; you focus on what &apos;s going to be .
and it &apos;s also been done . i grew up as a child kid in the south bronx in the south bronx , and everybody lived in the past and in the present .
let &apos;s take the domain medicine .
here &apos;s a beautiful picture of the andromedanebels , which is the largest spiralgalaxie in the way to the milky way galaxy .
it &apos;s cold , gespenstisch and neblig , maybe raining , and maybe they &apos;re standing at the shore of a michigansees randvoll .
i can &apos;t tell you how this was , the first images of the probe of the titans surface of the titans surface , this one , this was what we saw .
so here we see a film of the titans äquatorregion , who shows these dunes . these dunes are 100 feet high , got a distance from a few kilometers and erstrecken and meilenweit and meilenweit .
so far , the only planet is still the only planet where we know that it &apos;s about life .
they had 40 percent of their country and would have been published by the country so that they have no free access to the rest of the west .
demonstrant : this is a friedlicher protestmarsch .
so we organized a demo .
it just took them four days .
and like the rest of the brain is made of neurons .
in the eingängen of the hippocampus , you find cells that are in the hippocampus that are in the hippocampus of borders , or edges in a certain distance , and the direction in the room and the mouse , if you &apos;re exploring the environment .
and this would be represented by the firing of the grenzortungszellen .
he wasn &apos;t the only man who used to have a america without bürgrechte , and he was not the only great speakers of his time .
and why would somebody care about ?
people don &apos;t buy what they do , but why they do it .
the neocortex is responsible for all of our rational and somewhat thoughts and language .
it &apos;s always the same three things , so we look at it .
and if you talk about what you believe , they will attract the attract , believing what you believe .
the reason that people are bought a iphone in the first six hours to take six hours in the line , their worldview , and her will , you know , everybody &apos;s her , and they were the first first .
people don &apos;t buy what they do , they buy why they do it , and what they &apos;re doing is just proof of what you believe .
and by the way , he gave the &quot; i have a dream &quot; -rede , &quot; i have a plan &quot;
i &apos;ll never forget how cartoons is in dauerschleife über over the screens .
and as this was the office for wirtschaftsförderung in washington , d.c. , the geigers clinic , they were wutentbrannt .
and we decided to use the presence of this purpose .
what if we had an early wartezimmer , where you &apos;re not just simply herumsitzt , if you &apos;re sick , but you get to be healthy .
and they leave this with the belief , the ability and the efficacy , our most fundamental hopes in the public health .
i think that last thing , if we judge our healthcare system , it &apos;s not to the sick that are cured , measured , but on the disease that have been thought .
the ones , the piraterie is a real danger around the world , but this is in the indian ocean .
we caught it with this low-tech-floß . and on board were six tons of cocaine .
eighty-five percent of you can &apos;t read when they &apos;re going to sicherheitskräfte in the afghan sicherheitskräfte .
multiply this 400.000-mal. of the world &apos;s broader cooperation associated with sicherheitskräften , like safety in the world of the world .
i really do .
remember , this is a fun of me , which is a fun of me , and you know , they count the points for gore , count the points for bush . count it again .
the circles represent the countries .
some countries had no statistics before .
but we have to take a whole bit of a whole bit of a whole bit of a whole bit of a whole bit of the same health that we have today , today .
that changes itself .
this looks like a happy story .
what you &apos;re doing here -- on what height you live in -- it &apos;s stellt their daily work .
it &apos;s about having food .
it &apos;s this stupid idea of the developing world , which is , argentina and mozambique , 50 years ago , and said that that &apos;s where the way is worse .
in governance . a functioning government -- that led to the misere of 1850 .
and i &apos;ve shown the approach about how the seemingly impossible is possible .
and the enemy is pretty weak .
we &apos;re -- despite skepticism , in afghanistan .
&quot; it &apos;s not a ideal world . &quot; &quot; and your government doesn &apos;t get us to step into the same . &quot;
how would a rules look like ?
what we also need was there , the back , is a kompetente .
do you want a better system ?
and the doctor says he says he doesn &apos;t move the way .
&quot; who &apos;s going to be , the world &apos;s end of the world . &quot;
the leviathan is just going to be selten from its gehege , just from its gehege .
it &apos;s hierum .
air luftwaffe , strategic luftbrücke beiderseits .
thomas barnett shows a new way to peace for peace to peace .
i don &apos;t want to be too deprimieren .
here you see the pinatubo in the early 90-zigern , who has a lot of sulfur in the stratosphere , with a kind of atombomben cloud .
this report ended up on president jonsons desk when i was two years old .
but we say they have sunlight that &apos;s sunlight on the particles , and it &apos;s ungleichmäßig erhitzt .
i don &apos;t think that &apos;s going to happen . it &apos;s not very likely .
since we continue to move on that scenario , and further away from the present climate .
not just how we do it better , but what are the risks and side effects ?
here you see a fish with luminous , pulsierenden eyes .
really incredible . here are two males .
and so i came to their freundliche invitation , just two days ago .
but if you look at the literature in east asia and west , they &apos;re incredibly different from happiness .
so , a deep sense is a deep sense for the creation and richness , a state that actually wipe all the gefühlslagen of the gefühlslagen and all of them and sorgen , who can &apos;t be able to begegenen .
in fact , we know that we can be in something like you &apos;re called &quot; little paradise &quot; and we can be completely unhappy .
the mirror allows you , but the mirror will not be beschmutzt , it &apos;s not going to be verändert by these images .
and if you do that again , their tendency is going to keep the rage over and over again , because they &apos;d get it , they get it .
of course , we do that with the training .
we &apos;re ready to be ready for 15 years to our education .
it &apos;s really a riesenproblem for us .
it &apos;s a schätzenswerter place . it &apos;s good .
you can see exactly what happened to night at night .
not just simply blumenbeete , not just a cartoon of sierra nevada .
this is actually a television television that the sendung that &apos;s &quot; show &quot; we are normal . &quot;
we &apos;re going to -- we have a eisenbahnnetz , which would be ashamed of the bulgarians .
one last comment -- that &apos;s been sorge for years , but i think it &apos;s particularly important for this audience .
at that point , we &apos;re about two days from the entrance .
this is atmungssystem with geschlossenem cycle .
that ice can be between five and 25 kilometers deep .
the sensorstrahlen start looking at the same time and the back , so it can do new sondierungen , while it &apos;s still behält , which is already going to be behind .
they would pay for a $ 10,000 to the orbit .
and the fact that you &apos;re going to move over 10,000 feet per second , when you want to get back to the gas station .
with the right support that can be done in seven years .
i guess you &apos;re not going to throw me off the same time , because she &apos;s got the question .
they also created a couple of companies where the brand , but that &apos;s not working well .
rb : no , no , no , no .
we have a video that shows what they &apos;re planning , and virgin brides in the air .
he wanted to jump it up , or he said , &quot; i &apos;m going to go ? &quot;
ok , that &apos;s not hard .
i mean , there are lots of wohlhabende people who have children , and we have this dilemma , how we educate them .
rb : in fact , our kronzeuge argumentierte , that it actually is actually the priests , here &apos;s sex pistos .
fifteen people are filled our paper out of our paper and they said , they would try it .
no , i want to live my life in all of us .
