now why does it matter a role for human health ?
here &apos;s a graph of the pcb-belastung of dolphins in the sarasota bay .
and i remember , as i sat at my desk and thought , &quot; now i know . &quot; but what it was for a great scientific discovery . &quot; but it was so awful .
they &apos;re always going to be in the world and always look at the same time , and i think that we should be genausowenig .
i showed you , how much we have the ecosystem of monterey bay in the bay area , and the konservenindustrie and all the problems of all the problems .
hhhh -- hhhhhh -- hhhhhhh -- hhhhhhh .
about the same time , his mother had asked him , &quot; do you know the book of michael morpurgo ? &quot;
we really had fear .
craig venter &apos;s going to move the head .
you &apos;ve got the skeleton .
we also have this ability .
namely , our modern species of something like this is a little bit of a bit of the benefits , but i think we should see what price .
clay shirky , this great chronist of all the interconnectedness , has the premise that &apos;s going on the prüfstand , in such wonderful ways .
today , there are so many new foundations , the schenkungen and investments , and investments , people together , together together in a bigger context , in a bigger context .
and i &apos;m hopeful because not only philanthropy organized itself . also , other great parts of social sektors and the business of the business prize , which is called the business of as .
i &apos;m going to summarize this photograph in my office . it &apos;s in my office . because i &apos;ve always been a hell of a mystische connection to these two men , i &apos;ve never met both .
my own research is to mobile phones and internettelefonie , that 80 percent of the calls is actually in four people &apos;s anrufe . 80 percent .
whenever they have a moment , chatting it .
and with the modern bureaucracy , a very rationaler approach , where it was a disconnect between the private sphere and the public environment .
we &apos;re going to be concerned that , in texting , facebook &apos;s facebook vertrautheit , but stefana broadbents research shows how the kommunikationstechnologien tiefer can promote the tiefer of the hürden , like remoteness and arbeitsplatzregularien .
one of the things that we developed in the lab -- we have multiple vehicles -- is how we believe , the first autonomous driftauto of the world .
for example , the ruhende brain is to create a lot of alpha-wellen .
not challenging task .
at the time , for example , the dollars for $ 5,000 60,000 , for the last year , a human being in jail .
their family lives since eight generations in a city called whitesville , west virginia .
yeah .
we can create these local markets and incentives to create more recycelte materials as a commodity for the manufacturing materials .
and we should all invest in it .
and he said , you know , you &apos;re barely barely barely barely kaum in los angeles -- a reason to love l.a. -- in the 1940s .
i began to help all the company to help communities to use their normal potential to improve the whole quality of their people .
and before you don &apos;t have kids , you don &apos;t understand what i mean . &quot;
these deaf people have some people in adulthood . &quot;
it takes time .
true makes it makes a schuld for a straftat , and somebody with syndrome is no person . &quot;
and to testreihen , people are not far .
but i found that i &apos;ve been born to the kids i &apos;ve got to have , so , so i love to not imagine you .
he would not want to reach his legs .
i come from a privileged family . i have a lot of lucky .
it &apos;s about two weeks old . and there are you .
this is the beginning 2000 . my son , dimitri -- the also here today , many of you know , many of you know , i went to cambodia -- went to the internet , just as they were connected to the internet .
remember , because there &apos;s other people like bill gates who said , &quot; man , you have a real computer . &quot;
so latin is pretty rare . let &apos;s take some languages .
and guess what ? we won it .
we have a plädiert for this , not to integrate a more zusätzlichen features to keep the prices down .
for a gemüsepflanze , my apartment is about as close as the space .
and we can take care of the issues of neuankömmlingen .
from a cliff , i was told to be parteiisch , although i don &apos;t know what the party supports the support or angreift .
now , wealth is leuten people who don &apos;t want to call the unproduktiv .
the theme of the theme is there &apos;s greater arts .
none of this most important theories was a full of success .
we have fear that the world is accidental .
and during a lot of these work we found something , or i found something that really fascinated me , maybe you can remember .
in fact , it &apos;s just happened here -- from light to dark seconds .
i see your faces very closely .
that &apos;s not a expression of joy .
this lady here has even a particularly assymmetrisches face , and both sides are beautiful .
this thing here , it &apos;s flackert light on it , so it gets a kinetisches object , although it stands silent , it &apos;s just how brilliant it is made by the reflection .
i had to move this part , but only a millimeter .
and one of what i showed you before , of course , was a very complex .
it wins or lose it in this moment .
the emotional band between this object and you &apos;re formen , is a elektrochemikalischer partytrick , which is going to be about thinking about it .
i don &apos;t think we need to make this choice .
it &apos;s also a thought that we forget .
i think it &apos;s necessary for the tradition of the sermon .
we don &apos;t think that &apos;s not .
and at the end of the gespräches , they all stand up and say , &quot; gedankt , &quot; platon , gedankt , gedankt , gedankt . &quot;
the other thing is that art should not explain that artist should not be able to tell you that artists should not tell their beweggründe , because if they were verrieten , the magic and we might have it .
art would be one of the tools that we can do our society .
we may not be able to agree with what religions want us to teach us , but we can admire the institutional way they do it .
absolutely . i meet how many of you who say , &quot; is there something that is bigger than we are , something else ? &quot;
because you &apos;ve got to 90 percent of 90 percent , because you have similar to that , and you &apos;re in the place of other opinion .
so he led me from places like chile -- the atacama desert in chile -- after the sibirien , in the japanese mines , in north america , in north america , in north america , to find out the south pole .
it &apos;s the largest lake of the world . he &apos;s 800 miles long .
and they won &apos;t believe it , but that &apos;s going to be called the unermesslich big telescope .
this hut was built by robert falcon scott and his men , when she came to find a antarktika expedition to the south pole .
think , all of these things are doing this in extreme cold , temperatures .
this is a interesting statement , i come back to this .
what people first do first do , the book readers , which you can look inside of the book , and that &apos;s fun .
there were quite a lot of people there .
but how do we all do it all ?
we &apos;ve achieved the 10 cents a page when we work with big volume .
i &apos;m not sure , which is what &apos;s absolutely profound .
a day , a day , you &apos;ll get about two or three bands .
with 15 dollars a hour and about 100 dollars per hour , and we can put it in a material that can put it in a very günsting online and have it in the net .
the question is : is the world we want to live ?
flowers are going to be eintreffen .
we all know that the earth has problems .
after the train form of spores , they verfaulen .
if you go through the landscape , it schnellt it up to your shoes and trying to respond to the rubble .
all across the landmassen landmassen .
some of these mushrooms are very happy .
this is a very rare seltener .
i did something that nobody did .
the box of life -- you get a dvd from the ted conference -- they give earth and water , and they have both mykorrhizale and endophytische fungi , like auch sporen , like the agaricon mushrooms .
i &apos;ve lived in biosphere 2 .
we wanted to know : is life adaptive enough ?
i sort of sort of gegessen myself .
and the doctor &apos;s focused on making sure whether it really was really well .
and everybody gave them to me .
eritrea , early on ethiopia , one of these places is one of those places that are amazing and incredibly karg , and i have no idea how people do it .
this , this beautiful image , that &apos;s the amazon .
this is actually a auengegend .
i had to think about how to cut photography and cuts , but also how you chooses the right person in a op-saal .
you get the kind of thing , you took blood off , you put blood flow , you put it under the microscope , put it in the way , the antiserum .
but we need a boxencrew , boxencrews pit patients .
and so the medicine sometimes sometimes .
we looked at baufirmen for an wolkenkratzer , we looked at the luftfahrtindustrie , and we found that they have technology and education , and then they have something , and then you have something .
and it &apos;s just hard .
so , this is really a lot of bees , and that &apos;s very important .
so that means that beekeepers can replace their dead people , and they could keep doing the losses .
they take their hives and their families their families to the year twice .
honeybees are honeybees in minority .
so we take a cave in new york with a 15.000 bats , now it &apos;s a thousand times , which is so many , as a würde , the population of the u.s. population is in half the population .
now not all of us are not all of us , or the lawns that we can put them , and so you can get a meadow in a topf topf .
and i also met the holy evening in my wife .
and to defend my title -- like judoka and others who do that -- thought i &apos;ll just make it back in 2005 , and won it back .
that &apos;s very promising .
why ?
the blue , the greatest living living living on our planet . it &apos;s wrong wrong .
and as the night they roll their leaves and reduce the movement , and during the day , the petals will open up the leaves -- there &apos;s a lot of movement .
he wrote a few interesting letters on a friend of his friends , j.d. hooker , the president of royal society , so the largest scientific authority in the united kingdom of the united kingdom in which he spoke from a pflanzengehirn .
so , the person who had just been inspired by people or the animals that he &apos;s a robot .
they don &apos;t know that she &apos;s being filmed .
and when it became a shared experience , it was funny and something that you could laugh .
i was inspired by this .
this is in 2005 .
they &apos;re two of my guys , who had hidden cameras in reisetaschen .
it &apos;s a wonderful way to spend a wochenendnachmittag with a stadium in a stadium .
the idea is still in the early &apos; 80s , but it looks like this is something like this .
this is ted .
and this is the bann that i want to break .
now kids aren &apos;t yet more than mündig , are a special case .
they &apos;re a kind of ektosymbiont .
the discovered of natural selection are genius , incredibly brilliant .
that &apos;s what we &apos;ve done on this planenten .
the ant isn &apos;t alone .
they just heard this guy .
i really appreciate that .
now , i don &apos;t believe that .
now , maybe we should take it .
it &apos;s the devil . &quot;
so they &apos;re actually a chord , each of you is a single chord .
you know , men , if you don &apos;t understand anything that talk , it &apos;s trying to listen to expansivem and you can change your relationships .
the third problem with the headphones is the deafness -- lärmbedingte schwerhörigkeit .
klangheilung is a wonderful way .
i &apos;m going to leave you with you , that &apos;s very good for you .
he said , &quot; i don &apos;t know , but i can show you . &quot;
look at what &apos;s in the middle .
you look at this direction , so i &apos;ll close it here .
we were going to do this type of this type of material , which is the type of materials that we do .
it &apos;s smart billion händepaare who are all of their own passion , and all of the things that are going to come together and make the world into the world -- in their hinterhöfen and in their kitchens .
and yet you can hear black holes , even if they &apos;re invisible . the reason is that they &apos;re playing on space-time as you play in a drum .
our sun won &apos;t end up not as black hole .
now , we &apos;ve never seen a shadow of a black hole , but black holes can be hearing , even though they &apos;re invisible .
we can predict how that &apos;s going to happen .
it &apos;s also to be a mission for space , hopefully in the next 10 years , and it &apos;s called lisa .
it comes closer and closer -- 40,000 years ago , we &apos;ve made a höhlenbilder .
trees are going on .
that &apos;s what i think is movement .
we are critical to the west , the view of the west , which is what our identity is -- the image of us , about our women , about our politics , about our religion .
but instead , i found a country that was completely resilient , and i didn &apos;t get more wiedererkannte .
that iran once was a weltliche society , and we had a democracy , and that this democracy was taken from the american government and the british government .
i stand here to say that the iranian women found a new voice , and your voice gives me my voice .
so , in this itself , a size should be a size , a wholeness , focus , focus , focus .
there &apos;s no american compassion .
maybe the swami right now .
they &apos;re swimming swimming through swimming . they &apos;re learning wheel .
the fossil fuels are only in this animal kingdom in this area in south america -- a beautiful clear field -- and in this part of africa .
you just look at these videos , if you &apos;re bored , they just go on .
but i was excited and i was going on .
the khan academy of the videos are also there .
this is the shifting and reflect thing .
red means they &apos;re festhängen .
most of the effort of the effort to make the classroom is to focus on the schüler of the students .
and the working that you had with los altos , how is it possible ?
is it ready for the big toss ?
a few months ago i got a call from a pflegeheim , which i work .
but it &apos;s very silent , like a stummfilm . &quot;
she said , &quot; who &apos;s this charles bonnet ? &quot;
so , for example , when his buddies went to him , he said , &quot; and who are these gutaussehenden young men ? &quot;
and then , if you were standing there , the boy suddenly flew up to senkrecht , 30 feet tall , and disappeared .
these properties of a dialogue is not there .
there &apos;s a domain of the anterioren of this fusiform , where teeth and eyes are becoming , and this part of the anterior is activated when people have hallucinations .
&quot; kermit &quot; is not me . &quot;
sometimes i find them interesting . and i have a lot of pictures of it in my notizbüchern .
edith widder : i &apos;ve made this footage with a special camera , whose sensitivity of the darkness of the darkness is entspricht .
this crab , for example , for example , sondert biolumineszierende materials in the water , just like a squid or a krake .
this looks like a plant , actually , but a animal .
there &apos;s something little bit that it responds to it .
it should attack the predator of the kalmar .
one of a sense , a picture would be a picture .
if we zoom in the top of the two strands , you see that these things look like teeth .
it &apos;s verpackt and aufgewickelt .
one is a sausages .
again , this is all akkurate , scientific ableitungen .
hold her eyes and your head in motion .
the ability to be able to see concepts intuitively of objects and processes .
if the themenbereich is very thin , you can be besiedelt with the sorgfalt and hard work to the world &apos;s largest experts .
i &apos;m here to commit to commit to help us change the way people and other creatures things .
not through the druckpresse , but it &apos;s allowed by collective action that comes out of literacy .
the other big narrative of social dilemmata is the tragedy of the allmende .
instead of toyota , rather than seine gegeneinander , behandelt , these kind of a network and trained them to produce better , even though they also train them to produce better for their competition .
thank you .
thank you .
we &apos;re going to make two different things .
in fact , all of all about the east and difficulty , you &apos;re running running and atembeschwerden -- cold conditions .
first we did a little experiment where we gave people to people and asked them to build something .
and if you said , we gave them a new given , and as they did this aufbauten , we have the other one , which was just built , and then they took apart .
there was a very nice relationship between the love of love and the number of the international legos .
and i think the ceo didn &apos;t understand how important meaning is .
but i should point out , so by the way , that the people who have gotten people to cheat .
people didn &apos;t want them .
and we had two kinds of people .
think of kids .
and i think that in the industrial revolution , adam smith was actually a karl marx , but really we have umgerüstet . and now we &apos;re in knowledge .
that &apos;s in modern conflicts today , because kids are going to send very easily into the war .
the vietnamesisch of my mother was so bad that she was going to make our history glaubwürdiger , all boys and girls gave the boys .
afghanistan is one of the poorest countries of the world , and 70 percent of the population are illiterate .
they didn &apos;t want that . it &apos;s just happened . they have lost control .
and 70 percent won you go back .
i think everything has given me to this .
this is the european average of neuwagen .
the top on the right is the same energy consumption of the same energy per person , in about 300 bulbs per person , but the population is 300 times higher people per square .
if you really want to take a lot of solar panels , you &apos;d have to take the traditional bayerischen landwirtschaftsmethoden , where you &apos;re not only the roof , but the landscape with solar cells .
and a third way is nuclear .
i tried it ; it works . some call it changes .
as a boy , for a boy , since the earliest kindertagen , i always wanted to be a musician and thank god , i &apos;m also .
he &apos;s a boy from a community in caracas who &apos;s his kontrabassstunden in the juniorenorchester of the sans agustin .
that encouraging new dreams , new targets and progress in the different opportunities to have the different opportunities that music has to offer music .
this is a verstohlene technology that helps them to do with the simple task , the right pill to the right time .
how do we get simple , unterbrechende technologies , and that &apos;s the first of five sentences that i &apos;m going to talk about this talk .
this is this year . she went into the frühruhestand .
is the first word &quot; doctor &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; ... &quot;
many of these generation won &apos;t press the button , even if you have a notrufsystem , because they don &apos;t want to drop the burden of burden , even if you &apos;ve got a long time in the month .
the color provides different spaces in the house .
i &apos;m going to show you some of the newest and the fiesesten inventions of cybercriminals .
if you want your house , they &apos;ll go to it .
how do you do a usb-stick that &apos;s going to be a company in a company ?
so , we imagine that our sense of our sense , we call it a little bit of fun of bösen hacker , something called fieses .
there are some other interesting pieces that uploaded the cybercriminals .
now , you probably wonder , what happened to those people are happening .
in 761 , i could identify hotels in the world where they were recently recently , but with punktgenauer precision somewhere .
thank you .
the alttiere can see the juveniles , they can recognize the alttiere .
and they &apos;re in something which is probably the blood vessels that are going to be through bone .
we all know that these bones are dead , and if you &apos;re in säure , you should not remain anything .
the nichtvogeldinosaurier are the big , schwerfälligen , which are extinct .
transgenese is really cool .
a friend , a colleague , dr. hans larsson at the mcgill university of universität , too beschäftigt .
people always say , &quot; why do you do this ?
finally , i began to write my book to write the world &apos;s worldwide scale of this problem , this shows an aufstellung , which shows the aufstellung of the geschätzten level in every country in the world .
so imagine , these nine of those nine seals that i found in the trash , represent the world &apos;s world &apos;s fourth essensversorgung , ok ?
this bauer has about 16,000 pounds in the gulf of spinat investiert , which he didn &apos;t even know , not a leaf , because a little grass kartoffeln potatoes , the kosmetisch kartoffeln , who are not perfect in the pigs .
it &apos;s a living organism , i cut a piece of water , put it into a vase and it held another two weeks .
and if you use these things , they don &apos;t need to do it .
i &apos;m going to go through a few .
left to the left .
we need to change the stuff .
here &apos;s einstein , of course , niels bohr , the great fermatsche sentence , and i &apos;m not sure whether the james coburn or richard harris is .
and you can see how the icosahedron in the dodecahedron disappears , and then they just verschmelzen them .
what a cat cat cat .
before the horse of the horse .
&quot; 10 milligrams , 20 milligrams . &quot;
so , i said , if i &apos;m a circle , you see what the pattern is coming out , and boom , the red system .
you have to be exactly the same ! it &apos;s the measurements .
there was only two other arenas on the internet .
i &apos;ll come to speak to it .
i mean , all on &quot; off &quot; to put it as a call of your kabelanbieters , but for the rest of the world .
it could be made of people from the audience here .
so if we had a chance to have a chance to have been on the tedxparis , we would have talked about the momentanen innovations of the military , which is the massive festungen of the military , and we would have a era of stabilität in the world or in europe , in europe .
now , in this environment , where you don &apos;t know if you were to be prepared to defense or lose the weapons of attack , this environment is what most of the most powerful is to be in the most part .
it &apos;s a huge blue area .
so you have to have a minimum in time to see how a dinosaur looked like a dinosaur , so this is a dinosaur .
it can &apos;t always and all your threads shoot ; they have to get the pants down .
he never thought about a particular girl .
but what i did was a abenteuererzählung .
you don &apos;t have to worry that the readers in unglauben , because if you &apos;re already a redenden shark , you can actually take a zweifel of a doubt .
you will know a kind of urgency of urgency , as much as possible as possible as possible .
my stellenbeschreibung was wonderfully vague : begutachtung and öffentlichkeitsarbeit .
that means that i love my love to math and magic , to do something that i call &quot; mathemagie . &quot;
audience : 25. : for example , 25th .
audience : 987 .
audience : seven , seven .
good . i &apos;m trying to use the impossible -- or at least nine .
audience : november . the connection ?
of course , i could give me an answer , and you wouldn &apos;t know it . that &apos;s me .
ok , oh , ok -- you have a 10-stellen-rechner ?
so let me explain what that is .
i &apos;d love to talk about astronomy , but i think the number of people who are sich in nicht-grauen atmospheres and lichtpolarisation in the upper atmosphere of jupiter , is the number of people who fit the wartehäuschen in a wartehäuschen .
no , if you want to know how society will be in 20 years , ask a kindergärtnerin .
just two weeks ago , i know , i know , i have little , medium and large kleinflaschen for the exhibition .
my mentor . he came up and spent an hour for me .
i &apos;m taking mittagspausen .
right ? that &apos;s simple physics .
if you &apos;re in the book , it &apos;s actually 343 .
and i think , ah , the one that &apos;s the square of the length of the length of the length of the length of the length of the length of the length of the length of the length .
you would think of all this extra space we would have every big room for all of our stuff .
it &apos;s time i &apos;m going to trenne me .
would i have a little bit more freedom ?
north from churchill , manitoba , there &apos;s no ice in the hudson bay .
it has been untersuchungen by personenbezogenen spielgeschichten , before i really began to recognize that i didn &apos;t understand it .
frank wilson has a book called &quot; the title &quot; the hand . &quot;
so what does this do is for the brain ?
this really took a long time -- i had to runterkriegen down , and it was durchs down to the prostate and spect durchbekommen and mehrfache , but as he was a schrumpfhirn .
their own personal spielgeschichte is unique and often nothing to think about it .
he &apos;s characterized by a sense of energetischer fokussierung , so völlige and success .
how do you prevent the media work or the science of what your work now is now paying for work , like the mozartmetapher , like the mozartmetapher , like , &quot; oh , the mrts , that play the intelligence .
the difference between our nachos and the landläufigen nachos is that our actually actually are a dessert .
br : and then after a brief tauchbad in liquid nitrogen to get this perfect brateffekt , we really have something that looks like , tastes and behaves like the original .
when i was , wearing the ipcc in paris , his report about the people of the world &apos;s disease .
alisa miller gives us a message that we have news news .
it enables it to be a negative forms that you can see , as you &apos;re going to nachgeht your everyday life .
for this project we have a kind of smart simultaner of action .
no matter where i &apos;m -- it &apos;s a process that tries to locate my eyes .
in the inside , a 400 pounds of a 400 pounds is to be roboterarm , which i promised to share with a friend .
and then there was thousands of people , we believe that were infected with hiv .
erzaehler : deep : deep in a remote region of cameroon verfolgen , two pounds .
but they will also ask them a different question .
if we had found out of these laendlichen doerfer , we found that nobody had television there , so she didn &apos;t know it .
unnoetig unnoetig , that these viruses probably probably probably probably about the way that the eintreten societies probably would be extinct .
you &apos;re told you about the help of 140 signs or less and people who are interested in this updates .
we constructed a programmierschnittstelle which means that programmer can write the programmer that they &apos;re using twitter .
&quot; ... are you giving people more information and follow them to make their stronger ted tedtalk . &quot;
and there &apos;s anything that i &apos;ve been reading , and i was the ones who were living in the individuals , i convinced that books , i believe that books , from nature , were had to have been enthalten , and they had to act of things that i couldn &apos;t identify .
all i heard about her was how poor they were , so that it was impossible to me , she was not a little bit different than poor .
and slowly , i realized that my american roommate was different from their lifetime , and i &apos;ve had to have heard that one of their life , and i had to have had to have had a story , which told me that my novel didn &apos;t have &quot; authentisch . &quot;
and you start the history of the native peoples with the testosterone and not with the ankunft of the british , you told a different story .
i always felt that it was impossible , it &apos;s impossible to employ a place , or a person , if you don &apos;t talk about all the stories of all this place or this person .
i &apos;ll give everybody every summer in lagos . and i find it amazing how many people are einschreiben , how many people want to write stories to tell stories .
in a recently , recently , in a recent experiment , in a recent experiment , in a recent experiment , the brains were taken in an fmri scanner -- while people have people .
why my doctor &apos;s been my doctor when i was a surgery , &quot; girl hertz , they &apos;re not going to get any hyperpyrexie ? instead of saying that , it &apos;s also easy to say that i have to be careful , not to get a high fever .
my dad &apos;s a alzheimer &apos;s in alzheimer &apos;s .
and reading is good as impossible .
even though it &apos;s hard .
so we have to push ourselves up on the physical and economic limit .
in the sense we have our promise to our promise .
if you have difficulty , what that means for the average consumers in the u.s. is in the current economic environment .
if you want a fish , you get a woman and if you need a woman , you get a fish . &quot;
and if it &apos;s going to be a longer time , you can still change the battery and keep on the island of the island .
this is after private u.s. government agencies .
in india , you don &apos;t understand where the problem is , because most indians , every indian hour every time for two or three gallons .
everything we need is 10 percent of the total energy .
we don &apos;t put it right now . maybe we let the kids free and keep the slaves .
the arguments in the so-called world war are the same old arguments who have been struggling and again , since darwin &apos;s time for darwin &apos;s day .
the most natural natural selection is so amazing , because they have the problem of understanding complexity , in form of nothing else .
now the next one : &quot; president of royal society has a strong internal internal belief , &quot; -- -- -- that a asteroid killed the dinosaurs . &quot;
it feels in a belagerten minority , but how do you prioritize the american atheists in fact , in fact ?
i don &apos;t have any brand for topwissenschaftler other fields like history or philosophy , but i would be amazed if you were different .
darwin was the fact that atheism was right and good for the intelligenzija people , but probably , quote , quote , &quot; not to be &quot; seien . &quot;
when people like -- if atheists hawking hawking and albert einstein einstein called &quot; god &quot; god &quot; and then , of course , as a practical metaphor for these deep , fundamental part of the physics that we don &apos;t understand .
and the launch is about 500 dollars , about 10,000 dollars .
earlier , in a nutshell , a person had a person to get to a person in a field and it decided to be able to get this on a license or possession .
just because it &apos;s a certain sense of any sense or a place to be more collaborative , like wikipedia , ) a particular set of social relationships .
i have no slides , so you &apos;re going to have to get to me with me .
a study of the wirtschaftskomission of the wirtschaftskomission for africa has shown that there are a clear aufwärtstrend in 28 african countries .
the state should not be in the production of the goods and services because he ineffizient and inkompetent , and inkompetent is on this area .
but what it immediately is the variation that was the schwankungen that was caused our economic development -- meaning , if the oil prices were high , we grew up very fast .
the same thing we do in the versicherungssektor .
otherwise , i would have to have that you &apos;re seeing this .
he called her : &quot; massively fatale diskontinuitäten , &quot; which means that they could kill 100 million people to kill the next 50 years .
until recently we didn &apos;t know how a vaccine was doing .
the main challenge for these two viruses is that they change constantly .
these drugs are not cure , but they represent a huge triumph of science because they have the automated of a hiv-diagnose of a hiv-diagnose at least at least for those of the hiv-diagnose of the hiv-diagnose of the hiv-diagnose of the hiv-diagnose of the hiv-diagnose of the hiv-diagnose .
but you know , research , the research that has been in hiv has been very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very
this was a slow process , mühevoller process , which was about hühnereiern , millions of lebender .
and the reason of the radical manufacturing production , and the huge kosteneinsparungen of the ancient coli method for example , for example , i just talked about -- the end of time -- that would be the gerettete .
so the challenge is , so the challenge is ahead of the challenge .
the question is , why ?
do you think , african union is a conference like this conference ?
there &apos;s some things you have to know .
the speaker who was on the stage , idrim mohammed , deutete , that we had hundsmiserable leaders in africa .
by allowing it to steal it from your leidenden people .
traditionally hate governments -- they hate the tyranny .
they decide what they do .
he gets no help from the government , and he &apos;s building a second , grösseres boat .
something that would all us together .
scott &apos;s results .
and the challenge for algorithmic filters , these personalized filter , is that they &apos;re going to take these balance , because they go to everything that you &apos;re going to see .
it &apos;s supposed to bring us to new ideas and the new people and strangers .
and the man replied , &quot; ganz abstieg , what ? &quot;
i know that she &apos;s waiting for more bad umweltnachrichten -- i &apos;m just fun -- i &apos;m just kidding -- but now , i &apos;ll just get a quick term and then i show you a new material of possible solutions .
until the fillmstart may in may may be a update on version 2.0 , which is then you can actually durchklicken the kauf of the kauf .
again , even in all the republicans here : it should not go to parteipolitik .
what excites me about the gulf of the gulf of the gulf , is that they &apos;re ausgesprochene .
and there &apos;s no one in the way that no one is actually a few people who are trying to continue the beach .
we have the implication that bacteria eat ?
these tunfische durchschwimmen all the way across the ocean .
when the japanese pearl harbor harbor harbor , they would take at least at least .
what the saeubern of the birds is , i don &apos;t want to do a abfaelligen remarks people to people who are left .
okay , people who are concerned about the conservative , if you really want to be really conservative and right , then you should send these korporationen to the hoelle .
it &apos;s about right and wrong .
and i developed a system to produce medical flight .
all right , &quot; i &apos;m more than my genes -- all the way .
i don &apos;t asked you to skandieren it because it &apos;s true , but to remember it .
they contain a molecule that we know as a brain .
and this is just a mäusegehirn . it &apos;s much smaller than a human being .
now , neurons , as trees , as trees , can grow new branches and old .
and we can even speak from the bewusstseinsstrom .
if you &apos;re going to be the number , you can easily see it very much to be a large potential for fehlverbindungen in the brain .
perhaps this technology is going to be able to be able to be able to understand ourselves through the auseinandernehmen and our imagination of our own brain .
he &apos;s working on music videos and commercials with his company , the directors bureau .
so we have a quick experiment to show you .
ks : no , no .
as he did , he noticed a unexpected thing .
ks : how do that work : there &apos;s a matrix of färbemitteln .
oh , right ?
and a few months ago , a friend of a few months ago , a link to this guy , eduardo sousa .
a huge scandal for a few weeks .
but he still did that .
so his farm is incredible .
and then he found this wild plant , the lupine .
and then they fly in the circle , and then you fly around the circle .
i finally came to try to try and get before i went before .
no salt , no pepper , no oil , no , no suggestion .
what the hell is called ?
at least , at least . i think i think it &apos;s .
farmers that rely on nature to find solutions , rather than finding the nature of nature &apos;s solutions .
and from old to the new fire , is called two great stories about oil and electricity , which both ever put two fifth of the fossil &apos;s fossil fuel cells in the air .
our fuel for mobility is to three areas of cars .
you can make it quietly runterfallen , it &apos;s tougher as titan .
and trucks and airplanes can use hydrogen or advanced biofuels .
also , we also have a better light and büromaterial and so forth , and that senken senken , the maximale kühllast of a third .
in about 20 us-staaten verlegen verlegen billige billige solar panels , no financial losses on their roofs and lower water .
and what we &apos;re going to do with it is that we &apos;re always replace it , it &apos;s going to be about 6 trillion dollars in kapitalwert -- but we &apos;re buying more of them , which we have or neue neue , or renewables , or renewables that are more or less centralized .
so , so on results , and not to focus , not to focus , and conflict , the konflikt of america .
later , i realized that what i ate , i was going to eat , two tagesrationen of his family .
these simple überlagerung shows that donor in areas that the kids go to school , no schools fund , no new questions , and i &apos;m going to give aid to aid that you need most need ?
two years ago , at the table at eight , i called my dad .
i &apos;m not trying to design the toothbrush .
and we remember that , and can be in every book in every book of my zehnjährigen son , life is four billion years ago -- four billion two years ago ?
so similar , i &apos;m not sure .
there are risks , there &apos;s a fall . there &apos;s a case : the one .
you think time has been thinking about time , you have time to do what to do about art and stuff .
you go back to the future , back back , back .
they come from families to come from families to home , where they &apos;re only one person &apos;s home , mostly the mother or grandmother , and they come to their education and her structure .
we bring them to the right and turn on the left and turn on the left , so you can obey the gehorchen and the consequences of it , if they &apos;re going to be .
let &apos;s go all online . &quot;
it &apos;s unpredictable .
they said , &quot; this is enough for regierungsarbeit .
then you can support us . this is the task of you . &quot;
but i have to have my hotdog .
you can listen and mitreden .
take for example , for example , the reiseanbieter nextpedition .
if you think of wikipedia , the most popular thing that everybody in the content is the content , and you ended up the largest encyclopedia of the world .
there are many people who have the same dream .
a website created a website .
there was no leader .
and extremism become too tolerance .
the modern tools of neuroscience show us that what happens there is a tremendous complex process .
we can also keep the sound of our own own language , but not the case .
we were able to encourage the by american babies that never heard a second language , at the beginning of the critical period .
it may look like a haartrockner of mars , the mars .
well , a lot of science has a very rational approach to their environment , whereas art on the other hand , is a emotional approach to his environment .
now , i have a live-demonstration over here to show you that .
let me demonstrate that over here .
the dalai lama once said , &quot; love and compassion are notwendigkeiten .
the researchers were born in a little girl whose body was burned verbrannt .
it &apos;s part of the human lebewesens .
and if compassion is so good for us , why don &apos;t we choose compassion ?
the wound up in front of the wound .
imagine you like squares , and frankly , who doesn &apos;t like ?
we start with a 1x1-quadrat , and then we &apos;re going to ask another 1x1-quadrat .
then there was a aron kader , a palästinenser-amerikaner .
i said , &quot; he &apos;s already dead .
&quot; i have what verbockt ! &quot; &quot; &quot; i don &apos;t get a memo . what happens ? &quot;
i said , &quot; what do you do ? &quot;
so i went to the lobby and saw this indian guy .
marco tempest : if you asked him to deception , he said , &quot; magic is the only thing that is the only thing .
where is the queen ?
i &apos;m going to demonstrate to you how linked terrorism are connected to our daily life .
at the time when i interviewed the red brigades , i discovered that whose life is not determined by ideology and politics , but by economic constraints .
i think a lot of people thought me even in a little bit of a little bit more .
but mostly , in the ernsthafte geschäftsbeziehungen , they went to the organized crime .
this money was got in koffern and containern hinausgeschafft -- in bar , understands .
nobody wants to control the us-finanzaufsicht , and his verhältnisse controlled control and his geschäftsbeziehungen with consumers .
some of you may think of you now , &quot; wait , wait . don &apos;t necessarily necessarily look like a hochsee-ruderer .
yeah , i wanted to leave my wohlfühlbereich , but what i didn &apos;t have done was that it &apos;s extremely robust , to exit his wohlfühlbereich .
and i really learned that , the larger the challenge , the larger one of the sense of a particular achievement , if you get to the end .
now , i thought the atlantic was large , but the pacific is really big .
but that wasn &apos;t without missgeschicke .
it &apos;s this little green layer on the horizon , which is very nervous in the rising sea .
we can start to do better , better , klügere , to make decisions .
roz savage : why i &apos;m about the pacific rudere .
this is the world trade on the cover .
why ? why ? why ? why do you want to do ?
he doesn &apos;t see a lot . he doesn &apos;t pay extra time .
they were able to make this .
and the final end is about comfort , it &apos;s about the good places that they didn &apos;t have done before .
and that &apos;s hard if you don &apos;t know who you are .
and i asked myself , how can it be so easy to be so easily ?
it &apos;s not so hard , someone who said , and one day i said , &quot; yeah , you know , you can be my homework abschreiben , &quot; and i gave him the wrong answers that i had ever before .
we both were both of the back of the back of the classroom , so we wouldn &apos;t be with papierkügelchen .
maybe you have your prellungen and zerbrochenen teeth , but never , never told you , because how can you tell yourself , if all around you want to get you to eat ?
that &apos;s french science .
well , then we go .
if you look at this trucks here , it &apos;s the largest truck of its species on earth .
it &apos;s also one of the reasons why it &apos;s the largest and fastest-growing growing of co2 in canada , and it &apos;s also the reason why canada is now number three is in terms of co2-produktion .
and as a dad , i can &apos;t imagine what the one of the soul .
by doing this , we remove a large part of our largest kohlenstoffsenke and replacing them with the most greenhouse gas oil in the future .
the hauptgegenstand of their work is the bindi that you can buy , and the millions of indian women are going to be on your forehead , and it &apos;s a ritual that &apos;s going on with the institution of marriage .
raqib shaw was born in kolkata , in kashmir , in kashmir , in london .
i hope you can convince you that complex and complicated is not always the same .
the eingekreiste knotenpunkt is the one that we want to influence -- the public support for the government .
so i suggested to my first tedtalk that we should spend a planet over 21 billion hours a week .
only a little bit of minutes a day , a day of online-spiele reichten , for a major improvement and langfristiger increase of pleasure .
why is a game ?
how could a triviales game could have a huge effect in so many times , sometimes lebensbedrohlichen situations ?
there are four kinds of strength , or resilience to support growth systems , and there are scientific things that you can do every day to build this resilience , you need to build it .
more practice , you will get into the gestärkt .
here &apos;s another secret for you : if you shake for someone to shake for six seconds , then the oxytocin-level will increase in your blood , which is called &quot; vertrauens-hormon . &quot;
and in this project , we actually have hundreds of people around the world and make it together with us , actually , even thousands of people involved in this project , in many of his different aspects .
and then a few people came out of chicago and said , &quot; the end of the chicago erwärmung , the global warming , we have a 3,000-square-foot quadratmeter gallery and we want them to fill it with your reef . &quot;
and the wool and nässe are not just two concepts that are gut .
euklid said , &quot; how can i define parallel lines ? &quot;
the infinite . they captured . very precisely .
so we have , from wool , like , duch , the proof that the most famous postulat of math is wrong .
and their individual beliefs , and their engagement with this mathematical method .
these special eigenschaft -- the self-confidence -- the self-confidence -- my opinion is after holy grail of neuroscience , which is neuroscience , and eventually we &apos;re going to understand what &apos;s going on what &apos;s going on .
this person is otherwise understood and intelligent . but if he sees his mother , he grabs his delusion , and he says it wasn &apos;t his mother .
so if this area is damaged , you lose the ability to recognize faces .
and chairs and chairs and flusen -- nothing happened , same as normal people , but if i show him a picture of his mother , the elektrodermale activity remains low .
he knows that his arm isn &apos;t there . it &apos;s a very compelling , sensorisches experience .
maybe you can actually solve the phantomschmerz , the spasm in the phantom .
and my pain are gone . &quot;
he said , &quot; no , the last three days i didn &apos;t have a phantom , and therefore , no more phantomschmerzen , no more phantomschmerzen , not spasm , not a spasm , not a verkrampfung , all my pain .
cis is blue , the fis is green , a different sound may be yellow .
that &apos;s the key .
which is kiki , which is buba ?
her sexualverhalten is too menschenähnlich , which most of us don &apos;t know .
that &apos;s kanzi .
none of the things you see in this video is antrainiert .
well done .
he learned that he both beide hands with his gezielten hieben , with his gezielten hieben , much larger and schärfere splitter .
a frame is a hut in the forest .
look what the sound coming from ?
because we believe that it &apos;s not the biology , but the culture .
and some stars die in the spectacular supernova explosions that are these remains .
on the right-hand side , gravity is gravity . einstein .
and moreover , it &apos;s going to bring it to the kind of change .
it was too early , but he was a moral wegweiser , a inspiration for scientists who were concerned about control of the weapons .
we take a alien living living creatures , we &apos;ve been observed in the cosmos from far outside , not only in the cosmos , but the average age of the earth &apos;s population .
martin rees : it &apos;s like our last century ?
and it &apos;s worse , &quot; then i would make a picture of it and make a dozen hochglanzabzüge .
now , these are students , so they gave them a lot of money for things like ohrringe and make-up .
and then we asked them , how happy they are .
but enormous different incentives .
these are verkaufs-teams in belgium .
the teams of the team we gave money to spend it , to spend it , to other teams and the dominierten in the end , actually , in the end .
if we &apos;re hearing from the kriegsgefahren , from the high school , the high redekunst , is often believe that this is one of the most amazing conflict of the middle east , whose roots is so old as the region .
and ironically , this was time to be a time when the hauptinteresse of iran with the iran department of the world with washington , and not the destruction of the zerstörung .
this is a analogy that focuses on it , the diplomacy to diplomacy . is the diplomacy of all the time , it &apos;s inevitable .
you can look at certain verbrauchsarten or you can look at the different regions and you compare them .
the map of port au-prince at the end of the end of 2009 was not as good as they could have been , not as well as the map of california .
the trick is that this trick is .
and i said , &quot; he said , &quot; he was not a environmentalists . &quot;
this system wants to use the status quo , also the status quo .
so it &apos;s not about the most important topic that &apos;s the most important . it &apos;s not .
we can &apos;t do anything . &quot;
lawrence lessig : we , the citizen , the republic of the republic , you have to be the republic of the rule .
for example , some people will be in this room with a fellowship to school .
this is in my pen . &quot;
everybody &apos;s just a little bit .
i don &apos;t want to say that law doesn &apos;t have the law of entropy , it &apos;s right .
here in the model , you see the attack of the raubtiers .
if you see in north carolina , they are like so many things in the united states , they ignore each other .
each of their herzschläge depends on this critical region , the sinusknoten , which is the sinusknoten , which is about 10,000 independent cells , which has a electronic rhythm -- a high tension , a low -- to send the ventrikeln to the pump .
they were a while a while , but then , apart , but apart .
so i want to show you a few interviews with people who were on the roofs of the bridge , and describe what happened .
now you don &apos;t think you &apos;re not going to be a metronome , but we &apos;re all going to walk -- we &apos;re oszillieren and running back .
on the one : the one weighs a few tons , it &apos;s going to go right .
but the höchstgeschätzte scientists in his area .
i didn &apos;t say what the list was , but she was in alphabetischer order , and i told you , you should look for your name , or your mother &apos;s familiennamen .
and maybe perhaps a weizenart may not worth a weizenart , which is not worth economic economic growth , or a resilience for disease or pests or another property that is useful and the other not have .
we &apos;re going to see children in the tv .
the idea of svalbard was that it &apos;s cold , so you have natural temperatures under the gefrierpunkt .
and if anything happens , you can come and pick it up .
thank you .
watch your neighbor ! this one is not properly .
maybe there &apos;s another lady , a lady ? -- thank you very much .
you only try two concepts -- two in the united states , and one in the russians .
i mean , i have to talk briefly about a bit of things -- the things that are evolving , there &apos;s a lot of activity , and then you &apos;re going to die through something else and die .
i can &apos;t tell you when it comes to it because i don &apos;t want to know the competition to my own .
i mean , i mean , i mean , really interesting that &apos;s going to happen .
ok , let &apos;s talk a little bit about the commercial development development development development .
it &apos;s like the air .
after a few years , he &apos;s ready , but one day he has a enlightenment .
institutions will be naked , &quot; and if you &apos;re naked , well , the consequences .
the fourth meaning of openness and the fourth principle , is machtgewinn .
the toothpaste is from the tube .
you know that bees and fish and fish in the other life .
all around us , there &apos;s a medical revolution , and a revolution that will help us to defeat some of the worst diseases of our society , cancer with including .
this is a tumor , dark , gray , a unheilbare mass , wachsend in a brain .
and you can see that the ring of the blood supply chain is going to be cut .
but the real question is , how good work work in practice ?
here &apos;s what happens when we add a erdbeer-extrakt , it &apos;s based on very effective in very effective art .
but more interesting , the study goes out of the study that the men have developed the prostata-krebs , which have evolved to have any tomato sauce , which is less blood vessels , which have fewer blood vessels .
albert by szent-györgyi once said that &quot; discoveries of szent-györgyi is to see what all of you have seen , and think what nobody thought . &quot;
i &apos;m a rätselkolumnist beim .
it has to be fun , unlike the world , unlike the world , not particularly well , frankly , very well .
that &apos;s one of the background of the other .
you can &apos;t do that physically , but on a computer , it &apos;s a computer . over the computer .
i wanted to do a sequel .
so , what are the direction that you &apos;re going to do ?
so there &apos;s games like &quot; brain &quot; and the nintendo half &quot; for the nintendo ds .
looks like a black character . where is that ?
i really believe that a girl is so powerful that we have to train all of us to train , not as being as being .
i remember , for example , my father , who was very , very violent , i was struck .
we &apos;re so used to be used to the mädchen of the anspruchs , protagonistinnen your own life that we actually have them in the way they were actually to actually objects and they were turned into it .
and she looked at the eyes of their babies and said , &quot; of course i love my baby . how could i love my baby ?
when we were there , she did a ritual , where they were girls who are weggelaufen , with their families .
and i &apos;m going to be on the rest of your life on your side . &quot;
i love it that i don &apos;t take things .
why would you want me to abdrehen me , zusperren ?
so , in the actual process , all of the six teenagers came out and bezeugten the identifizierungen that had made the functional .
but the incident was in the middle of the january in january , the northern hemisphere in seven watch .
that &apos;s 10 feet away .
and what is this example of this -- what about it is important for us to keep us ?
he was a very religious man .
i got a fullbright-stipendium and a year by africa , where i asked people what they built in fractals , what a great job is , if you can get it .
and that &apos;s going to be in some of the same way to the smallest .
it &apos;s not really a mathematisches .
he said , &quot; if i lived in the jungle , i would just use a long time because it &apos;s very fast , and they &apos;re very cheap .
just and there &apos;s odd and odd .
we have a pilotprogramm .
the bad news is , but the bad news is .
instead of wenden , wenden , they looked at the same time .
today , agile development is angewandt in a hundred different countries and it &apos;s going to go up to the chefetagen .
fear of fear are losing .
we put a few rules on them and keep them .
the conversation will walk better . &quot;
just as i was here tonight to come here , i started to get one of my daughters herumzuschreien .
and we developed 10 .
i was a teenager when i first read the first karenina karenina , &quot; and the famous first sentence &quot; -- &quot; all happy families in each other , all the same families each other people .
i want to show you how something can be so beautiful about it .
if i put this in the water , you see a silberne beschichtung , and this beschichtung is the luftschicht , which is the water that the water &apos;s water from the benetzen of the paddels .
and plato with all the young boys in his cave . sweeney : uuuuh ...
i &apos;ll show you .
but what &apos;s success is not about a game .
one thing that i want to be a moment is that not all of the neurosurgeon cowboystiefel .
we can hoch- them or turn them , or do you .
he &apos;s one of five children .
i showed you that we can apply it in the circuits of the mood in cases of depression .
we &apos;re in understanding what these circuits are and what the physical signs of the clinical signs and symptoms are responsible .
evolution works in reality , like a tüftler .
this is enough .
what we discovered is whether you look like richard , or a krabbe or a krabbe or a krabbe or a kängurus , the relative beinsteifheit of this feather is equal to all the way we &apos;ve seen before .
ok . the point is , it &apos;s really hard to say ? it &apos;s incredible , students , it &apos;s trying to say it , and they couldn &apos;t say it .
he does this with a druckempfindlichen glue .
what we do is we take the hair as a role , and put them together with a different fellow .
showed that by the verheirateten gehobenen , the verheirateten of the verheirateten men , two thirds of the verheirateten men have only one third of the women &apos;s women .
on monday , i left san francisco , my heimatort , and flew down to this conference .
and we go out at the end , look at us and say , &quot; how is it ? &quot;
there &apos;s a famous study at harvard business school , and i was roizen to a woman named heidi roizen .
and i put my hand back and i fell on for all of these women , and then you &apos;ve got more questions , and then you have more questions , only by men . &quot;
a woman contacted me and i looked at them -- she looked at something young .
thank you .
they don &apos;t do it as they should , but they do it .
so fear was not fear , the bestimmende factor .
but it &apos;s true of the middle of the black .
now i want to talk about the next talk about how we spread in this country , like we get to information .
that &apos;s why they &apos;re in verständlicher , and it &apos;s a language , and it &apos;s working in verständlicher .
we tell you that everything is fine ; it &apos;s okay .
this patient is the 50 , we can actually say pretty much , like large to be in prostate cancer .
they don &apos;t need the private audience in this room .
and this bee had been accepted , &quot; i &apos;m going to take this apfelbaum , these flower , i &apos;m going to get the nectar and then i &apos;m going to go down . &quot;
and if you talk about nature , the author of the subject is how the idea is the aldo-leopold-test ?
well , we &apos;re all equally gleichermaßen .
the only technology here is the cheap elektrozaun : pretty new , in a autobatterie , even i could get a koppel of 10 ar in 15 minutes .
if a wiederkäuer grast , the grass of this altitude is on this gekürzt , and it &apos;s going to happen something interesting .
and i say that i want to build a layer of the world at the world , but it &apos;s not quite true , because it &apos;s already in the developing world .
if not , it &apos;s a shame . there &apos;s nothing you can do .
come to a certain time , you get your favorite price to half a price .
and then you can do a different kinds of ways .
and it &apos;s powerful .
digg is a kommunale dynamic that tries to find the best news that &apos;s most exciting stories .
we &apos;ve talked about the last time you &apos;ve talked about you .
you also see that if i turn around here -- hopefully , i don &apos;t know the world .
you can see , here it started .
this is one of our engineers .
mendel , who should have been high-school students , which is the law of the vererbung , just as a hobby .
raise your hands .
it makes it to a place where it &apos;s fun .
and therefore , what we &apos;re working with , and we even have people who are excited about it and crazy enough that they &apos;re really going to work on that , that &apos;s really your goal .
thank you .
what &apos;s what he said , how he said , for his passengers , was the experience of the experience .
what makes life easier to be easier , enjoyable ?
so , part of you , they &apos;re going to be able to build this by building a great new facility , the keller of your own .
today , the industrial systems have become brunels and sind in the very part of the present .
and how brunel can we do by systems , we can have a bigger impact .
and from my persistence , the waiter of his life .
mark lipper and i have a series of studies , trying to answer this question .
yet , it &apos;s exactly what the american paradigm needs .
but for the osteuropäer , the sudden availability of all those konsumprodukten of all these konsumprodukten are in the market .
the americans have even find that the other choice of the theory is probably more attractive than in practice .
französiche parents would say , &quot; noah was only for the short time , but he &apos;s got it so much .
robert frost once said , &quot; it &apos;s poetry that translation the translation . &quot;
&quot; well , it &apos;s a very elegant nuance of pink . &quot;
the three problems have one common : they &apos;re menschgemachte problems that are controlled by forces .
so thank you so much .
it &apos;s going to replace competition by collaboration .
and then we build a sechs-meter-version , which we can test the power of machines to test the maximale of machines , and so we can become very , very quickly .
girl 5 : no .
and so i realized that the techwelt were not understood as a symbol of the best , but as a heilbringende movement .
the atombombe enters the stage .
and then the 92 kernkraftwerke that the energy would be done , the rest of los angeles auffüllen .
then you get it and you get it on the screen , and you &apos;re looking back from the inside , right ?
if you replace the word or the internet is replacing the internet , it &apos;s very really , that its perception is probably very aufschlussreich .
i think it was this exchange that led to the pcs .
ph : i hope you &apos;re understanding how subversiv this is .
finally , the race won &apos;t take the future of the future than the telefongesellschaft unterging .
mm : because it gave the audience a role to do something .
they produce things for 1,500 and 800 dollars a minute .
and where television has been built , what &apos;s built on what &apos;s built , is a very exciting new type of communication , and we have the zusammenschluss of two industries and a new way to see it .
this is a spanish architect and designer .
paint can be a simple blocks of simple , simple materials : if i go through new york , i think i &apos;m going to go .
it gave me a anregungen way -- maybe there &apos;s a yellow day in san francisco , and we all talk about it , and we &apos;re going to take a few installations .
the use of the city for the public space has done is significantly , almost a international model .
even the parts of the airplane had increased französische .
he said , &quot; well , there &apos;s more girls . &quot;
and that was , i was , as i , after a few hochs and tiefs , where the design of the paper i ended up with you .
he said , you have a new new , better chairs .
or they &apos;re going to take them up into the middle position .
i knew it from the world , and if i was in the offices , where it was bürostühle , where it was bürostühle , where it was bürostühle with kopfstützen , that never would come to the idea of a knauf , and the headrest to get them into position .
and dengue has spread in windeseile .
two days ago , and yesterday , i can &apos;t remember exactly what i &apos;ve been hearing about a reuters-meldung , which is that madeira die the first dengue-erkrankungen vermeldet , about 52 , mit , with about 400 wahrscheinlichen .
we need something that really was really drosselt , so he didn &apos;t know the disease .
here &apos;s a typical situation : males have the female , all of the onion , every whole bunch of offspring .
so , don &apos;t have our finest problem .
&quot; why ? &quot; why here ? &quot;
and most of the time i barely have a little bit about that , even though i &apos;m a weitgereister weltenbummler .
look at the data that data .
now our mobile phones can actually build a story of our wohnorte .
bill davenhall : your health depends on where you live .
that &apos;s my grandfather .
and i think of the simple reason that nobody else is talking about it .
how could explain , they &apos;re moving from water from water from water .
here &apos;s the title article of a remarkable article from a 2009-ausgabe of &quot; nature , which is the discussion about the phosphorus crisis .
eighty percent of it is going to go .
and instead of a dose of 100 percent , we &apos;re taking a von percent .
we have a working technology and one that &apos;s going to be used in korrekter use some of the druckpunkte mildern that we &apos;re going to be in the world &apos;s population .
and he was a sogenannter teratologist , he all saw all the missgestalten and mutations to see rules and laws , rather than looking at the norms .
and in this example , you see that the individual steps repeat , but they repeat without being modular .
as an architect , i think , i think , i think , i &apos;m just between relationships between the networks and all , but in terms of the way , it will always be more trouble .
we &apos;re looking at the level of the typologie of the building , where we could build five separate towers , but they should all be verschmelzen on the 60. floor to a single monolithischen crowd .
come back back , a few years later , 2003 , and we &apos;ll see that this landscape is actually in the way that the landscape are actually known as a rainforest .
the difference is in bewässerungsanlagen in bewässerungsanlagen in the desert , or maybe golfplätze in scottsdale , whatever they want .
here &apos;s a lot of toxic waste waste , a lot of things that are illegal in the world &apos;s illegal and now .
we have the amount of nitrogen and phosphorus in the world , just by fertilizers , the huge problems of the water ; in rivers , lakes and even oceans , and it &apos;s also the most important einzelfaktor for artensterben .
but we can do that , and there &apos;s opportunities .
so , the biggest wasserverbraucherin of the paneten is on the paneten .
have to work together .
so , what is the › of the système ?
we want our products to see our products . &quot;
the whole system is not steuern .
we interact with the world through our hands .
what do you do ?
we use biological computing to reinforce these nervensignale .
so this is what this is happening .
here we are deinnervierten , or the nerve to the nerve , from the muskels parts of the muskels and ließen that gave us our hoch-runter -- two other people that gave us our hand -- signal signal .
ak : it works good .
but i can &apos;t stand up to the electrode , and say , &quot; there . &quot;
and that &apos;s our goal to have a clinically clinically anwendbares .
this is jesse and he presses a schaumspielzeug .
so thank you very much .
well , sub-saharan africa was largely , because there are a condition in there , there are 22 people living with hiv , which are 70 percent of the 30 million people who are infected in the world .
governments have to create a local prüfsysteme for the ethical of ethical things in clinical trials , which are going to be approved in the different developing world , ethikkommissionen , who are unabhängig the government and the finanzierern of the trial .
the fundamental problems that we are faced with , so it &apos;s a too high consumption and too many people .
so they &apos;re all criteria that are normally liking .
so you can see this power that goes to north -- the humboldt-strom in this case -- the up to the galapagos , and this tiefenwasserstrom , the cromwell-strom , the cromwell-strom , the cromwell-strom , the galápagos-inseln .
we also know that not only galápagos-pinguine are threatened by galápagos-pinguine , but rather magellanic magellanic penguins and other pinguinarten .
i want to show you that penguins are drawn to mitleidenschaft .
turbo has angewöhnt , with his shot to the door . we let it go in and it comes into it .
and then there &apos;s another one , the very comfortable hereingelatscht .
now , here &apos;s a fundamental problem that we don &apos;t solved , our basic political geography .
they &apos;re going to share a pretty long line .
again , as the mongolia in the case of mongolia , china doesn &apos;t die . it &apos;s least .
for low-income countries , china reduced its zölle , so that laos and cambodia can be billiger and cambodia to be able to sell their own cheap and exporten to china .
what i want to introduce you here is i call staatenbildung , day .
these two arrows form a bow , a bow of pendelzügen and other infrastructure that connects the west bank with the gaza .
a lot of you .
so what &apos;s next ? how does the future of european union ?
53 countries and the most honest lines of the global lines of the map .
this dream is going to be a big .
it &apos;s not bad ? it doesn &apos;t seem like this .
okay .
and the hormone igf-1 promotes growth .
so how can a hormone schlussendlich schlussendlich the speed of light ?
we think insulin and the vibrant hormones are , which is particularly under vorteilhaften circumstances -- in a good time -- in a good time -- if food is available to the system , and not much stress in the environment .
we don &apos;t know the details of how it works , but we know that foxo genes have a impact on the lifespan of human beings .
and i could have the genes .
so it &apos;s possible that the process of i &apos;ve been talking about the process of which i &apos;m going to do , in the worm very quickly , a different normal sollwert , like a bird , that the bird can live much longer .
you &apos;re never going to see a kind of ad , because nike wants to buy their shoes .
they all show heroes , the auserwählt .
it &apos;s like trying to walk out of a backsteinwand .
this is a sense of being , a lot of ausgestellte medikamentenrezepte like prozac , like prozac , like prozac , in the brain , as if it &apos;s the brain in the behälter of the bag of a chemical soup .
and my namensgebender colleague kollege seymour seymour .
and we found that a company , we found that a globalized time , a lot longer , to turn back to the luftstößen , and when we got the genes that were played the genes that were made a role in this mutation , we could detect a dopaminrezeptor .
and i think that this question has been in a human way for a long time , but we can actually test it in the way .
so , so , mosquitoes , in the dark , by looking at us . they &apos;re trying to do .
just so you see it , that &apos;s the cheese .
people have told me that they &apos;re now being bitten by mosquitos .
in großbrittannien .
and every time i felt the schaurigen of the eyes are behind me .
and how herrausstellte herrausstellte is fat is one of the best sources for adults .
as we speak , about 117 clinical trials studies to study the use of stem cells from stem cells .
we &apos;re very happy because we have the opportunity to have this angels in the world , not only in our country : venezuela .
so what happens if something isn &apos;t going ?
but here you see what &apos;s going on .
and i can &apos;t tell you anything that i &apos;m telling you because i stopped the title .
jenna mccarthy : what they don &apos;t know about marriage , you know about marriage , you know about marriage .
but how ?
it &apos;s even better . it seems that we can make these receivers using the use of material that is in dna .
the animal jumps , it &apos;s a breitet wing , it &apos;s vibriert , but it can &apos;t really take it because the fly are caught between two main ones .
for an intelligent creatures like our fly , is this rule not in stone , but it &apos;s changing as the animal learns through experience .
through many of these experiments , we were able to be able to the identity of the critic to 12 cells .
there &apos;s a few ideas in the realm of the computerwissenschaft and the artificial intelligence , how you could do that , but we still haven &apos;t solved a single example of how smart behavior from the physical interaction in the physical matter .
here &apos;s a lot of stuff , or actually , a ultraschallbild of libby .
ed : all right . tb : okay . so , a little bit after the bus , a little bit more .
from a hundred experience , i know that hospitals for young people can be a very dangerous place .
here &apos;s a picture of my abschlussteam from the legacy of the legacy .
so i &apos;m saying that , i &apos;m saying this kind of pflegeanpassung that &apos;s all going to be reflected to their genes , the bahnbrechendste transformation that we &apos;re going to see in our lifetime .
they don &apos;t take a haften like a klettverschluss or klebstoff .
here we have the robot .
marc raibert built the hüpfroboter uniroo .
what would happen if you would have that the bottom of the blattes , and it would be a böe or we would shake it ? &quot;
and so they did also . and he does this .
of course , completely different than you would see that in a naturfilm .
we &apos;re going to look at the rising sea level .
and i would say people who work in the oceans and think about the goals , we think they are much lower .
this is the ship that i was in the last three months in antarctica .
if this ice ice melts is going to melt up the sea level of sea level .
what was the cause ?
in both cases , the bad news for the most galapagos in the galapagos .
you have the magic .
but then you see the thermometeraufzeichnungen in the end of the line .
we have very interesting opportunity in the atmosphere of the atmosphere of years , and we &apos;ve done it all over the time , but in this case , we go back 20 years .
and this is the assignment that einstein has got himself : finding out how gravity works .
einstein had already been expanding space and time , warps and curves , the gravity would have to describe the gravity .
but deep in the structure of the room , so the idea that it could be more dimensions than we see there .
and just like the strings of a human commitment , can be the same threads in different patterns .
not yet .
is this just a interesting mathematical perspective , which may be able to explain some of the einstmals properties of the world , or can we actually see these extra dimensions ?
so we have two decks at the colored points .
now , can you see the predator predator , which is that you attacking attacking it ?
and what &apos;s important information that is true to the sensory information , to use all the information .
and we &apos;re looking at 30 seconds , which is a third of a hammer , long talk .
why ? because if the smoke in this shadows is actually in the shadows , and the same amount of light was going on to your eye , like the image outside of the music was to reflect more -- just after laws of physics .
how do you know that ?
and she comes into the hive , and it &apos;s a empty honigtopf , and it &apos;s übergibt -- and that &apos;s honey .
he finds him . insane , right ?
voices ? yes ? yes ?
often there is no right or wrong wrong .
in 2010 , not so much .
we &apos;re also a species of storytellers .
now , some things : understanding of certainty , the risks , the risks , the gegenmaßnahmen , the gegenmaßnahmen , as they work .
but in a modern and complex world you need to take models to be comfortable with the many risks that we &apos;re facing .
think of cancer , avian flu , swine flu .
there was no new insights , but fewer fear .
and there &apos;s another cognitive distortion : i &apos;m going to call it bestätigungsfehler by data , to accept data to accept our glaubensatz and data in our glaubensatz .
i would be looking at a different group , realizing , if my airplane was definitely to fly it .
so this is the people .
and he was found in the nearby , in stanford .
they had good enough to students with their teachers .
so let me ask you some questions about trying to find out if that &apos;s a good option . &quot;
i took it , any of somebody &apos;s got to get rid of it , or save that i could have to go back to the freiwilliger , but i found that nobody did .
we opened the first passage of 2009 .
robert hammond : a park in the sky , in the sky , in the sky .
and groups were very often called &quot; terrorists . &quot;
you need a einschließenden process , which is the core of this very complicated society can handle .
it &apos;s about the first time in the history of arab world in the history of the arab world , a revolution in the ground , a volksrevolution .
it &apos;s the paradox of this is that the vorletzte decade was so promising , and it &apos;s a very much way to say .
so , once the ngos do not have the ngos in the streets -- but they assumed them in the negotiations , to the part , because they were vertraten the victims of those weapons .
thank you very much for your attention .
but i don &apos;t think that &quot; monsteret is something good . &quot;
so this was once completely smooth .
it &apos;s a little crazy to work on a new job .
and i &apos;m trying to use a very scientific approach .
they said , &quot; well , you know , this strange rich man in the film ?
it &apos;s a great tooth . &quot;
and last day , the sun comes out of the sun , the orcas come to the boat , they come to the boat . it &apos;s fantastic .
i &apos;m going to give you a little nervous because i &apos;m going to tell you a few radical things about how we should think about cancer , and a audience that many people have been around for a lot of people who are doing a lot more than a lot more than i do .
the part of the genome that we can read is the list of ingredients .
it &apos;s a huge amount of information in genetics by just comparing the genetic similarities .
and i &apos;m like , &quot; well , at least this guy &apos;s good . &quot;
so , we &apos;re basically measuring any of the same as a single .
if you have malaria , we give them chinin , or some of them .
where we really have to really have to be the process that &apos;s right on the level of the proteomischen activities , why the body doesn &apos;t release itself itself , how he does it ? &quot;
danny hillis : cancer , through proteomics , through proteomics .
they all are members of tribes .
it doesn &apos;t enough , and that &apos;s just not easy .
because at stage three , most of us are .
that &apos;s their lobby .
there was no plan . never before anybody did .
in truth , martin was done luther sentence in stage three .
so i &apos;m sitting here in this chair and do nothing . &quot;
and suddenly they got the papierzettel out and tried to figure out , &quot; how do we know the population of sub-saharan africa ? &quot;
automatically schnippen the little bits of plastic up .
these are the ein- or zweistöckigen konstrukte , which have been designed to get the taxes to the floor , on the floor , they were not as permanent as a permanent building .
they duchschauen the stability and security that can offer the lap of a uncle , comparing them in the wackeligen of a neurotischen nichte .
but from my perspective , compassion has a problem .
and it &apos;s the erbauendste form of sofortiger befriedigung .
i can &apos;t really explain it , and it doesn &apos;t .
stories like these , zeichen like these , practical aid in a world that yearns , to bring compassion to compassion , the übermäßigen images of suffering that could afford us .
and gandhi was a really fehlerhafter person .
and the first day our day , our gruppenleiterin and taught us our motto , we had to take every day for the rest of the summer to take the gemeinschaftssinn of the summer .
this is one of two or three of their known .
here are some examples .
it turns out we can &apos;t be part of a group without instinctively the other way .
so this is the world that we live in today .
and so i &apos;m trying to learn from my grandfather to my grandfather .
okay , number two : go to the wild .
and imagine this , you know , you &apos;re going to be born in a very small village in mexico in mexico , in , unfortunately , in a very ärmlichen , and my parents had not higher education .
and so we think that through all the changes that are happening that we &apos;re going to be today with incredible odds .
it &apos;s a initiative that &apos;s based on simple , erreichbare , and menschzentrierte solutions .
we now have 30 different countries in 18 different countries , and we were in the field of connecting millions of people , in the most effort , to continue to learn what this particular is going to do .
and my dad came to me and said , &quot; you know , i said , &quot; you know , i remember it all over the previous generation .
i know a lot of people who are very smart , and yet , &quot; why can i solve my problem ? &quot;
i started putting them up with a different family .
don &apos;t believe that we have the responsibility here , the environment ? &quot;
i still go back and over four years old , and i was also .
but that &apos;s not a good life .
that &apos;s what he &apos;s praying .
if you believe it or not , doesn &apos;t matter .
so he said , &quot; what do you think you &apos;re in your hand ? &quot;
what is that in your hand ? &quot; i said , &quot; it &apos;s a basketball , and this basketball represents your identity , which is what you are .
when my kids were little , i went to her room , sat down to her bed , and looked at my time to sleep .
it &apos;s less than i had vorausberechnet -- i rechnete with three to 10 million -- but still , it &apos;s a very comfortable number .
in a village , we then have 100 laptops , each of a different collection of 100 books , so that the village suddenly has 10,000 books .
right , the famous chinese character for rastplatz .
they answer the question : how do it feel , you know , you know , you know ?
we &apos;re really learning really bad really good .
think of a moment that it &apos;s right to feel right .
and unlike all the other animals , we &apos;re obsessed with it , trying to figure out it .
and i have to tell you that i thought i was writing this incredibly nerdige book about a topic that everybody hate to have a audience that would never be .
the effect of it is not just wogender wheat , but the mountains of the grain .
1986 , 1986 from vietnam .
the answer to this was lapidar , &quot; that &apos;s worse . &quot;
our personalfluktuation sank in a third of the durchschnitts in our industry , and in the five years , our betriebsgröße verdreifacht has tripled our betriebsgröße .
and bhutan , for the people who don &apos;t know it is the youngest democracy of the world , only two years .
it &apos;s actually that we often hunt in the west of happiness , as a luck , which is something we have to capture , a thing , or maybe several things that we need to get .
and we think 10 simple questions -- that &apos;s the simplicity .
what we need to learn as leaders is that we can actually create the fossil manufacturing production of manufacturing , by looking at the right conditions so that our employees can make their lives .
bl : all right . one , two , three .
so , in a deck , you &apos;ll say , you move your hand , but the eyes are moving in the einklang with the boat , and say , &quot; i stand quiet . &quot;
amy , do you go to up above ?
the method : what did you do ? what &apos;s the result , what did you observe ?
i read a front .
real scientific literacy should give people a voice and they empower it to make them , and so it also brings to express this , so amy the last word in this short story have .
poor people have no opportunity to have this opportunity .
we were going to immerse the 1970s .
and to see it , we have to recognize that the principle of a wegwerfkultur not only the species we &apos;ve talked about , but our society are verdirbt .
today , 60 years later , i can tell you why it &apos;s possible .
i &apos;m sure somebody who has already said , &quot; yes , great things up there -- but how do i get up there ?
i was a professor at the u.c. davis and received a lot of attention . it allowed me to fund the start of the program .
we have eight motors in this vehicle .
thank you .
they drop apart , they were falling apart , and they end up .
i mean , people are wondering if cell phones are .
you have a coil .
because , remember , remember the original idea of dr. soljacic : the piepende mobile phone .
and for those of those who can &apos;t read : it says , &quot; it seems like it would be a kind of kabelloser technology . &quot;
green or natural bestattungen , which is not einbalsamiert , they &apos;re a step in the right direction , but they don &apos;t take the existenten of the poisons in our bodies .
first , a beerdigungsanzug , angereichert with pilzsporen , who &apos;s death death .
only months later i knew who he was really .
i &apos;m looking for a cure .
i say , &quot; keep him alive if you can . &quot;
even with this eindeutigen paper in our hands , we &apos;ve redefined the hope .
but a feature .
suddenly he knows that he was defeated .
to give you this , we have to put them back to the driver .
we beflogen the area , we photographierten it , we schickten people , we photographierten the buildings of the inside , and we helped the katastrophengebiete of the innen , and we helped the first einsätzen , and the rettung .
if i do this , i don &apos;t know the original detail , and in the contrary , i could write a story .
you &apos;re going to be the public opinion .
that &apos;s not particularly good .
and which is a democracy , and that &apos;s a democracy .
here &apos;s the question : which country is getting up , you know , the country , china or india ?
because the indian man has been in a way of life expectancy from two years of the indian woman .
what political change is , they instituted it .
china , i think , has always been a few herausragende , ungeschliffene foundations -- especially in terms of social capital , public health care , a sense of equality , which is not in india .
it was a place where people with verschiedenster and mit and sich .
and now you have the problem that they spent all the money to use help to help help these fortschrittlichen electronics in those countries , and now everything is unbrauchbar .
a slightly more expensive environment , where probably a lot of ideas arose , where people are more new , interesting , unvorhersehbare , unvorhersehbare auseinandersetzungen -- human resources .
so , about a decade ago , a wonderful stipendiat was a wonderful stipendiat with the name of howard , and read this period of this period .
they erkundigen their coworkers , but everybody said , &quot; no , no , i didn &apos;t believe it .
does this also go ?
in the 1970s , this is a percent of the national income of national income in the united states .
many of these political factors can be roughly , and that &apos;s why you can be summarized in the category of &quot; capitalism , &quot; political , the one group of interconnected , but actually not a good job for us .
as you can see , as you can see simple , like globalization and technological revolution , this global ethic of money , is much harder to judge it .
so , they &apos;re spending a lot of time at time and tools , to get their kids .
we &apos;ve created the modern sozialstaat , and we created the modern sozialstaat .
that &apos;s his little hand .
and we &apos;re going to die all of them .
this was a huge disappointment for us , because we had believed in a new development .
i think that in places like oregon , where you &apos;re in oregon , where you can take a ärztliche and a toxic dose , only half a percent of the human beings have ever done .
so , long rede meaning : they came to canada .
but i also heard about cancer as most of the most powerful disease of our time , how did the good and the bad ones together ?
some papers went to even be able to say that skelettmuskelgewebe is resistent for cancer , and beyond that , not only against cancer , but that they &apos;re spreading metastases in skeletal muscle .
16 percent of the tatsächlichen ! that nadelspitzengroßen had this nadelspitzengroßen tumors in skeletal muscle , but only 16 percent of the actual lab -- which is that skeletal muscle may have to control angiogenesis , capable of control that tumors to control these blutgefäße for themselves .
this is a very large idea of idea , but i really believe that this is possible .
and afterwards , my translator .
she was the girl that was the other for her team .
and i &apos;ll just put a letter on my best friends in atlanta , georgia that had 11 shortly son .
&quot; what he said ? &quot; i asked the translator who i said the translator who i said .
so the two came to lunch , and we were thrown out of the restaurant .
he had kids from korea , and he found families for them .
they have a lot of time talking about the dictionary .
so i &apos;m going to open the window , look out , and see how flames of the world &apos;s hotels in the height is the hotel .
so we ran into the bath , and we took it handtücher , and they held them in front of our faces and the children .
until the adoption through the adoption . a year ! what needs to be so long ?
this is your kochlehrerin .
this is sydney , which is going to be three years in a few days .
but there was no evidence .
there are little planets , there are larger planets , there &apos;s big planets .
but there are still a lot more to do .
so the question is : is this chemical phenomenon , or is it something that the planet depends on average ?
and this deeper gründende , that is , is the point of the point that science is that the science is , how we know it .
okay , we say , this is the size of the observable universe , with all the galaxies , with all the stars , all over there .
thank you very much .
you see , as uganda absinkt and zimbabwe absinkt , russia on a percent .
they find the highest hiv prevalence in the world in the world in the world , and yet they find in senegal , the same as in the united states .
look at this .
it might be that it &apos;s something else , because the transmission of transmission is more .
we know that roughly 106 billion people have ever lived .
this was not just a economic story .
and the result is even a greater divergence in a shorter time than it was in germany .
likewise , it &apos;s related to institutions .
you have to give me to eat . &quot;
he was wrong .
now , i want to end with three questions about the future billion , shortly before the united states , if the united states is to lose their place as a number of one country in china .
no , we &apos;re going to be durchhalten , notwithstanding the vast schuldenlast that we have , irrespective of the other people who lost our work and other parts of our historical elans .
niall , thank you .
there are many kinds of silks .
so spider silk is almost entirely composed of protein .
the fibers that can make a single spider , are pretty diverse .
also , a lot of the potential is because of their capacity to the raketenabwehr .
i want to do this , not the meerjungfrauparade , so you don &apos;t know , as well as you may be , but the photos .
you have to have a physical structure .
there are more photos . there are more photographers .
this sounds strange in our ears , but what happened after , that 80 percent of the mitwirkenden unterdurchschnittlich have contributed to have a lot of mitwirkenden .
the first thing that happens when you &apos;re a problem in the world is that the first goal of the institution is also used to the institution , and the world &apos;s moving to the power of the earth .
the inventor don &apos;t know what the invention is .
there is people in the states who are trying to try to find out whether they &apos;re journalists or not .
it was created by the kommunikationsmuster , by giving their kommunikationsmuster , the use of these tools , the same the third of the world today &apos;s the same work in the last week .
you have kleie , which probably is the most part of the bread , or the fibers , because it &apos;s just full fibers because of fibers .
everything is in its place . first level .
we call it &quot; gare . &quot;
but let &apos;s look back to the different steps , and we &apos;re going to look at the gesichtspunkt of the possible level to a deeper level -- my quest to be careful about the question , &quot; what is so special about bread ? &quot;
that &apos;s transformation , two different things .
and if you &apos;re shaped , they go back to the point that they &apos;re alive and character .
if you make this bread , you can use any kind of treber of every beer .
it &apos;s going to be a kind of refrain , as we &apos;re working through this talk .
it takes a very long time to write this scores and time at a piece of time that &apos;s been a piece of seiten , and that &apos;s a big part of my life and i &apos;m raufe me .
it &apos;s going to be vorgeführt by brian mcwhorter , who is a single artist .
you have a little vorgeschmack of the piece of the piece .
what we did -- betty rapacholi , one of my students , and i -- we gave the babies two schüsseln to eat , a bowl with rohem broccoli , and a bowl with leckeren goldfisch-kräcker .
i mean , last , when we look at babies , you &apos;re not really useless .
and our babies and kids are much more than the babies of us than the babies are .
the befund is bringing them to change the hypothesis .
now there are two things that are really interesting about .
boy : so that &apos;s why .
our conscious minds of this thing is extremely bright and vivid , and everything is going to be dark .
&quot; babies and young kids are like the research and entwicklungsabteilung of the human species , &quot; their forschungsarbeit untersucht , like babies während the psychologin and make decisions about the play information .
if i could just take you for a little demonstration of the difference , to show the difference -- because it &apos;s actually quite trivial .
then you repeatedly repeatedly , and over again , until something called the figur -- in this case , the character i &apos;m going to walk .
what we really wanted was , the whole human body .
you can &apos;t do it .
here are a few simple scenes like it being done .
i &apos;m not sure why , but we did it anyway .
now , some of the most unusual use of our software to do this , and we &apos;re going to get a few of our stuntmännern in a few major filmproduktionen .
we thought it would just take the balance .
here you learn from the töpfchen -- like most of you , most of you know .
but i have to say , i &apos;ll never forget what happened when i was 13 years old .
i believe that art and creativity is essential to develop empathy .
if you &apos;re the lonely , you write a new york times , you get hundreds of thousands of times . most of what i &apos;m doing today , mostly by frustration .
some stories are just a bit of being , and yet , nachvollziehbar .
it versank . nobody has ever bought it .
there &apos;s a limit that we don &apos;t want to do . what is the solution ?
that &apos;s microsoft word , ok . if you want to create a new , empty document in the word -- that might be like that .
i think there are two microsofts .
the other products were used by microsoft by microsoft &apos;s standard , rather than apples firmeneigenen .
and when i &apos;m going to write a hassbrief -- what happens -- what happens -- i &apos;ll say , &quot; leak . &quot;
but when i looked at the mächtigeren technologies , nanotechnology , gentechnologie and others in the kommen of the begriffene technology , i made a lot of worry about the missbrauchspotenzial .
and to do the danger of these new things , we have to do not have the ability to limit the individuals that are the access to the access to the access to the zugang .
i think the challenge that we are -- i &apos;m very sure that this is going to happen -- the challenge is that we &apos;re going to be able to develop these bildungsmaterialien with the background that will be used to use this device ?
and if you build a three-dimensional structure , for example , for example , you have all kinds of incredible properties .
and to give you a sense of the past of a little fund , and it &apos;s been belief on 400 million dollars , so that &apos;s not quite remarkable .
and if you have the concept of the versicherungen king , you can use a much more mächtigere problem -- the instanz of the market -- use to deliver feedback .
12 years ago , started to faszinieren me , and i got my research into this direction .
wonderful and grim things .
there &apos;s ice below the surface .
so they &apos;re a langsamere form .
it &apos;s actually so much energy for biology in this cave , that there are a large number of höhlenfische .
we can see them .
we &apos;ve noticed a few years ago that caves have been many characteristics that have been used by people and other organisms as habitat as habitat .
whenever you have a goal of a goal , to be able to have a ziel of your whole steps , some of the way .
and so it &apos;s also in archimedes , the big griechischen mathematician .
and took over time and it was litt under the starkem .
that means that we could start to digitize the archimdes , we had to take the book apart .
and this is what this looks like .
but by the electrons with the light around the speed of light , they &apos;re going to be called x-rays .
this was a bad idea because philipp from macedonia had a son called alexander the great , and she lost the battle of chaironeia .
because , in the moment , institutions , their data with urheberrechtsbeschränkungen and whatnot .
the initial owners of the bottle of bottle was one of the most famous weinliebhaber of the 18th century .
i asked myself , i said , 160 dollars for something ?
she has four rogue .
a wiederkehrendes scheme is that many of these things come from japan -- they &apos;ll notice it .
i mean , a freihändig , klopapier-freie toilet .
there was a object that i couldn &apos;t get into the finger , and this was the 1947er cheval blanc .
and i can &apos;t -- call you a taste of a banausens -- so it &apos;s not necessarily significantly that i wasn &apos;t impressed , but i was not the only one , with this reaction .
and at the beginning of this year , a virtual habitat for 330.000 reale dollars .
the really interesting thing that is really interesting , is you can measure them .
now , i could develop a game with the name of piecraft , by just one million pies , or a thousand pies .
if there are real boxes , we cannot do much , but in a game , we say , &quot; okay . &quot;
this is absolutely critical and virtuality .
and i want to tell you a quick story , so in 1999 , and there was a video game called everquest .
it &apos;s about how to reuse how to use the psychologischen and neurological insights that we get when we &apos;re getting in playing with play .
it &apos;s a kind of versteinerter zahnbelag , which is called the officially als .
i &apos;m a ellen , and i &apos;m totally obsessed with diet .
there &apos;s hunger in america , 49 million people and nearly 16.7 million children .
and your farms are also big .
it &apos;s the 30th anniversary of genverändertem crop and the big gulp , of chicken mcnuggets , hochkonzentriertem fruktosehaltigem , hochkonzentriertem fruktosehaltigem , der maissirup , the landwirtschaftskrise in america and the way we have the world &apos;s population .
this is a bauhelm that i &apos;ve got two years ago , which was one of the largest projects i &apos;ve ever been involved in .
but i &apos;m going to focus on the start of the process , on three pedantische .
if we are so good at what we do , we should not be able to create an architectural manifestation , which is absolutely reibungslos through the kunden- and projektseitigen ?
the architectural and the architectural were able to say , simpel .
and this is the actual case of the trouble .
the second technology that we &apos;re using , we &apos;re using things that you know from the seitenbühnen of a opera .
here you see the ebenerdige configuration .
i &apos;m going to talk about how to try and get stories in something .
one of those projects is about a year .
these are the images that are made automatically .
as i was awake , i had the camera to go to the neck .
you can see a timeline that shows you the exciting moments of history .
it &apos;s bartenwal . you know .
a 28-jähriger inhaber of a handy-geschäfts .
a 80-jähriger farmer farmer .
what if you thought about a year , what would you find out , what would you do the next 35 years ?
&quot; money deserve and a business review was &quot; the indian straßenarbeiter .
during the course he had told them that he wanted to be a zweiprozentige chance of gegeben .
don &apos;t understand me wrong , writing , schrift .
and with the hand , it &apos;s almost impossible to impossible , except in steno , and then the communication is limited .
very fun people , if lol is that , if lol is .
you don &apos;t make this .
if someone from 1973 to a black board of the 1993 , a very different one had been a bit different from the time of &quot; love &quot; , but he had understood what was going on .
i &apos;m about the zeitlimit , i wanted to say if you &apos;re in new york , you can look at my work at the next week , and also in the bitforms gallerie in chelsea .
afghanistan is not a existential threat to the global security .
and the same thing for the troops .
instead , there was a litanei of erstaunlichem optimism .
diplomats verschanzen .
and finally , we have to understand that the secret of what we did in bosnia and kosovo , the secret of our erfolges in our humility -- in the very careful of our wisdom .
rory , they &apos;re both libyen .
so here you see two examples .
this is an example of the same system , on a finger , to show you how it looks like .
there are also teststreifen , which are eingetaucht , but if you &apos;re diese these teststreifen , this is a different kind of urinanalyse .
the selektionsproblem . this is a hard problem that i &apos;m not going to be erleutern .
there &apos;s another , very interesting connection . and this is that what you want to do is to continue to lead the valuable information to lead to the general schlechtes .
so , i think it &apos;s the minimal of the food that we can probably do to make things .
and we decided that we should not think about that much in terms of the cost of the cost , but in terms of simplicity .
there &apos;s a book that is called &quot; the &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; what &apos;s the matter of the table ? &quot;
so we have to ask why .
but nevertheless , you don &apos;t think much of people who are not as as you are .
so we can think of things like the straßenverlauf .
i &apos;m kidding , but only half , if i say that you &apos;re not believe in the hospital , if they &apos;re going to be able to come with a very different reef , mri , mri and orthopädische .
then , bell &apos;s bell bell &apos;s bell .
within a few years , in the late 19th century , and early 20th century , suddenly the doctor , trying to ask a diagnosis , the barbier .
between perception of the patient and the physicians in terms of the best healthcare of health care , is a real dialectic .
also another experience that i made in texas , before i went to stanford , and i was going to take me .
the bad news : the precise cause is not knowing . look ? you can do it ? you can do that . &quot;
i remember so many large , ausgehölte , verfolgte eyes , the ritual to me .
some call us entlarver , a rather unfreundliche .
in this case , we have the bedrock .
for you , the back here , here &apos;s a miracle !
and there was no till 1655 .
religious ikonographie .
more difficult is it to move the dead to the answer .
my friend simon singh , a teilchenphysiker , nunmehr , nunmehr , wrote the book &quot; the big bang &quot; and &quot; etc . &quot;
and now you open your eyes .
you can open it up , and it &apos;s wasserundurchlässig .
but it has been a lot of thinking about this , that these guys , at least most of the guys , most of what you do for a living .
everybody thought that was impossible .
you can produce any amount of change . you can build roads .
and that &apos;s something that people want to do .
you don &apos;t need everyone .
hugo chavez has the unzufriedene arbeiter- and middle class in venezuela . he &apos;s just flipping it .
and so it &apos;s always going on .
they connect people together .
the reason ? the study of modern medicine uses a 60 year-old method .
there &apos;s a catch .
this makes it faster , over 26 times over time , over 400 times over time , than our current standardtest for pancreatic cancer .
my experience with the islamic world are absolutely different .
there are just the figure of the phrase .
and why leads sex to babies , and why don &apos;t mean in a erotic disaster , to have erotic disaster ?
because it &apos;s the secret of the future .
specifically , very important about the other side of my other -- that &apos;s the same thing -- particularly interesting , that there is no bedürftigkeit in desire .
this is her dreh- and angelpunkt , which is biology , the natural instinct .
and then , the desire is going to be the desire . this study needs curiosity .
you know that there &apos;s a ring in the room , every one of the alone .
other places in the country had similar spaces .
in a gothischen cathedral , this kind of music is perfect .
ok .
that &apos;s going to played in the most remote rooms .
so early hip-hop-gruppen , some stellen , some places .
so i asked myself , ok , is this a model for design , these adaptation that we &apos;re doing ?
thank you very much .
and then he turned to me and said , &quot; the one stands up .
how do we solve the following three problems that i want to bring to language ?
albert einstein -- i &apos;m just talking to somebody , when i was a talk in princeton , and i met mr. einstein .
what is life ? why am i here ?
i never read a talk or a lecture or a lecture .
and it was about 300 people there .
he talked about his personal experience .
a french historian was two centuries later : &quot; rarely have a powerful way of the authority of jesus christ of jesus christ . &quot;
or he was what he said .
i &apos;m not going to be a ermordeten about the selbstmörder trauern .
but for this , you have to take about ten minutes and a woman in the poor , which is not there .
i never was pure .
harvest harvest , harvest , baby-zähne .
and with tears in the eyes i said , &quot; no . &quot;
2010 : a young woman stands up to president sirleaf and says , &quot; and she says , and their siblings , their parents died in war .
we go in rural areas and everything we do , what it is in this room is going to happen , we create a space .
i failed .
i &apos;d like to look at a time of zurückblicken , and you see that there &apos;s a liberianisches girl , a ghanaisches , nigerianisches , äthiopisches girls on this ted .
lg : pardon .
licklider realized , computers can do the power of the power of doing insights and choices .
every interaction is recorded by more and more of the same sensors : your phone , your computer , you have a lot of data , and we get the opportunity to understand our lives .
these records were human bezugsformate .
by a verbesserter process , which is a verbesserter process , which was a task for 40 people over three months , was to a simple assignment for three hours in 40 hours , and all these are siege .
we should stop looking out .
for dinner with my wife and the kids go home .
because people say , &quot; shit man , i don &apos;t have to get time to get a time ; you want to get rid of time .
she was a much bigger dog than i thought .
these effects affect us all .
the boom of the national geographic autobahnbaus is to gesellte our problems .
think of fahrradläden , getränkestände .
in the era of katrina , we have more common .
and they probably have done that , and if not , you &apos;re going to have to be .
help me green to the new black . help me to make sustainability sexy .
so i thought this would be a opportunity to use scratch to make a interactive map for my mother .
i &apos;m skeptical , what these terminus angeht .
in this case you take a bewegungsblock , put it on a stack , put it on a stack , and the stack of blöcken , the behavior of the different characters in a play , or a story in this case , the big fish .
if you learn to learn to code , you can learn to learn .
if kids like the victor of these projects , they learn important concepts like variables , but that &apos;s just the beginning .
what i want to talk to you today is to give you a background , the idea that cars are art .
i want to talk about .
and i think that this idea that great cars have a soul , very large , very decent , you know , you know , a car with the first anblick , you know how much it is .
this is one of my favorite lieblingsgemälde , which is really our relationship to cars .
right ? and she decided that it would be cheaper to be able to be able to have a studio and six or seven wohnungen elizabeth haus in malibu .
there was a lot of dialogue .
i think we felt very close to this day , we &apos;re ignoring the trennten of the fäden , and we schmiedeten the concept of real wesen and creativity .
we didn &apos;t bring him to boston .
i just have a little lab , and i just have a little lab .
now , we &apos;ve been in a clinical trial in four maus-modellen of this disease .
we don &apos;t have a team of verkaufs- and marketingpersonal that can be able to get this pharmaceuticals on the market .
100 billion is the only number you need to know .
what you have to remember is that we have to do it with a universe with a hundred billion galaxies , with the hundred billion stars .
what he didn &apos;t explained was why the entropy ever ever had ever been low .
unlike the low entropy of the universe , although we don &apos;t know the answer , we have a good theory that can explain this , if this theory is true , and that the theory of the dark energy .
and therefore , it &apos;s going to be growing up , although the universe is going to grow forever and ordinary matter and radiation , there are a certain amount of radiation , even in empty space .
but we also give big fluctuations .
it cools off .
it &apos;s a rücksichtslose fact of the universe that you accept and not question .
i never used a computer .
it was a future i couldn &apos;t accept .
now , i want to just get to all of those things like me , say , to say , to the extent and the poor people who are struggling with their dreams .
no matter what i &apos;m going to do in my real world , only in my real world , only in my little life , in the digital world , eight years ago , in 2000 .
i took this very literally , i took my fahrradhelm , and i put him a little bit schieff , which is the great gut .
the camera is not only to use my movements , but is also capable of understanding what things i think in my hand .
and why just comuter ? we can just play with a game .
all the work you &apos;ve seen , and you &apos;re going to have to be about my learning in india .
this is juan carlos , king of spain .
this is going to be the drittgrößte park in rio , in rio .
again , you don &apos;t have to dig down below the earth to build a look .
i &apos;ll give you a quick example .
almost every year we have this horrible schrecklichen .
we &apos;re under the average of the average in the city .
a city of the future is a city , which is the one that is all the great community that are cities .
the best answer is to try to reconstruct a darwin &apos;s way to reconstruct our artistic and aesthetic priorities .
so the trick of evolution is to make them beautiful , so that you &apos;re kind of anziehungskraft , so that you &apos;re kind of anziehungskraft , so it &apos;s just to look at joy , just to look at it .
and some of them are too large to use it for butchering .
our strong response to images , the expression of emotion in art in the arts , the beauty of music is going to be in the world &apos;s beauty in the world , as long as the human race is .
now , it &apos;s a pretty complicated system , but let me try to explain it , and maybe i can simplify it .
so , you can see the computer here , like the computer sees the environment , and since you can &apos;t see the growth , we &apos;re actually going to see the driver &apos;s driver , actually , to see the rider leds , so he can see what &apos;s going on .
let &apos;s see if mark mark you can avoid .
or for blind people , in everyday geräten , in the north of the household , in education , in the office .
a subtle konditionierungsprozess had begun . the implikation , the implikation , that normal people were hearing , and i heard it was that something that was not going to me .
my psychischer gesundheitszustand was a catalyst for diskriminierungen , beschimpfungen and sexual übergriffe , and i was told by my psychiatrist , &quot; eleanor , with cancer , they would be better because cancer is easier to heal , because cancer is easier to heal . &quot;
to paraphrasieren chavez , if the social change is beginning to be more aufgehalten .
and that &apos;s what we &apos;re going to go right now .
so what i &apos;m suggesting is where we should seek to life , more than mars , but of course , as far as mars , but of course , is a very much more complicated place and interesting place .
and the usual astronomers were full of contempt .
because it &apos;s bedeuete the way that the way that life can live out there , it has enormous benefits to live with life on a planet .
there was another object that is a very different object that &apos;s going to be möbelstück with creatures and wasserspeiern and naked -- pretty gruselige things for a little kid .
the first projects were modest , but they assumed technology and verwandelten , they might be able to use the things that people are using a new way of using the new way .
the other thing that &apos;s humanistisch is at jawbone , is that we decided to wegzulassen the whole thing , that whole spielereien spielereien , this whole nerdzeug , and tried to make it as beautiful as possible .
so we called it y water . so this is another example of where everything in a room happens : the three-dimensional design that ideas , the ideas , it &apos;s all very tightly .
this is my neffe anthony , switzerland , in switzerland , he had the laptop for a afternoon , i had to put it back with a zurücknehmen , and it was hard .
yves behar about the design of objects , the stories tell stories .
thank you .
my aunt , a incredibly wortgewandte and brilliant wife , was early .
she was the entschlossenste fürsprecherin of the frauenrechte that i ever heard .
look at this young girl who go to school after the next time , after säure in their faces .
the world that had been given the layma was given a world in war .
then , the situation will be .
you have to negotiate .
it &apos;s people from my generation , which is in a world where everything is papierlos and in some of our best conversations on a screen .
finally , could it be able to print their own drug users .
and if it &apos;s what it is , why it &apos;s interesting , you have to look at the rest of saudi arabia , because it &apos;s a country that &apos;s been divided by the geschlechtern .
maybe some things are bad traditions , and they need changes .
let me give you an example of the turkey , where i &apos;m talking where i &apos;m from a very aggressive republic , we had to call something that i &apos;m calling something that i should call the universities , to protect the universities , to protect the universities .
if i now have the only person , the one that we would have to think of that , we would have a problem .
in the 19th century , as muslims as an example of europe , they were independent , selbstsicherer .
so the e.u. process , the efforts of turkey , the e.u. , the e.u. , within turkey , the eu muslims , as some nichtreligiöse nations were against it .
there &apos;s a very large nose that doesn &apos;t take the anschein , as if it was something like it .
if scientists today , a century later , a century , a century , and then they leave these from inside the inside , rather than physically .
carl schoonover : glimpses in the inside of our brain activity , the inside of our brain
this trend is not a clear .
but for many parts of africa , it has a colleague of the africa , and i was a colleague of the waffenstillstand in the evening , the most recent time was just to the right time , so that the genocide was going to start the mittwochmorgen . &quot;
and instead of installing the opportunity to have local leaders and international leaders turned to the second intifada , the events of the 09 , and september wars in the 2001 and the wars in the afghanitsan and the wars .
institutionelles design requires a strong focus on the problemfragen , innovatives thinking and anpassungsfähige and kapitalkräftige .
the stromatolites are the heroes of my story .
in the shallow sea , life itself is already early in the morning ; here &apos;s what it is in more complex .
flamingos moved across continents . the big of the world started .
some of the sudden the säuger comes back into the water .
everybody who should have a luxury of luxury .
but there was nothing for this purpose , so we have schnurrbartwachsen with prostate cancer , and then we created our motto , which is the face of man &apos;s health . &quot;
mo bros from canada , from the united states , and from england , and we said , &quot; hey , there &apos;s nothing there for prostate cancer .
and i said , &quot; last year we had the lucky to have the 000 promi-botschafter . &quot;
this kind of conversation , men in every age , is so critical and important , and i think , as much more important than the money we collect .
he could see what his forest happened , his environment , because his grandfather had been taken him under his fittiche when he was just two years old , and began to teach him about the forest and the journey of his people .
when i thought about it , i wonder what our grandchildren and our worst answers , if you &apos;re going to ask the same question .
we need new models of a leader and human our world .
they &apos;re working with people like murali krishna .
a life , through everything , and everything that came out , and everything that came out , he gathered up , so he had a hundred million pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of pieces of
it &apos;s just going to happen .
&quot; my world is subjective .
or maybe he was just a single yogi who was sitting on a rock and the skies , and the sun and the moon and the moon .
and if you lived a radical life , you &apos;ll get into your elysium , or you can call the french , &quot; the champs-élysées -- -- the skies of the heroen .
and so it comes to this great rituals where great bildnisse of the muttergottheiten and 10 are angebetet for 10 days .
see , what is business than a product of the market and the behavior of a organization ?
see , you see , this is india today . the grundauffassung of reality is based on a zyklischen hierarchy .
you know , he &apos;s built the largest kaufhauskette , it &apos;s called big bazaar .
&quot; why i chose this way , why don &apos;t me get me not interested in the way , please , just like , please . &quot;
devdutt pattanaik shares us the eyes of a new view of the myths and the west -- and shows why these grundverschiedenen self-assembly with the death of the death and the jenseitsvorstellung help us help us understand ourselves .
but you know what ? it &apos;s almost 2012 and the world : &quot; i &apos;m completely competent , &quot; meaning , even in the schwächsten praise .
your interest stands in comparison ?
their friends and family are going to be versammeln on the friedhof and there , on your stomach , on the written , &quot; here &apos;s a great engineer , the power engineer . &quot;
they &apos;re happy . this is the conversation that mothers and fathers want to listen because your kid &apos;s good in math and you know what comes next .
that &apos;s because you -- you know what they are .
i don &apos;t have patents and i &apos;ve never got money from a medical bildverarbeiter , and i don &apos;t have to worry that they choose me .
so how do you know if your breast density is dichte ?
ultrasound has more biopsies to the consequence that &apos;s spread to other technologies , and it &apos;s not very common .
if you find a tumor , as long as he &apos;s less than a centimeter , is the überlebensrate in the 90 percent , but it falls through the increasing tumorgröße .
the picture of the mbi shows that tumor , there is a lot of grand reasons , just like a second tumor that &apos;s focused on the surgical possibilities of patient .
it costs a radiologists to be educated for a experte to become a normal anatomisches detail of a besorgniserregenden .
some women who get breast cancer , dying of cancer , and fortunately , and luckily , most of them are .
so , there &apos;s da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da da vinci da vinci &apos;s there .
we &apos;re going to put this physicist in los angeles to see what they build .
absolutely , the way .
they have slept in this schulstunde .
this is a umwerfende vision .
it &apos;s a question of the consequences .
so let &apos;s come on the spot .
what did i do ? i &apos;ve heard my stomach ?
that &apos;s interesting . this is another way to think .
the homunculus is basically a visual of a human being where everybody &apos;s body proportional to the surface that he &apos;s going to have to see in the brain .
this is white noise .
and it &apos;s probably probably going to roll in your direction .
i did just to make money .
thank you .
and he said to me , &quot; i wonder if people don &apos;t find your even more powerful than my video . &quot;
that &apos;s why i &apos;m with david edward , a researcher in harvard , an object , the toxic elements of these plants can absorb these plants .
no , not potatoes , but tomatoes , and so on .
the tragedy of other people can take easier than the one , and i want to have to put the beschwingten spirit of this conference .
malcolm gladwell was &#91; das &#93; by the kokain-derivat crack by tomatensuppe tomatensuppe .
he was a really interesting picture .
he went back to the second floor and said , &quot; hey boys .
so , like mcdonald &apos;s .
we think of the comparison of other lebenssituationen , where you can expect a very old risk .
the second reason was that the gang were in the marketing and the betrug .
economists talk about the game theory -- that every game for two individuals .
skysurfing is skydiving with a board of feet .
extremsport extremsport on the age of the way , as you can do , if you &apos;re going to step forward , if you &apos;re really intensiv and mentally .
ue : no . that &apos;s just smoke .
occasionally , i meet with scientists .
that &apos;s why i had hope that by putting some natural elements of elements , a little bit of mist , i could make the space tangible .
the natural environment is that it does a difference whether you do something or not .
the big mountains in the distant distance are less .
how do we create a idea that both meaningful is both individualität and also to kollektivität , without the two different directions to two different directions ?
i spoke to a new kinds of ozeanerforschung , one , the animals , instead of verscheuchen them .
but even more incredible , the material was the triton-u-boot .
and they take off the dead and take the dead and take the dead and take off and take off the dead and the dead and the dead and take off the dead and take off the dead and take off the dead and take off the dead and take off the dead and take off the dead and take off the dead and take off the dead and take
and he taught the classics at the trinity college in dublin .
natalie merchant sings old poems over life .
fremdartiger , as a dolphin , it &apos;s hardly a dolphin .
as a grown-up , when i was talking about the amazing insights of penny and koko , sue savage-rumbaugh with kanzi and panbanisha , irene pepperberg and alex , the papagei , i heard i was going to go .
vint cerf : ng : how to me .
we &apos;re in the national aquarium , we &apos;re engagieren ourselves for a research , for research and preservation .
but we &apos;ve been pretty quick , that we &apos;ve created a system that connects people together .
today . this is the first time you &apos;re talking about this topic .
this is a picture of me and my daughter &apos;s tochter , i think , i think .
&quot; because it works , make a poster with me . &quot;
they came and it was so many . one day , i remember that michal was talking to a journalist , and i said , &quot; who &apos;s going to see that ? &quot; and he said , &quot; everybody . &quot;
it &apos;s not the israel-liebt-iran-seite . that &apos;s not my side .
and sometimes war is unumgänglich . but sometimes , with a little bit , we can avoid it .
and what we &apos;re trying to do with &quot; yes is , &quot; to try to convince you that the architectural avantgarde almost always defined by the time , and it &apos;s going to be defined by the architectural avantgarde .
and we saw this guy , haibao , haibao , haibao .
and slowly , you start thinking of thinking that sustainable life is less fun than normal .
so , you go to the expo of the expo in the expo , they &apos;re going to take a dänisches wheel , and drive it to the other ständen .
it was interesting because she was nine to 11 , 11 to 11 , and how many billion people should invest in the economy .
this is a standardprodukt from switzerland . switzerland , there &apos;s a national need for diagonalen bedarf .
we often do little movies .
what i &apos;d like to talk about , that &apos;s the largest problems in the world .
but it &apos;s natural , of course , if you &apos;re going to focus people on issues .
so what i &apos;m going to say is , really , for a very long time , we have a situation where we had a very much of choice .
and then you ask , why economists economists ?
but it says that what we can do about it is very little , too much .
the neuerkrankungen of malaria is belaufen a year .
what happens here is that we think about our priorities .
it &apos;s a good movie in terms of what i want to see him is , but don &apos;t expect to casten the emmerich of the next film of brad pitt to casten how he latrinen in tanzania , or something like this .
they had all the same material , but they could actually take the frame of discussion , and they did it , and they did it , and they did it to make their own lists .
his power , wealth and bigger freedom . &quot;
second , china has done it , the ungleiche income income down to lower the political framework .
and freedom found that , even though , in fact , that 50 percent of all countries are democratic today , 70 percent of you are oppressive , which is not rede- or reisefreiheit .
because after all , the question that &apos;s going to be looking forward and seven billion other people on this planet : how can we create wealth wealth ?
the serife is not that place to place .
we &apos;ll really care what really interested in .
it was published six months ago and get rid of the bekommt in germany .
you have to make a corresponding living in the growth of optimal poor .
i think it looks easy to look at human skin , which was fascinated me .
but i think it could be a fairly smarte and sustainable service to our rarer resources .
chinese workers won &apos;t be in factories because of our unersättlichen demand for ipods .
because a person has a time to spend their time to make a piece of something called something that is not going to be a piece of something .
min turned to him and said , &quot; some understand that . you don &apos;t understand anything . &quot;
this is the coach-portemonnaie that i had on the screen on the table in the train .
the taliban run your schools .
when any kid will be caught up to break this rules that &apos;s going to be rough .
when i find suicide bombers , the younger are when i was , or in my age , i feel so inspired by your anschlägen .
and this is going to be going on enceladus , and there are a enceladus , from raumschiffen , who are hopefully in the middle of the future , specifically to make this question .
is the internet actually a place that you can visit ?
and the landscape changes . three years ago , when i started to employ , there was a cable along the african west coast , shown here in this map of steve song .
and that &apos;s not really true .
this data will sent to the device , starting with the device , starting with the basis of the product , and the material layer on layers of layer on layers of layer by the new consumer material in a additiven schicht , which is going to be aufgegossen in the old layer .
she was made by ablagerung by layers of schichten .
a repulsion is probably probably less likely .
they can just make it straight back to the place .
this is made the product .
and i think it &apos;s not a bit of a doubt , i think this technology is a revolution in the production , and the produktionslandschaften of how we know it .
he was concerned that if he called her , especially in this name , especially out of the public , you could think of that , you would think about this notion of jihad .
they use its rhethorik .
the good news is that it &apos;s not like that .
but a lot of these factors that have played a role , now , even more interesting . half the work is done .
i was with my friend susan meiselas , who was fotografin in the mathare valley .
she said , &quot; you know , poverty was not the bad . it was the humiliation and the embarrassment of the whole thing . &quot;
think , i &apos;m going to be the violence or the drugs ? the lack of privacy ?
first , instead of monaten , and i &apos;ll forget the flying and forgetting , was a lot of einprägsamer .
but it &apos;s probably less likely to remain .
and during my first year , i went to my company .
it &apos;s actually told that more energy is going to make a solar cell to make a solar cell , than she &apos;s going to be done in their whole funktionszeit .
solar panels are collecting up there , but four hours a long time .
and they &apos;re also listed it under a large pressure , and therefore dangerous .
this is a wärmekraftmaschine .
it &apos;s just a little cylinder here , the generator , and all the kabelage in the bottom , and this is the hot cylinder , the hot cylinder of the end -- that part of the hot end -- that part of the hot end , which is cold , and it comes out .
you don &apos;t have to use the hot water , it can also be cool .
so here we have a map of the united states .
and we don &apos;t have a geburtsrecht , this energy as fast as we &apos;re doing it .
we bubbles it on and looking at the parts .
it &apos;s a flying lab that we did the measurements in the region .
but i continue to written bad poetry and he never gejagt the mathegebäude into the air , but he &apos;s gone after cuba .
so , from unverständnis , great stuff -- -- -- from which i get a picture of the end of my piece .
i work for new yorkers and i do titelseiten , and then the 11th september , and that was , and that was , &quot; whoa , a völliges end of the world as we knew it .
and then , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , deutlich ! it &apos;s ungebärdig with tongue , but that we understand it . &quot;
&quot; and he decided that his topleute were going to be extinct . &quot;
this man is angry because somebody all over the staircase hat. and basically enshrined -- you know , you know , they seem to be a theme .
and she &apos;s also with george gershwin , so i don &apos;t think about it .
td : since my recent childhood and after , i was a lot of different types of different , and when i was young , i was always used to me that my journey was vorgezeichnet .
this is beautiful , but we should remember that a similar process should be in the same level .
td : lakshmi has incredibly hard work , even for my invitation , let &apos;s get away from everything else , which is , and i was pretty much in a resistent , and i was very nervous in this week .
in these two examples , we &apos;ve seen machines who &apos;ve learned in the simulation , and others who have learned in the reality .
if i say , &quot; we &apos;re going to say , &quot; i mean my advice for aussenbeziehungen .
but no one thinks that it &apos;s actually very effective when there is a real outbreak .
the biggest part of the chinese in the world &apos;s administration bush is actually more likely to connect with anthrax and the threat of the process .
we know that the virus is called the virus . it &apos;s going to be another virus .
but in the scientific community , there &apos;s a raging debate about what percentage of the grippeübertragung between people &apos;s grippeübertragung is through niesen and coughing and how much of the hands happens .
some of the poorer countries that most experienced have been with h5n1 , and they have a few drugs that are already being created .
and i think even our leaders would say in this case , that we have a lot to do .
i &apos;m very excited to answer their questions .
our centers for krankheitskontrolle have a lot of you -- as early diagnostikum .
and in the very bisherigen , there were similar bacterial infections , they were no problem .
don &apos;t just look at how much fun you have to do it , but also how much of the leading beweglichkeit completely changed in the way to interact with a city like san francisco .
please put me a schweigeminute .
i &apos;m going to immerse myself with a young juggler of a force , and he &apos;s a drei for me to sell me .
since i was a kindheit , i played with seilen and climbing , so the case is -- i &apos;m 16 ; i &apos;m going to be a drahtseilkünstler .
and manhattan didn &apos;t go into the infinite .
so i &apos;m not supposed to be straßenjonglieren , right ?
i &apos;m going to be in the middle .
she became one , the trieb me .
because of the überhängenden sheets and branches is very dark and very quiet .
i and my colleagues interested in the dynamics of the baumkronen-pflanzen , which is in the dynamics of the forest .
we &apos;re advising with the media of baumkronen-fragen ; we have a baumkronen-newsletter ; we have mailinglisten .
and then the students came in our aufnahmestudio , and have their own rapsongs in their own beats .
and our new project is that the inmates and we learn ourselves to grow the frog pretiosa , which is a controlled of extinction vom , the aussterben of extinction bedrohte in the states and oregon .
he said , &quot; look what you &apos;re hidden in front of you . &quot;
so we see a rising demand for informationszugang , and therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore , therefore ,
they &apos;re not a magician . they &apos;re not our parents .
you have to believe me . trust me . &quot;
and i learned that day , i learned two really important things .
the deeper we go below , the higher one is the pressure .
so i began 15 years ago .
the air goes into the air , the air goes down , the air comes out of the einatemlunge .
each of these computer can run the entire system , so if two of these are there , there &apos;s no matter .
but this is what it looks like , and this habitat kept going on , over many miles .
so sharks are not quite dangerous as most people .
when we found him , we didn &apos;t even know what family he heard , so we called it ihn , and he was called him after the kinderbuchautor , because he looked like he looked like this as he looked like this .
the same one was a krampf and he &apos;s ertrank .
so this means that every one of you , every one of you here is at least one child that &apos;s a entwicklungsstörung .
and his communication and social interaction conversation with the normale of the normale , and he was able to visit a normal school , and even a karate-superstar .
he &apos;s like the life that you &apos;re in , if you &apos;re in , you can &apos;t even back out .
i know you may never heard of him . but remember that day , one day , you &apos;ll hear you , because he &apos;s hearing a great man . &quot;
nk : no , he died 25 years ago .
he had a lot of love , he loved everybody .
we all , all of us , what happens when a ursuppe look out of hydrogen and helium so long as they start to wonder about their origins .
these extremophilen prove that life can exist in many different environments .
so you have to understand the diversity and the incredible scale of life on this planet in the first step of the first step to get to a contact with life with life in space .
it &apos;s as important as the silicon as the aluminum , and we will be able to expand it , and we &apos;re going to expand it all over 350 antennae , so it &apos;s not the moore &apos;s law .
and then we would like to do the automatisierte quest to improve through human societies .
many say , it &apos;s the best place to study the world of climate change .
everybody cylinder is a parfait of time .
as they were using the ice , they put a couple pair of gloves in a oven , so you can put a new pair of anziehen if your finger will be scanned .
i think i think of this place a little bit of a little bit of ink .
and our soldiers don &apos;t really enjoy the role of the pipelines in weitwegistan , if you actually have the service to beschuetzen the service to beschuetzen american buerger .
you can still push it further , and the efficiency is almost described with some funktionstechnischen improvements and so the gewinnspanne of the big spediteure .
we could build cars , which is going to be the same thing as security , but it should be easy .
but instead , they sell it to china and japan , because we have to have our defenses protecting our maisbauern , and the other ones .
and that &apos;s what the militaer of the brain is the step of the materials of materials , or in this case , in this case , to make the herstellung of ultraleichten stahlsorten , as a good stuetztechnologie , the militaer , the way that it has the darpanet for the internet .
it can &apos;t just take a giant sexistische conspiracy .
there were two kinds of negative feedback that we &apos;ve got .
we hope it really is really getting stable .
hoppla , i &apos;m wrong .
at the end of the end he found a kunsthändler kunsthändler called han called han , who was meegeren that he sold a wonderful vermeer to a price that is about 10 million dollars .
according to his biographen , he looked like he had discovered that he had no time in the world . &quot;
&quot; it comes to it . what is it ? &quot; is a good response .
but how do you find them how much they &apos;re flying or fuzzy , depends on what you think , who you think of it .
but each of those three objects has a value beyond what it is to say , because of its history .
but i don &apos;t want to be a copy , even though i can &apos;t see the difference .
so he brought joshua bell , his millionen-dollar-geige with a subway in washington d.c. , to put a corner , and see how much money he will .
the second shock hurts less because you &apos;re going to be used to a little bit of it .
and if you can weiterlesen , you can see that there &apos;s a kind of a political wertigkeit .
she prahlt that she &apos;s a zertifiziertes , professionelles member of the american verbandes of ernährungsberatern , which is very glamorous and exciting .
and what you find , of course , is that people who eat vegetables and olive oil , less hautfalten .
the placeboeffekt is one of the most fascinating things in the entire world of medicine .
it &apos;s a vorgefasster conclusion , if you &apos;re a drug in such a large dose that it &apos;s more side effects , and that your new drug will look better .
the big trials are closer to the real answer .
this is a problem that is not a solution .
and very soon they &apos;ve been begun to get this coal , tonne , tonne , zugwagon , bootsladung , bootsladung , bootsladung , zurück , back to china and all around the world .
can you imagine , how you feel like you &apos;re feeling like that ?
it &apos;s just about oil ; you know , all knowledge .
there is this thing , the militarisierung of the world , and the stammt is in the middle of the united states .
and what do you see ? you &apos;re christians .
man , americans , are kind of like , &quot; ah , kreuzzug .
these christians are bekloppt .
they &apos;re going to generalize . that &apos;s wrong .
and the soldiers are chinese , and everybody else are chinese .
can you imagine , maybe one of them &apos;s got down to his child &apos;s head and it &apos;s hugging , and said , &quot; honey , i &apos;m a afterwards .
everything has changed .
and all this has huge implications to the world .
i think thomas jefferson has really really good in words .
for the hollywood-menschen of the audience , why action-filme has a bigger budget than komödien , which is that it &apos;s because of action-filme leichter into other languages and cultures , so the market for those movies are bigger .
but it &apos;s going to happen within this century .
this is not the pro-kopf-bip of the u.s. , which is about a million in a million , but gdp per capita -- 200,000 dollars per capita .
and also , as everybody here knows -- it &apos;s about energy , not oil .
my choice is the peak of a lifelong obligation to the aufwachsen of the gulf of the gulf of the gulf alabamas .
a lot of our actions on this planet that are going to be made to our living environment , are just by faith and guess .
one is a series of thousands of years .
we need to reassure down before we cut the planet .
e.o. wilson &apos;s talking about saving the saving of life on earth .
another schlüsselart is the famous european population .
the genome of passenger pigeon milliarden .
the de-extinction of the extinction drops into this category .
real falcon aus aus .
and there is a program to the öko-tourismus , which is just brilliant .
this is an emotional theme . some people are gone .
my grandmother was a hausfrau .
i also made my own comic comic that was another way to tell stories through words and through pictures .
and we sat around , and he said , in silence and he said to me , &quot; you &apos;re really talented . &quot;
use your own style . draw how you tell you .
&quot; rather than jarrett , i &apos;ve got your postkarte .
i &apos;m also going to publish a medical release with the title : &quot; platypus police : the frog who . &quot;
sound affects us all over us , psychologically , cognitively , cognitively , cognitively , cognitively , kognitiv .
this is a 32 million pounds of expensive , so , so universitätsgebaude , which was built recently in england , and it was designed by a british stararchitekten .
but it &apos;s not just kids who are affected .
people who say , let &apos;s say the team not next to this team because the noise may like the noise and the other silence .
&quot; upwake &quot; tells a story about zero , a contemporary man who is carrying in the suitcase of the suitcase with the koffer and reality , and not able to enträtseln both the two .
344 frames and four and four years and a business later , which was a solo-show , a gemeinschaftsarbeit of neunzehn talented .
i know theater to connect us .
now the time , in which we can use the diversity of our talents , to create a smart , so you can create the amazing and remarkable piece of work .
if you look at the bathroom , you look a few products more , like , for example , spülung , spülung , körpercreme , but also .
injizierbares collagen -- or , for the &apos; 70s , collagen of pigs -- is used to inject it in fold .
i found out of 185 products .
and i said , &quot; my love , i &apos;m afraid you have a long and beschwerliches year . &quot;
i told you , you should be a front of the hinsagen , &quot; i &apos;m somebody .
you have the feeling of being someone in a time in which i felt like a nobody felt like .
they &apos;re working on the ninth edition , so it &apos;s going to go back and get the letter .
hundreds of verbs can be so behavior .
you can see that as the language of the mind , or &quot; mentalese . &quot;
so the puzzle is why cancer , höfliche requests , ersuche and drohungen and drohungen and drohungen and drohungen and drohungen .
you can try to imagine what if the language could be used to be used .
and the other puzzle is that i &apos;m not going to have a problem .
here &apos;s my argument . is it haltbar ? is it good ?
it makes it gegnerisch . it &apos;s polarisierend .
what pearl did you get out of it , convince me ?
all these different rollers . can you imagine a argument where they participate in the audience , but also in the audience , and they &apos;re watching the debattieren ?
or -- and this is the most popular part of me : we want to get us into the world of nature . we bring a design-herausforderung and finding the masters of the adaptation in nature that might inspire us .
this changed everything . there were these engineers , these engineers were not in the boat .
here &apos;s the opposite -- here &apos;s how we make things .
this is the national national laboratory .
that would be hochinteressant for fuel , if you could do without any platin .
it &apos;s not easy because life is only going to use a subset of the elements in the periodensystem .
and i &apos;m feeling and it &apos;s a very important thing .
what you don &apos;t see , you can &apos;t count .
my first business was a schneiderei . i started under the taliban .
in the realm of the city and indonesia are almost half a million companies .
because , as the weltwirschaftsforum bemerkt , smaller geschlechterkluften in the direktem of direktem wirtschaftlicher wirtschaftlicher .
and the world in all world are not exceptions .
people jubelten if this entzückung and this one .
i have a klecks bio-joghurt of fröhlichen , himself , even verwirklichenden cows on my arbeitsfläche , and i want to use paper to use it .
first we &apos;ve got it .
what does that mean ?
when i started to employ me to present , i realized that they have incredibly well adapted .
but the researchers had a problem .
until they finally had their degree and the campus left -- and certain happy were coming to come there -- and i was going to come back and see that the crows were still reminded .
we &apos;ve found that they &apos;re really smart and that they can teach each other to each other .
for example , for example , for example , they would be suchen , looking for the peanut and go back .
but there were three problems , three puzzle that i couldn &apos;t solve , and i want to talk about it , but more importantly , i found a lösungsvorschlag .
who would ever hire me ? &quot;
and imagine what happens to what happens , because every region has something to offer .
let me make the connection .
you know that there &apos;s the future of the future . you have to understand that .
that &apos;s a lot to vereinfachend .
oh yeah , i &apos;m going to be the johnny tail of the sounds .
each of about 10 million phagen .
and here we see over here , with the words of the radiologists israel , &quot; how the hand of the penis in a way of masturbationsbewegungen . &quot;
and she said , &quot; yes , but i would rather be just not until the end , if they don &apos;t have anything . &quot;
i said , &quot; you should make a experiment .
he had a line of a line in his book , which was allegedly from the habsburg-monarchie , there was a kaiserin maria maria in the conception .
so now you have a evolutionary excuse .
she said -- i have to read you what she said , because i think it &apos;s so beautiful .
i find that unfortunate thing . not , because i want him to use it . i wanted to see him .
and that &apos;s actually the beginning of our history .
now , i would have thought that at age 50 , one of the things that i really had to know , was my shoes .
first of all , i have to tell you that i &apos;m not from here .
yes . the artist doesn &apos;t seem to know where he should be hinmalen the different colors .
but i can see in their faces , they &apos;re still a little bit skeptical .
it &apos;s called &quot; unbenannt , &quot; and i think that &apos;s appropriate .
and after a while i decided to have a fun , and before i left the room in the morning , i put a few things in the room .
and now you &apos;re all here .
my dad was one , my youth was really interesting .
the song as mere .
i &apos;m so sure , &quot; well , i &apos;m going to be good enough -- i &apos;m going to give me the wheels , and i bought it in the auffälligen , and i built them , and i put it in -- i would go to my sonderbeleuchtung ?
it sounds simple , but i think we have in our society and culture with the absichtlichkeit .
he had designed the sonden himself , and he was really pleased to be on it .
human , i love the thing .
the consequences of a planet , in the average billion people .
especially proud of the time , he was on the cushy seat , the real seat he had posted his triumphwagen , and the beautiful stofffransen around the seat around the seat .
intent -- a life with intent -- consciously conscious , the original thing about the original nachsingen .
i saw the healthy mass of a left and i trauerte that she was lost , and i was losing all the way i didn &apos;t do , but not more possible .
then i began to wonder how many times before , i think , how much more times before i have been different , if this man didn &apos;t hurt me if my genes had a different portion of experience .
i was , but i was now in a gehbehinderung , and i suspect , so i was going to myself myself .
i had a much simpler einfacheres : this türkische dessert to trade four words and to make me go back to my journey .
he spent six months in jail , lost his lkw-führerschein for a decade .
yes , contrast .
we work with the machine at the machine at the university of california , san diego .
first , the perception of people , and secondly , a natural interface , a natural interface , so that the interaction of the roboter is going to be intuitive .
and yet i made this idea to this idea .
after i &apos;ve done this economic danger , i thought we have to find a solution to this problem .
some have a lot of referenzen to eingebaut how to speak in nathan ways of talking to the nathan , or the one of tim ferriss that might be seen as a function .
i don &apos;t know a tedtalk , which includes this includes .
this time , i paid 25 cents because i thought that was a little bit harder .
and yet , there was one thing that all was secure , the expansion had to slow down .
keep the mystery of the dark energy in the back , because i &apos;m going to give you three schlüsselfakten to string theory .
the kandidatenliste stieg on about 10 feet tall .
and he was working on the number of this number , but he didn &apos;t have success , and we know why .
each of those universes has extra dimensions .
because the astronomers of today , by taking the powerful telescopes to the sky , discover a handful of hochinformativer photons -- a kind of kosmisches telegramm , billion years .
now , i want to be honest with you , and you tell you that most of it is only a trick , but a trick that actually works .
remember , it &apos;s the first time you meet it . we want to do it , but we want to do it really , and yet .
he said , &quot; go , milo . zertritt . &quot;
pm : this is dimitri in wettbewerbsstimmung .
we don &apos;t know anybody .
the next moment , the phone doesn &apos;t work , the television goes out , bewaffnete men are in the street .
it was a very famous gathering of the reporters that had been working on the war , the employees of aid , and of course , the mutigen , tapferen people .
if i &apos;m going to ask why i keep going on kriegsberichterstattung why i &apos;m going to be doing this , that &apos;s why i &apos;m going to do it .
but it &apos;s my job of this testimony , and this is the krux , the core of the things that we &apos;re doing .
even before a goal appears to be the joystick of the joystick , and the way they &apos;re trying to find the target of the target , no matter where it is .
basically , we &apos;re going to do the animals that they learned to control these avatare and objects in the virtual world .
in a experiment that we did a few years ago , we went to the limit .
so we start in china .
so , dai manju was done .
please raise your hand .
the last reason is that the last reason is that women are part of the solution , not the problem .
in the niger , in the average , one of seven women in childbirth at birth .
it became part of the solution , not the problem .
larry summers , when he was chefökonom the world bank of the world bank , once said , &quot; it can be good to be the ausbildung in the developing world in the developing world . &quot;
this is bill easterly &apos;s book .
and that was the feather of a bird .
this whole gyre to tell us a single wesensmerkmale tells us that there is a klärungsbedarf .
and even this image makes the suspects of the tube , zurechtgebastelt -- like something from the barnum &amp; amp ; bailey .
so one of those possibilities was that we can have a little bit of familiengruppen in small rooms .
they put their arrowheads and say , &quot; i want to trade this arrowheads against the fertige arrows . we share 50 to 50 .
there are places on this island where they all can do three or four miles on a new language .
if 27 individuals turned out of these 27 , and they were put in a table , their 23 languages , then you &apos;ll just get a very simple thing to tell you a army of 253 übersetzern to be prepared to all the possibilities of all possibilities .
but it doesn &apos;t tell us that they &apos;re also talking about language .
and what i &apos;m most interested in most of the most is the invisible space between a text and the theme image , and how the image is changing by the text , and the text through the image .
these are transatlantische unterwasser-kommunikationskabel that are verlaufen in the ocean of the atlantic ocean and north america .
they turn the negative to do .
but through the sense of phantombildern , polaroids , fahndungsfotos and gegenüberstellungen , can change the zeugenaussagen .
larry youngblood saß eight years of a ½ haftstrafe , in arizona , in arizona , for the kidnapping and wiederholten mißbrauch of a 10jährigen boy on a jahrmarkt .
before , people are leaving themselves .
and they made them take for us to texas .
and now you &apos;re driving with the kind of the same thing where you &apos;re in this moment .
it &apos;s just the vast of the space that makes it look like anything .
so you &apos;re called a sense of a feeling , which is the pursuit of happiness and human design .
so , partly , it &apos;s been the legacy of the erbe , the pessimisten , which is the pursuit of happiness for vergebliche &apos;s pursuit of vergebliche , it &apos;s going to be driven by infantilen aspects of the patient , and it might not be found in the reality .
a hauptpunkt of happiness is that happiness and happiness doesn &apos;t look at a closed continuum .
it starts in the ventralen of the tegentum .
here &apos;s a three weeks later .
in the animal kingdom , there &apos;s only one possibility to increase the status of the status , which is dominance .
i want to close with some quotes .
why would you choose rats ?
once the rat that was understood , we can actually make the job a little bit .
you can actually heal t.b. , even in people who are hiv-positive .
with the knowledge that a patient is unentdeckt to 15 people -- 15 people -- a year , you can be sure that we have a lot of lives .
here we see neurons .
so the important thing for imitation and emulation .
now , the question is , if i just watch another person touched , why i &apos;m not confused , literally , literally , literally , literally , literally , literally , i literally moved this berührungsgefühl from the naked to the naked , how somebody will ever get touched ?
thank you . i have two missions here .
i don &apos;t really go to the pflanzenvermehrung , but to be the pollen itself .
all these pictures were taken through a rasterelektronenmikroskop by the way by the way by kew .
even every single one of us has a single story to tell us the pollenfingerabdruck .
we have to be as well as the breast cancer campaign to tackle this crisis .
right at the time , in the 1980s , when we were going to go back and forth , and death rate and death rate and they had a editorial for the new england journal of medicine and called the yentl-syndrom .
our colleagues in washington , d.c. , d.c.
we decided , &quot; let &apos;s look at this . &quot;
unlike computertomographie , x-ray , röntgen , thallium , thallium , for women , for women , every time we &apos;re doing something , which is just a little bit of radiation , we &apos;re going to ask , &quot; is this test really necessary ? &quot;
okay , here we have .
you &apos;ve done what they said , they have fürsprache and they have campaigns beigetreten .
the cells have something like heimweh ; in the frame , they &apos;re not making .
what does that mean for us ?
in the course of three years , we took a day eight to 10 hours to produce a viertelmillion stunden ton- and bildmaterial .
this is one of the first fazits that &apos;s a little bit more than a year , which we really surprised us .
and finally , my son in a gehhilfe .
three of the most important people in this project , philip decamp , rony roy roy .
and there &apos;s a fascinating dynamic in the game .
this is the first time our son more than two steps , and i put it in the movie .
and that &apos;s a vital question . because the better we understand how the brain is generating meaning , the better we can communicate . i think , the better we can do together and work together .
it &apos;s a kind of center where you see a picture and think , &quot; oh ! i have a very strong or emotional reaction to the back of the back . &quot;
what we &apos;re literally doing is our team anzuweisen the entire strategieplan on a big wall .
this is the first house i built .
it &apos;s not just about hygiene , but also to be able to take care of the possibilities .
so , there &apos;s not a guy .
if you translated into the room , if you have a fensterwand , and a window is broken , and we &apos;re going to be the same , &quot; oh no , that &apos;s the must be .
that &apos;s the difference .
so we &apos;ve got it on .
are we just stupid ?
you can &apos;t be able to change it in two years , if you read eight hours per day .
so she can be hereinstolzieren in september of september , and say , &quot; i &apos;m important .
why do you do not do that , and why don &apos;t you do that ? &quot;
and the police waiting for the eintreffen of the fire department to cut the vehicle in pieces to cut the body of the site .
and that &apos;s enough to the present with the dollarschein in the united states , on the united states , on the line of the divine fügung .
all of this leads us to -- computersucht , just to name the time , what we &apos;re most doing is we &apos;re doing the most important devices .
this is the implication of the destruction of more than a third of the brain in the right .
this is a very , very low level to get out of the healthcare system .
he gave my jaw in the right position during the right position as he kieferorthopädisch my teeth .
alfred mann is a brilliant physicist and innovator , who &apos;s been fascinated with , gaps in consciousness , whether he &apos;s a tauben of the mind , or a blind that &apos;s going to see or a paralyzed the movement .
now i had to see in the dark years , the followed figure out what was going on that i was doing this particular .
and it works . it works .
lp : so if you have the opportunity to spend time with simon .
and these were the developing world : they had large families and a relatively short life .
and those are on this page . a large überlappung of africa and the one of africa and the one of africa and the der of africa .
and then deng xiaoping and brought money after china and brought back to china and they got the land again .
a search , we can copy the data in a durchsuchbares format and publish and publish it around and see what we &apos;re going to do ?
but this is what we do .
you know , darwin has been explaining that , after it happened , what was the essence of life ?
and there i learned francis crick .
there were the literature in the literature .
we weren &apos;t the best chemists in the room .
i was unhappy , and i didn &apos;t get married me .
you can actually compare dna origami and compare the krebsbefallener to the races .
and so i &apos;m going to finish by saying that we &apos;ve looked at 20 people with schizophrenia .
spend the defense costs in one case of a case two million dollars and take 18 months if they win .
first , fighting , they don &apos;t fight against the patent , but fighting against the verstoß .
my solution : give me this patent and i &apos;ll let you go to the trollbeschwerden .
&quot; why not ? &quot; , asked girls .
the fathers were in a place where they &apos;re moving their daughters to play their daughters , their chairs and their hand to dance .
that &apos;s a great technology .
it &apos;s not very much left to the world .
it can &apos;t survive for a long time in people .
can the enemy of the most people don &apos;t see most of the time , and we needed another approach to eradicate polio than we had done it with smallpox .
it helped have helped control pandemische grippen , for example .
the reality of polio today is something different .
and yet , the impossible is happened .
bill gates : now bruce bruce where are from their most vulnerable places ?
bruce aylward : how we &apos;re going to bring polio content to the standstill for the next to the standstill .
dj : we found this individualismus now in all kinds of animals , especially in the way .
and our surprise was a kultfilm .
for us , this elephant is a symbol of inspiration , a symbol of that hope that we &apos;ve been doing with our work .
it was incredibly amazing than she took it in security to protect it before the hyena .
and of course , if i look at these löwentatze , the gehäutet , she &apos;s got me in a human way , and that &apos;s ironic because your destiny is in our hand .
we need it . we respect to each other and a zelebrieren and woman , as a community and the part of this planet and we need to keep doing it .
it seems to be obvious that the earth is large and bewegungslos , the sun &apos;s sun and fluid , but it &apos;s worth remembering what wittgenstein is going to be once in anmerkte .
and that &apos;s because in middle of the middle ages , there is always the same time .
nature &apos;s nature depends on this , which is kind of animal .
because there are so many of them , and because between you don &apos;t have any consensus to be einigkeit , verharrt of their bevorzugten , verharrt , as we see him in middle world , and stuck .
people like machines are actually wissenschaftlich and philosophisch , but it &apos;s a hinderliche time when you want to change what the job is going to be next .
i was born for the nacht tetraplegiker at the wheels of 40 years .
so , over a moment i put on my head , allowing me to see these web-schnittstellen , videos from robot to see and send out to the robot in a web-browser .
with the help of people , how do we actually do this dream .
in the oceanography , for example , a regelrechtes lexicon is developed by the delphinsprache , by basically the radarstrahlen that they &apos;re using dolphins .
i think we can form a global community .
this is a hot trending topic .
now there are some -- there are some lessons that you can learn from it .
but we don &apos;t normally do this .
i think we &apos;re going to think of this , the infrastructure of globalization .
that &apos;s now about 12 to 15 percent .
this is a problem that we have to solve .
i &apos;m also going to think that most of you don &apos;t speak chinese -- what really sad is , if you think that this is the most frequent language in the internet .
what do you look at ? maybe we should do this .
if you look at this image , you might think , &quot; why should i care about that ? &quot;
but there are all these different techniques that allow you to look at a allow you and look at the world and find his place in it .
they would bring wealth and security , religious violence and make sure that never had never been terroristen .
and part of this activity is honesty .
what is that ?
i love this dish .
and the war , who was the 20 million people living fulfilling -- until today &apos;s most corrupt civil war .
lem sen , who &apos;s this guy , &quot; i have all this money , but i &apos;ve spent all this time to searching the american man who had stolen my prescription .
chinese restaurants have done the same thing , i would argue with the menü and the dekor -- even the restaurant name -- but without a centralized headquarters .
in contrast , we have general tso that in new york city in the early 1970s , when i was just in the early 1970s , when i was just in new york city in new york city , so ...
so what we &apos;re seeing in the 17th century , the 18th century , is the fortgeführte search for medicine , which creates the same thing .
so people would have a really big seizure , and people would have a big seizure .
when the überweisungen started to become less juice , i was always eindeutig to the bis until i thought my god , i can &apos;t work .
remember , you know , you know , as a kid &apos;s kid to have to get to any line ?
at 18 and 19 , i fell night .
whenever i get back and then again , i &apos;ll be something depressed and something more concrete .
many of us is clear that it &apos;s a lot of a lot of the time to do with the greater world .
he goes around , &quot; how do it feel to be free ? &quot;
you know , where was the world at the treatment of the known issues of the known problems , which is spread from the potential of earthquakes and climate change ?
if you render the impossible , you can do it .
but we &apos;ve achieved a agreement to climate change .
and there &apos;s god &apos;s crying .
the seideraupe power does something : they use two ingredients , proteins and water that are in their spinndrüse , to create a material that is as an essential , which is a tremendous visual part of the fibers that are fasern .
or you &apos;re erzeugst , you know , lovely things like this , if the camera can capture it .
here you see how it &apos;s taken from the tissue .
with my new project , marilyn , i want to use art to create technology .
there &apos;s a microphone that &apos;s going on and the round of the sun and the buh-rufe -- hopefully -- hopefully -- hopefully -- to help him help him meet some of his next choices .
what should i do ? &quot;
in addition to this yet , unprecedented knight , stellt knight knight data , a roboter-bühnenkomiker knight , which is a roboter-bühnenkomiker , which is sammelt more than einzeiler herunterzuleiern -- he &apos;s collects the feedback of his audience and so , and so his behavior is the answers to the answers .
stanley chemical , the inventor of the known bekannten of separation , vermutete vermutete , vermutete in the 60-er and 70-ern , that there are between two people &apos;s only one connection between five and seven .
how does our view of relations on relations is to be completely verstreuten ?
but there was a vorkommnis that i &apos;m going to tell you , and where he might have been able to put this out of this experiment .
whoa ... my dad , a geheimagent ?
it was his father who decided they needed false papers .
this sense of the responsibility of the life of the life had been in the lifetime of his life , despite his young people , and also his fault , he was a überlebender , as he was a lager , he kept his life .
and while my halbschwester and my halbbruder gave up to me , sozusagen , like , my father falsche .
i asked him , given the victims he had ever made , whether he ever had ever seen .
we &apos;re growing from a few million people to the seven billion people that we are today .
the arctic , a beautiful system , a regulierendes biom , which is a klimawandelschlag after the next einsteckt , which is the seemingly state in a good state .
if you were the forests of forests , the border of the landnutzung , you can get the ability to remain stable .
with the realization of tourbetreibern , fishermen , the australian great barrier reef and scientists that the great barrier reef is verdammt in the current kontrollregime .
but the drama is , of course , that &apos;s clear that kleinschrittiger change is not a option .
that leads me to another reason why i &apos;m here today , because i really like the way i really like this kind of way .
this is a überrest of a race of a race .
first , he &apos;s using a ancient kind of manufacturing , the relief and the associated with a three-dimensional perspective , which is a whole new technology to this time .
and through the process of sugar , schwarzem paper , i hired portraits of them .
it became very large images , and i took them with a very large camera , a 8x10 camera .
my interest in schauspielerei , particularly bad schauspielerei , very far .
back back back , a sequence of the chimps .
we can ask , there is there &apos;s an important differences between africans and nichtafrikanern ?
and then you can compare it with the genome of living people .
we can then ask ourselves for the denisova-mensch , how for neanderthal , you have sich with the people of modern humans ?
there are a lot of people who make their own eyes , like this vision of the 20th century .
after my conviction , the airplane of the future is the future of his mind .
imagine , imagine kohlenstoff-nanoröhren in 3d printers , and are in a kunststoffmatrix embedded , and follow the forces that are in their components .
they don &apos;t talk . but most of all , they were extraordinary isolated around the world around them , from their environment .
they would be zurückweichen . they would call the police .
now we know it &apos;s about a hundred of 100 .
you see a video , and you see a video .
you feel that the sense that the research that you have , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , really , that you can actually prevent those experience that i had to be able to prevent my journey on this area .
then you add off .
zuallerst verkrampfst you in a starren body -- chin on the brustbein , poor ausgestreckt , ausgestreckt your reservefallschirm .
they did all the same as we did .
and after the battle , they bring this mobile phone , and they do what you call &quot; nachbesprechung , to teach you what you did .
people have changed .
i said , &quot; where is he ? &quot;
that &apos;s not a piece of a piece .
and they showed up the left of the left to tell me how problematic this image was to zusammenhing it for the idea of idee , which was the schwarze .
it &apos;s really in this sense of enteckung that i have a new set of questions that i &apos;m going to ask .
now , that &apos;s a obvious statement .
and the kids said , &quot; how are we going to do this . &quot;
i think they &apos;re trying to try to pay numbers .
so i said , &quot; how long you know , before you knew that you didn &apos;t know that you didn &apos;t understand ? &quot;
their punktezahl increased elevated , which is the way we neu schools in the dehli of iron .
76 percent . it &apos;s a test , two months later , the result of 76 percent .
after eight ted talks , he wanted to be leondardo da vinci .
these are the most common .
suddenly i looked out of the darkness of the darkness of the platzes , which was a glitzern of mirrors that were taken by the moon .
if i had to reduce the whole story on a picture , what would it be ?
i &apos;m going to show you some clips from my other big project in this year . &quot; the tempest .
and our little life ends up into a sleep .
bono : &quot; you &apos;re mythologien .
i know you understand this .
so blue , blue , everything , everything was blue .
i want to tell you two stories . both play in africa .
it &apos;s one more of the things that are about health and business .
let &apos;s use the markets that we use , we have the empfindlichste of the spürgerät that we have , and figure out what price people pay for the people that would pay for the election .
thank you .
the faustregel was this : if my mother couldn &apos;t understand it , we couldn &apos;t use it in the video .
we destroyed two klaviere and 10 .
the little neigte that &apos;s going to take off from its trace , and that was a problem .
this is pretty good . it &apos;s going to slow down .
i would like to show you a clip of a few of the things i &apos;m working with .
tissue of berechenbarer density and behavior is the second part , and that &apos;s actually going to be the key to use these models for wirkstoffforschung .
thank you .
the trying to try to fly it as the attempt to shoot a arrow to shoot the gefederten , and it was hard work , and boy , boy , i &apos;ve learned a lot of respect for nature .
now , let &apos;s look at the other side .
we work on projects -- even flügelschlagenden developments , as schwärmer as schwärmer -- with darpa , the california institute of technology and the university of angeles .
be careful , you just behave like wood or something like wood or something like that .
now i don &apos;t really do not going to be besserwisserisch .
they go go on forever .
this is over two billion .
it takes him to him after about a schätzung about three years .
forget about the one .
but for me , it &apos;s great because it &apos;s a metaphor for the time that we live in the human mind , in the human mind , and we can win machines .
i have a really slow mass . where come from ?
it &apos;s too worry that the way in the arts in the wild are extinction in 20 or 30 years .
all of the evidence of deuteten insisting that this cancer is done by a virus .
i took the opportunity to come true and a few samples from jonas &apos; tumor , and some samples in some samples .
she brought him to the veterinarian and this fish discovered something called something .
finally , cancer is a unvermeidbare episode of our cells to share our cells and adapt to their environment .
and i &apos;m not alone .
and that &apos;s a global phenomenon .
they would be draufzahlen to wait for it .
and that &apos;s the third reason why a low expectation doesn &apos;t make a low .
but they didn &apos;t know that the numbers are zutrafen .
so , i &apos;m going to first show you the durchschnittswerte for the hillside to the optimism bias .
but the good news is that our illusion is not broken , if we &apos;re going to be aware of this .
but what we &apos;re going to see in the 21st century is asia , the gradually that gradually leaves the way to be more than half the world &apos;s population , and over half of the global economy .
you could look at this as the privatization of the kriegs .
after 1958 , the soviets sputnik had hochschossen , it was , &quot; this is the end of america . &quot;
if you live in japan or newly neu , or hanoi their view of china &apos;s ascent of china , something that if you &apos;re in beijing as if you live in beijing .
and if we have strategies in which we are able to bring this into bigger context , we &apos;re going to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to do this process .
how do we define our national interests , so it &apos;s not just a nullsumme ergibt. but the positive of the positive , but it &apos;s not only a nullsumme of the way that it &apos;s a bit of a nullsumme machine .
that &apos;s the konventionelle approach to the conventions of the approach .
this has typically typically typically typischerweise the responsibility to entsenden a stable sicherheitslage .
they &apos;re langfristig .
jobs for who ? especially for young men .
after the law that we have , you cannot get to get a moment .
the supply of the own , after the conflict , after conflict , government .
this is the silhouette of my hometown of new orleans .
the military has been . they call the climate change , the security of a security and stability , whereas governments in the world is discussing how governments are going to be about reacting .
it allows you to become more productive , so that you can afford to be able to afford the insurance self .
these are probably most examples of examples of this solutions , if we feel able to understand the way we plan for a change in the world .
listen , as chinese students put english english by it .
teacher : perfect ! students : perfect !
and the difference of the concrete world with klassifikationen auszukleiden , abstraktionen , abstraktionen , abstraktionen , which we &apos;re trying to do with the logisch consistent , and we also take the hypothetical seriously , we &apos;re more likely to ask ourselves what is what it is .
luria looked at the wissenschaftliche of the scientific age , and he found that these people were resistant to one of the world &apos;s largest world .
and luria said , &quot; at the north pole , there &apos;s always snow .
they chose albany instead of new york .
it wasn &apos;t just the spread of the kognitiv of the kognitiv .
would you have to be killed it ? &quot;
you might say , a halbkreis .
it feels like i was in a colony of angels . &quot;
and they flehten me to do a degree in something .
he &apos;s still in the red numbers , but chris made it with personal sacrifices , this film .
i &apos;m a yours .
there is a prime minister , aussenminister , verteidigungsminister and a finanzchef , or president of the rechnungshofes .
boy : &quot; the weltfrieden-spiel is serious .
we were all the mad to you , &quot; why do you do that ?
that &apos;s going to be much more true when they read him . &quot;
we had the game for the school for weeks , about seven weeks , and we had all over 50 wochen krisen .
and we have 600 billion dollars .
many people are kündigten bezahlte jobs and schlossen the nationalbewegung .
it &apos;s like your little connection .
if i &apos;m all three legs of it , in the three peaks of the triangle , i would get a tetraeder .
so anything you do -- it &apos;s a very provokante framework -- this old fahrradschlauch , and this old plastic &#91; unclear &#93; &#91; unclear &#93; , this füllventil is very simple in an old fahrradschlauch .
this is possible if you had a whole piece of paper -- you can be in a kommunalen school , or in a government school , a leaf , a ruler and a pen , no one , no scheren .
what we &apos;re doing is a very simple elektromotor .
this is a little straw what you do , is this two corners here , it &apos;s going to be a babykrokodilmaul .
here are two magnets .
it was very many passengers on the ship , and they were bored , so she invited the captain they invented .
in the ink conference , shows arvind gupta , and yet , astounding plans to turn waste in the way , to turn waste in real time , gut constructed konstruierte , and they can build the basic principles of science and design .
it was a big challenge , and it was actually examples of the biology that many clues are .
and there are a few examples of projects that are trying to mimic the versuchen of ecosystems .
and with a little planning , we can actually put a place from traffic to a turn into a turn , which is open to open space for people , and people are connecting to food and waste to get waste into opportunities .
this photograph was made a day at the day , and only a year later , it looked like this .
if you &apos;re reading seawater , the first thing is calcium carbonate .
no , you have to have to see the people who are struggling with visionen with the visions of visionen . &quot;
i looked at somebody who &apos;s jewish , because i &apos;m jewish , and i &apos;m very important .
but the real reinfall was that there were very many men who wanted to wanted me to go .
very few of us have the ability to be absolutely honest with himself .
he likes to travel , unless it &apos;s not a kreuzfahrtschiff .
i tried to be basically how to be smileygirl1978 .
because you remember my punktesystem , you have to reach a mindestpunktezahl of 700 points and nobody did .
most of you are . gamer are at average age old , not eight years , and if we look at the hochgerechnete of the computerspielens , the gamer of tomorrow is old .
imagine , you know , their vision is very , very good .
these gamer have even a lot of other benefits in terms of attention , and a aspect of attention that also is clearly improves , is our ability to track objects in our environment .
i want to ask you to remember this outcome , and it &apos;s in the context of a different group of technologienutzern , one group that are in our society , which is in the society , the men are doing .
so let me put this step with this one , with a problem that &apos;s called mental waves .
it &apos;s the idea of computation .
let &apos;s just take all kinds of the special case , we &apos;re walking .
so it was a big , very complex project , which i didn &apos;t even know if it was all at all .
so wolfram alpha knows about many and many things .
on one hand , we have mathematica , with the kind of imagery , formaler language and a large network of sorgfälltig developed , able to do a lot of lines .
so , with physical materialuntersuchungen , we &apos;re basically used to go around the world and see that certain kinds of things are made for certain kinds of technological and so on .
a few years ago , i was pretty excited to the discovery that there are a lot of universes that are linked to incredibly simple rules that have a special relativity and the general relativity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and gravity and
sw : i think i think .
and during this time , i lost more relatives , and teachers , who were ausbildeten me , and i &apos;m excited to hiv / aids .
they jump up . they wear red clothing .
my mom was a woman , she didn &apos;t have a right to the mountain , and automatically gehörte everything that my family had , anyway , it had the right thing .
and the day we were told by the actual ceremony we were excited , and they didn &apos;t sleep all night .
he was wearing it , and this is in a village that hasn &apos;t even gepflasterte in the village . it was very attractive .
i promised him to be a braves girl , i would come back and do everything she would ask me from me .
if it was pregnant before the marriage , the mother did make it accountable and punished .
as we speak here , there are never told their bets .
consumers , the 72 percent of the american theater are beginning to begin to actually use exactly like banks and businesses , their fremdkapital , selbst , itself , to liberate themselves from verpflichtungen and risks that are moving forward .
and what you &apos;re looking at here is the entire phenomenon of the fact that we actually actually vortreten , and in the principle of education , the future children of our households .
sterilisationen are in 48 percent , which is called the cornell of the land .
we also watch a trend too bescheidenerem tourism . right ?
one of them is the erstarken of community and neighborhood , and the third of neighbors and the zunehmender of neighbors .
we also observe a big heimwerker-bewegung .
the trend is immense .
and then we take the phenomenon of kogi .
and then i came to me , i &apos;m the only one that does something like this ?
you could get them in .
this is what i do in my life -- stories tell , novels , novels , and today i want to share with you a few stories about the art of storytelling and also some of some of the human creatures that are dschinns .
our vorstellungkraft could be shrinking . our hearts could verkümmern , and our menschlichkeiten could verdorren verdorren , if we were in a long time in our cultural kokons .
i &apos;m going to see the first time i call it , &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot;
i &apos;m not a immigrantin , no flüchtling or exilantin , i &apos;m going to ask why i do that . but the other way between the languages enables me to reinvent myself .
he wanted to see a manifestation of my identity .
my tiny story was a huge amount of matter because i &apos;ve been prosecuted .
literature has to lead to the other side .
i could have a novel about a muslim lady , and maybe that will be a happy story . and in my next book i might write about a gutaussehenden , schwulen professor in norway .
so you &apos;re remixt . you &apos;re already existing songs , you get it in little bits , and it &apos;s going to take off , you get a new song , but this new song is clearly made out of old liedern .
instead , we use these laws and laws around the world , the more democratic and the more likely to the property .
it &apos;s a 28-seitiges software-patent , but i &apos;m going to summarize what it says , spoiler alarm , the entriegeln of the telephone , by using a symbol with his finger .
our creativity comes from outside , not from inside .
and then you say , &quot; okay , but how do you see what ? &quot;
in fact , it &apos;s not my fault ; it &apos;s the newspaper &apos; guardian .
what &apos;s beautiful , you can probably see these limb there , a kind of undeutlicher rauchfahne , which is beinah from the limb .
our study of the solar system taught us that the solar system is beautiful .
now , this led to a understanding of the world &apos;s structure , because it &apos;s so erkärt that atoms have a single core , with elektonen , who circle it .
this picture shows a galaxy , a allerweltsgalaxie , and you know , 100 billion stars like our sun .
i think she can also finally , and the tiefstgreifenden ideas can be freilegen for us to our place in the universe and really worth the value .
this is here . this is at home . we are .
and with every aspect of the screen , we let &apos;s let the screen as hänsel and gretel brotkrumen , our personal information all over our way through the digital woods .
when our daughter was at the frühstückstisch , i said , &quot; will you do a lot of a lot of money on musical competence ? &quot;
we can &apos;t even get untätig .
now , i want to take you to this trip .
and because i was so much of wonder , and i talked to my 27th birthday that i didn &apos;t talk a day -- a day .
and they don &apos;t talk ?
and i explained to the help of a friend that i understood my language , that i was going to be john francis , i didn &apos;t talk about it , and that this was the last time that someone would be translating my language .
and i think , i &apos;m going to take my backpack back .
i started talking to speak , because i had studied umweltwissenschaften .
but the unterscheid was that i was thinking about every birthday of my silence , but never , i never thought about my decision , only my feet .
and born , and i grew up in north korea .
sometimes i found little jobs in the exchange of food .
i was worried that i would be able to get out of the gefasst and then .
i felt so wonder because i had so much to eat the south of america , but my father had died .
but i firmly believe that their commitment of love and the other people can save another joseph and thousands of other josephs , which is still the hope that still have hope .
it &apos;s very complicated to test new materials for buildings , but this was much more interesting than i expected to do , and i &apos;m making it to make a wasserdicht , and as a industrieller werkstoff .
but then i was very disappointed with my career as an architect , because we don &apos;t help , we don &apos;t work for society , but for the people who are , rich , rich , the government .
and then in the next year , 1995 , there was a big earthquake in japan .
so , i wonder what is a permanentes and what a temporäres building ?
but this is really necessary .
so , we &apos;re learning some of the most important things in our lifetime before we &apos;re born , in the womb .
so , even the fetuses learn that certain language that will talk about the world in the world that they &apos;re born in .
it &apos;s a mixture of the influences that &apos;s so individually and curious , like the woman itself .
why should we have malnutrition in the womb ?
you can also see ptsd , but also with other eyes .
this trust is in the fiktive , for each type of theatralik .
the audience are going to be hingeleitet on mutmaßungen , which is quite logical , but not with the übereinstimmen of what &apos;s going on . &quot;
and if it &apos;s a good story , it may not even be the smile .
you may remember that , maybe as the aol-time warner-fusion , ok , and then , as the most important deal of all the time .
if you &apos;re a blind animal in the savings and someone says , &quot; what does it actually actually do the moral eliminating the way the way the way the world &apos;s relative to the world ? &quot;
they said , &quot; can we start a werbekampagne ?
this is actually a strategy , and i &apos;m not not paying attention to a role .
for me , the music became the music .
now , if i use my software , the camera sees the infrarotpunkt , and they &apos;re used to the place of the kamerapixel in relation to the projektorpixeln , and you &apos;ve got a whiteboard .
i remember the poor little bit of a little bit -- eating clothing , clothing , shelter -- what they didn &apos;t .
i even felt a anflug of shame aufgrunddessen .
now , because i heard him speak , i was excited for different reasons .
i didn &apos;t even asked a donation , which was my way my way my way .
it &apos;s about the wiedererzählen of the poor and it &apos;s about a way to give us a way to engage a way of getting a way of getting a way of getting a partnerschaft , which is a partnership , which is a very , partnerschaft , which is , in a traditional way .
it &apos;s a widespread combination of combination , a very strong combination .
currently is profounder at the beginning , and it &apos;s been a fühlbar for me to realize that it &apos;s just a vehicle , just a tool .
what does the future of mankind ?
now , i &apos;m going to take a second big question , and we &apos;re alone there , or are there other life in the universe ?
the answers to these big questions that we &apos;ve done a population in the last hundred years .
see this .
here are photos of me .
the rate was even more 18 every 18 months and every eingetragene member of the digerati white , that &apos;s the mooresche law .
but what about them ? what is going to do with them ?
they sail them in their little untertassen , and occasionally they &apos;re entführen people for experiments that they wouldn &apos;t agree with their parents .
so we &apos;re interested in things like this .
and earlier generations generations couldn &apos;t do this experiments at all .
and i found out that the first technology of 2,6 vor millions of years of steinwerkzeugen .
we can learn a lot of them .
and i see sorgenvoll and trying to protect my kid because with a child you can &apos;t even alone even not a minister of a child .
and second , she told us that she had a aufrechten gang , but some tweaks for the trees .
now , until now our ancestors are our ancestors in the principle of adults , because the fossils , the baby-fossilien , the baby-fossilien .
the paläoanthropologe zeresenay alemseged studies the origins of mankind in the deep ethiopia , and he talks about how he found the oldest of a humanoid child , and what we can learn in africa .
and if all of the rules are going to be , you need to have a effektives system to the violence and rechtsdurchsetzung. because how we &apos;ve been able to find out all kinds of control .
it &apos;s considered as high seas because the continent was ausgenommen by territorialen ansprüchen .
we have to work in , but also the whole seebecken .
we have to create a new paradigm of caution and respect .
carol coletta says , &quot; i would pay to pay what i do . &quot;
that was a pretty good idea .
to say it &apos;s clear , i &apos;m a journalist , no technologist , so i want to design a sketch of what the present and the future will look like .
i think we think we all have to think about whether we want our reality -- and if what it means for our idea of life , and everything that comes out of it .
it looks like oil spills .
the symptoms of the complex is that you have the strong and unveränderliche opinion , the right solution to the right solution , no matter how difficult it is .
cesar and i tried to write a paper for the new york times and explaining how it works .
of course we can .
and make a lot of money .
it &apos;s for example , for example , as the ausfallquote of americans .
and we &apos;re going to try and do this . probably all right .
immediately . &quot;
taniyama tried to do it again , but he could never prove the presumption .
i &apos;m saying that our approach is not just about it .
china wants to have achieved this already in 20 years .
we don &apos;t even slow down .
the future is naturally ungewiss .
yes , it &apos;s going to be ugly , and yes , it happens to happen -- with certainty in our lifespan -- but we &apos;re more than able to overcome anything that we &apos;re going to do it on us .
and here they come into play .
and what we need to think is , if you &apos;re in the flames of the flames , what comes next ?
and we believed that we can put these debt on our kids , but it &apos;s a imagine you know .
everything else is verplant .
that &apos;s the financial crisis .
students wanted to know what the cell is in the cell .
should that should be nothing ?
all we have is roomba .
you will be able to focus on the empfindlichkeit , maybe the sensitivity increase or erniedrigen can do a series of things that we can &apos;t .
that &apos;s not 1,000 years in the distance .
we should be able to use this cheap , simple heilmöglichkeit ban and nobody can &apos;t use them for their kids . &quot;
and here we can see this frog .
we cannot be risking to lose the trust of the customer .
he only got 500 and could have to get to 1,000 . &quot;
and he had a huge topf full of placebo-pillen , which she got , and he said , &quot; come on a week when they &apos;re sick . &quot;
the internet as we know it , the kind of web -- the things we all talk about -- is something less than 5,000 days .
of course , there &apos;s the internet for more than 5,000 days -- the web only 5,000 days .
so if we say the machine that we &apos;re now now is a hb , a human brain , a human brain , if we look at the rate , we &apos;re growing up with the rate of this , there is six billion hbs .
now it &apos;s not that -- if you do a spreadsheet and things at work is a word document , you &apos;re not part of the web , but they will be part of the machine .
i say , &quot; people are going to be the extended senses of machine . &quot; in a sense .
it &apos;s going to be on the level of the parts or ideas , if they want to be aufgelöst .
the last point i want to talk about is the idea that we &apos;re going to be co-abhängig .
third , it will be more ubiquitous than it will fill our entire environment , and we &apos;re in the middle .
and within a week , i convinced that the second doses of jesus christ had noted that it was sun moon , and that i was specifically to be speziell by god , and i was prepared to be prepared by god .
these are the dead of jonestown .
and it &apos;s made all it . it makes it all logical .
i &apos;m going to start with some simple ideas as we are doing things .
this is a project that we &apos;ve done in penang stadtprojekt , which came out of this pathway , which came out of this pathway , it &apos;s the result of a variety of forces that are developing .
and that led straight into another project .
it &apos;s actually a false attitude because the most likely probably is probably more interesting .
i &apos;m interested in how these ideas are contributing to the world &apos;s making young people .
and finally , one of the most interesting projects -- a gerichtsgebäude .
each of you is to be in your neighbors .
so , as we need to pay attention to pay numbers .
so we have a big brain , a great advantage because we can affect our environment .
my story is the two brains . it may be you , our gut is a brain of a brain .
this muskelkontrolle is very , very important , because it can give it reflexe .
we &apos;ve learned to talk to the big brain , taste and reward , how you know .
he said , &quot; you know , at once , we were all like animals and then no longer . &quot;
these are men and women who can still give you the world &apos;s code today .
of course , the tibetischen monks would say that .
the intiwatana , the post that the sun is actually a obelisk , which is actually a obelisk that reflects the light to the sacred apu of machu picchu , called huayna picchu .
if you pray for the dead , they do the gestures of the gestures that you put your thoughts into the sky .
here &apos;s the place where the great mother of the world &apos;s spindel in the world has gesandt the mountains and the country that they created the heart of the world .
it &apos;s unique facetten of human imagination .
this material that you all know is , but i think it &apos;s more for toxic stuff .
i liked it in there , you fit in there , because in a hundred years , my body can back into the earth .
it &apos;s a abfallprodukt .
you want to apply it all over the world , and not to apply it in the world , and not to have reisspreu or baumwollschalen , because you &apos;ve got to have a lot of alternatives .
first , you start out atoms in a particular bottle .
i &apos;ve got a competition from four years ago called &quot; dance . &quot;
my country is 15 trillion dollars .
and that &apos;s -- -- that &apos;s much more than all of the speakers before me and all those who are going to come to me .
and she thought about my work on mathematical models , which is a understanding of evolution and modern genetik .
the other half of the audience may not seem to be head-tail-tail -- from the tiefgehenden , cultural reasons you hold it for boring -- and find another pattern of a lot of interesting times -- head-tail-head .
you can think of two ways .
if you toss a coin toss , you get a series of head and number .
back to a more secular , because you &apos;re dealing with uncertainty .
and only in one percent .
he postulierte , &quot; i assume that after a sudden a sudden a sudden a sudden a sudden a sudden a sudden a sudden a sudden a sudden is a plötzlichen in a family . &quot;
not unlikely like one in 73 million , but still pretty unlikely .
all the things that are the most successful impacts on the industrial world , is going to be carried by statistics .
the rauchmelder may have saved hundreds of thousands of life , globally .
a intelligent set of injury prevents the injury because of the power is always becoming a intelligent anschlussstecker of a smart stream .
but , on the other hand , china is a sick-land . a term aus .
you &apos;ve got facebook , we have renren .
yet , the chinanet self can create a very strong force , which never had in history in history .
so , looking at this mikrobloggen , this mikrobloggen , as real medium , not just as mere headlines .
how a big ted , isn &apos;t ?
so , in the last three years , the last three years , it &apos;s really changed by mikrobloggen lokalregierungen , and it &apos;s more transparent , because that doesn &apos;t have access to the data .
and more chinese , the more chinese and more than the meinungsäußerung and human rights than their geburtsrecht , rather than a amerika importiertes .
many of you know that the beethoven was a great symphony .
i &apos;m not saying that they can &apos;t live life .
girl : well , my sister can pretty nerves .
the acoustics of music is much more complicated than the language .
that &apos;s a violin .
and it seems like it was a schläfenbeine removed to try to see the cause of death , which is ton and his skull in the sides .
cl : joseph is phenomenal . he &apos;s brilliant .
if i &apos;m umsehe , in this tedxamsterdam auditorium , i see a special audience .
in many countries , it &apos;s one other thing .
at this point in the dutch history , my dad was on the bank of the waal river in the ufer river .
the rate of civil wars and oppression has been achieved since the end of the cold war .
my soldiers use your weapons as an instrument of peace .
peter van uhm : why i took a gun and a gun .
this program gets a form and then they spuckt 250 dna-sequenzen .
this is a spannungsaufstieg in tuolumne meadows , in the middle of the yosemite .
you can &apos;t let it go . &quot;
i &apos;m very interested in a very interested .
and i &apos;m going to give you a little example of this . but there &apos;s actually a theoretical twist for why technology is evolving in exponenzieller .
now evolution has been hundreds of our species , hundreds of thousands of years , and because of this interaction used to basically have the technology of the technology , which is the next stage , which was the first stage in technological evolution .
we live in a three-dimensional world , so we can actually exploit the third dimension .
over the last 50 years , we had 28 percent of the year per year , we launched $ 10,000 growth .
another big revolution is the kommunikations-revolution .
in order to grow our exponential growth : 1,000 dollars at the rechenleistung of computing doesn &apos;t take a car , or a mouse .
and in the year , we &apos;re going to reach the most successful of these trends , and they have to have a bit like often the schraube in the form of technology -- faster and faster , if we get to this point .
you can get segen and tücken .
they are difficult to be harder .
they were made out of the genpool .
because there &apos;s nothing in there . you know , is not there .
dopamine &apos;s essential stuff that is associated with musterverwaltung .
and that &apos;s what we call it .
and he was so freundlich that , and we can give the resolution .
i mentioned in our little experiment , they &apos;re a hominid in the african &apos;s .
september 11th has a verschwörungstheorie . it &apos;s a conspiracy .
and we have our own lippenbalsam , and we have a führendes product .
i wasn &apos;t as good as he was , but we were able to get it youssou , sting n , sting and bruce springsteen on a welttournee for amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty to amnesty
they said , &quot; well , &quot; the truth is , and we &apos;re telling us .
musician and activist peter gabriel erläutert his personal motivation , with the überwachungsgruppe witness.org of human rights and told stories of active .
next , we asked ourselves how this do that ?
he sees the problem and white with it , the dance is his übergangsverhalten , which allows him to orientieren .
the beetle climb a lot of less times when they &apos;re stiefel , when they &apos;re not wearing accidents .
here &apos;s our durchtriebener experimenter .
let &apos;s play a 550-hertz-frequenz and watching what happens .
this is the universe of stephen hawking .
thank you .
mallorys argument that it makes fun to look at this big adventure , right , not quite a lot of experience .
or , &quot; nice . you know , my grandmother , next year next year , i &apos;ll put a kreuzfahrt in antarctica .
so the whole purpose of the presentation that the vc is to convince the entrepreneurs that they &apos;re in the entrepreneurs , and they &apos;re going to invest in the unternehmer and make a lot of money .
and the experience of the experience , a company to run or too -- that doesn &apos;t have to be corporations .
there &apos;s no physiological needle of unterstützte , there &apos;s no trouble .
from there , they take them with -- on a solid solid , reasonable lens up to the top . right by the end .
if i happen to be somebody who is that a device has been made .
no , they &apos;re not .
then give me a fast geschäfts-überblick .
even if the competition is working after the other pattern ...
it was all positive , positive , positive , positive , positive .
if you follow my ear , you &apos;ll be a spärliche , very narrow presentation , and this is great , to be nice , who you are and emotionally .
i didn &apos;t know that , it &apos;s pretty cool .
statistically , one of them is a bug .
if you can do something , you may have a effect on it .
and if you have enough , you can click a little link .
we &apos;re at the end of the table in the last place , which is the culture of innovation .
so how we think and behave , our verhaltenssystem broken .
we have a durchlaufendes meme -- seriously .
but forgive me , the problems of the problems are not the issues of industrial revolution .
and you know what ?
and who are the most powerful neoteniesten ?
it &apos;s very popular .
our thinking is backwards .
through a change in change change , change , like transparency , change , change , like transparency , change , and collaboration , and we &apos;re not autokratie , and we &apos;re not autokratie , those things are focused on results .
because only the challenge is the only way that the only way of making things are always doing , the only way to get rid of us , the old trott of the old solutions to the problems of the issues of today .
because we can &apos;t do it alone . we should do it together , and if we do that , and the ideas of play , we can share a better way .
the economist is called the zeitschrift , i believe , &quot; innovation . &quot;
my master took me to ofenbauen , because the ofenbau had been used to the time .
after i had a gesture of beiseite , they were very -- i was accepted and i was in six months .
nine days ago , i had a fire .
you know -- all of the stuff .
my kids , davey and henry .
we abonnierten a etliche magazines , we made our homework , but where we looked at the same way , we were surrounded by images like this .
this image literally occurred in seconds after the baby was laid into the poor , and i got it into it .
rg : oh , oh .
av : taboo number three : above his own goal , you don &apos;t talk -- but i &apos;m going to talk about my talk .
the general opinion is that every aspect of my life have become better , since i was in the wonders of birth and family .
but you realize that you can actually lose control of it , which is to lose control of a wonderful way , which we think of my life , which is very , very much sense of life .
rg : rg , thank you .
i &apos;m going to start with glenn gould .
i started with the experience .
there &apos;s a consequence of &quot; star trek . &quot;
we all have this &quot; star trek &quot; with the holodeck-folgen .
imagine , big , big , big , große , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , persönlich walker , like recordings , and pedalbewegungen , to get it down to computergesteuerten flügeln .
now , since since then , we &apos;ve experienced a time of the golden economic economic system , the longest aufschwung in the history of this country .
but a few months later , as well as well as well as well as well , in the sauren apple , &quot; in the sauren apple , no one of the first apple , as someone once someone can &apos;t hide , they don &apos;t know .
now , i didn &apos;t understand that , until i met this guy , a 80-jährigen , a 80-jährigen , leicht man who was struggling from tomatensuppe and comfort for völlig .
but interestingly , the one thing that is also a future where society is a few kniffe from the capitalism of capitalism , which is how you put the dna in society by creating things and then they tried to put things , and then the ones that work and normiert .
i want to show you a fascinating new hypothesis and some surprising new findings that i &apos;ve been working on , about the relationship between the structure of language that you talk about , and their tendency to save their usual .
and if i want to talk right , forcing me to think of ständig , constantly thinking about it .
now , this is a phantasievolle theory .
please press this device with your dominanten hand , so i can measure their greifkraft .
it &apos;s the present pleasure in the exchange of the normal pain .
i don &apos;t have to tell you how important to communicate across generations .
we released the englischlehrer .
but i &apos;m against it as a hürde .
but they didn &apos;t have the results they wanted .
at the same time , i was on the field of the wettermodifikation , even though i was a ph.d. in aeronautik anstrebte .
people and bisamratten and giraffen and birds and everything that goes here up here . that &apos;s people , livestock and pets .
we focused on the ernsthafte of the future and produced products for the company .
let &apos;s look at the next video .
the last night at the party , and i can see -- you can see how it just herumfliegt , and you can see any ausspionieren you want to .
and he was a dissatisfied of what people who are the most vulnerable religion in india .
and he &apos;s walking as a gebrochener man back to the village .
and he has to close your eyes , it &apos;s so disgusting , the gestank and everything .
the animals are in a their lifetime . people are people .
we &apos;re going to be a lot of us . we take the emotion of memory to a mother and a mother and we &apos;re doing this in all the living things .
and you think of how do you think things are the things that they are happy when they &apos;re happy .
and of course they are cruel and skrupellos .
although the change in your mindset is something of other beings -- they feel this new quality in you , and it helps them to help them and it helps them as a role .
so the coffee is , or the cup with handle , one of the society to get tools to get the public health health .
interestingly , the complexity is very high .
we &apos;ve heard a little bit of bill gates .
so it &apos;s very , very simple , if you know how to read it .
well , let me go through four generellen remarks , and one example of two aphorisms .
and i don &apos;t want to go to detail , but in the bottom right-hand corner , you see an example of what we have .
do you start to do that ?
and what &apos;s happening in the case of the things , which is the way of things , what our jimmy species had spoken , or better expressed , or better , how do we think ourselves without our own organizations ?
the inventor of things are always going to be able to be able to be the use of the use of the anwendern in collaboration with the anwendern .
so , let &apos;s take astronomy , which is the most famous for .
it &apos;s also going to be ausgiebige , professional people are going to be there .
so there &apos;s no argument of two camps , but between those camps , it will give you a variety of interesting positions of people .
this costs about 100 dollars .
and then the people started to dedicate their brote and actually , a team of it would be done : between new zealand and spain .
and the first thing i thought was to thank him for him .
but the truth is that life is exactly what it is .
so people started , and they have news like this one .
he said , &quot; i &apos;m like batman , to pursue my anonymity . &quot;
and the one that didn &apos;t have a clue , so that it turned out that she was just in another city , and a new job had taken .
and in the last 35 years , i studied human behavior in the foundation of everything , from genes , dopamin , dopamine and ähnlichem , to zielanalyse .
and some of you have it . and it &apos;s dependent on the sex .
this was one of those cases because she had no violence under their ancestry , but in my dad .
they &apos;re similar to each other as you can only be .
by the way , i &apos;ve been given a email , in the way that says that we have a last part of the last part of the last part .
and these guys are the weak force that may be known .
so if you want to know , why the sky is blue or why compassion , you should be in principle , with a leistungsstarken computer -- why dna has the shape that you &apos;ve got to have .
the comparison is that people in this room is the higgs boson .
but it &apos;s really that the physical theory of the urknalls grundkräfte is to unite the physikalischen of the big bang , and a perfectly wonderful prediction . the model was not created by the goal that this is going to happen , but it seems to do it .
they created this civilization , this wonderful image , the darkness in light and it allowed it to see the civilization from all the time .
another big insight came from a study of the state state university in 2010 , the baseball maps of the major spieler spieler .
in a similar study in germany , researchers in germany to measure gerhirnaktivität and after they were able to messen the gesicht in the face of the eye .
&quot; because the colors they have , not the european standard , he said .
&quot; safer ? why ? got there ? &quot;
we built the bright empfangshalle , people who were to think of tirana , to think that they were to be able to get to abroad , if they were eintraten , to get them out of their cause .
president roosevelt said , &quot; belief , i think you can do something , and you &apos;ve done it before . &quot;
all in port-au-prince , unternehmer , boten ladestationen for cellphones .
one is a single one for the most transformative power in kibera .
until 2015 , it will give three billion smartphones in the world .
in the shops of the environment , were taschenlampen , batteries and bread .
this river is embedded in everything in everything , in everything , in the erosion of a sandkorns , in the knospe , in the knospe , which is zur to rose .
read a interview with a writer ?
and i think if i look at the big bear , i remember as a kid who &apos;s festhielt to his head , not by his shoulders , and i feel like this kid .
we &apos;ve been seeing again as creative technology and our lives , we can do those solutions and our way to have the solutions , innovations and moments that don &apos;t use the flow of time not zersplittern .
my mother was engländerin .
in every single refugee , she had to abwimmeln her soldiers , who was the older brother , who was nine , leaving the nine and he wanted to make him a child .
and i should do it alone .
take something that you want to do , from the suitcase .
then i ended up in einzelhaft because i don &apos;t zurückhielt my emotions .
thank you .
almost all life on earth is going to be about five times .
svante paabo has the answer .
why should it be a role ?
so , theoretically , we can grow any organ from any cell .
here &apos;s the rise in less than 10 years .
here &apos;s the conclusion .
if the rotors of the fuel with the same speed , the robot .
and you can see how robust the control .
and he does it , as he hindernissen .
they take their neighbors .
this shows that we &apos;re going to double the roboterkraft , triple , triple , in which we can get them to form teams , as you can see .
but the robot can also find out how he wants to go .
i can understand that . but there &apos;s so many , and i want to extend your home to change consciousness and your perspective to change .
this is a huge problem that has been on the late 1980s , which is the erscheinen of the varroamilbe , which is the erscheinen of the varroamilbe , which is a lot of different viruses , bacteria and pilzkrankheiten .
they don &apos;t experience it .
the chefs take the chefs for their courts , and the honey -- you &apos;re live-veranstaltungen -- they use the honey to their bars .
the bee dies . honeybees die if you stick , so they didn &apos;t want it to do it .
okay , now , the question is , why is this ?
of course , we also have it , particularly in the last decade , to make the world with a dense chain of supermärkten , with a chain of a global burden .
and never before , there was so many people in this fact .
in fact , not many of you know that our bread was not a european invention .
and particularly the fleischkonsum in südost-asien and china is protecting the getreide-preis .
agrarwissenschaft has been for most people , and here are not many farmers among them , bad to be bad to be the environment , to be able to be a lot of maßstab , to destroy the environment .
everything is all together .
and so , as i do my bread , and i have it gebacken , and i &apos;m trying to burning the hands .
and also , it needs to be a long time to keep the verfügbaren , which is available to the same tools , materials and kenntnissen .
you take somebody like me , a researcher , analyze and tweets and it &apos;s a new technology , and it &apos;s certainly the quantitative leistungssteigerung .
because i hope you &apos;re going to take this today , a new connection with nature .
this was a few days ago .
and what do we do ? what is our answer ?
this is von letztem .
but poolan devi was a one of them , and shekhar kapur turned a movie on them , bandit , bandit , you should see them .
i think the most important thing is that we can do it .
but the one here has grubenottern as a spezialität .
this is a repräsentativer patient who was at the time at the time -- he needed a bypass , but it was going to be .
i like this slide because you can talk about what people really change and what doesn &apos;t .
if you eat a fettreiche meal , how do you feel ?
it &apos;s a halbwahrheit . americans even eat more fat because even more more fat than ever , and even more carbs . so the percentage of light , but the actual numbers higher , the goal , it &apos;s the goal to reduce both .
one of the atkins-zentrum research studies found that 70 percent of people were clogged , 65 percent of people were schlechten , 54 percent of the people , 54 percent -- that &apos;s not a healthy diet .
on the other hand , everything is intimität , heilkräftig .
i hope he doesn &apos;t hang .
and the film is based on a kurzgeschichte of f. scott fitzgerald , fitzgerald fitzgerald .
two filmstudios were involved in the project : warner brothers and paramount .
and we had enough passion to proceed the arbeitsverfahren and technology .
we &apos;re so stereotypical to us from motion capture , we &apos;re going to be scooped from motion capture .
the number of the numbers seemed to be infinite .
and that &apos;s the data we get from that , and then we &apos;re used to get the model for the model .
and so the supreme image that was used in the movie .
that was a very , very , very early rehearsal .
and we found this , in the middle of the state .
and it has a own telefonzelle .
people from kalandar are going to be able to overcome these cruel past past past past past past the past , where they lived their lives .
we were too viert -- two bedouin than the driver -- and imagine that , this vast is a ocean from sand , 40 degrees fahrenheit .
i think the camel is the best animal in the world . &quot;
and they use them as similar as we see our zweiäugiges .
we weigh our animals .
so i &apos;ll show you another movie .
i don &apos;t schwitze until my body temperature opened to 40 degrees -- enough to be a single egg .
ricky , thank you for inviting .
you start a meeting with a poem . that would be a idea .
but how would you like to know how a living day like you knew how a living god durchschreiten the world , their shoulders in the clouds , or whether it &apos;s down from the tapete geradeaus geradeaus geradeaus geradeaus with your little plastikgesicht ?
who could sleep in this night ?
but , you know , judy garland in your old age , jeanne dollar has been a movie theater , which was jeanne d d , and he &apos;d aufgeräumt his breath to the victory , and he would reject his room -- no , i mean , i mean , i mean , i mean , i mean , i mean , i mean , i mean , i
at the end , they sat in a tree and a streckt hand to others .
and the human genome is more than that , but you would remove those two columns , probably no longer much left .
and also , we have the problem with elephants that you can build construction , which is hard to build a single elephant .
a component of it is the understanding . here &apos;s a standard-definition : &quot; the ability to understand the emotions of other people . &quot;
so we study more complex disasters . here &apos;s consolation .
that the test isn &apos;t good for them .
there &apos;s a very simple task that you have to do .
a philosopher wrote us that it was impossible that maybe that helped have a sense of fairness , because the fairness was invented in the french revolution .
now , it &apos;s not a lonely crazy , it &apos;s not two crazy , three is a lot of power and a lot of power news .
the last decade i spent , pain and humiliation , hopefully , hopefully for a good thing , the selbstvervollkommnung .
and i have to say thank god .
so i heard , in a sense , it was a success .
over the years , the ernste kreislaufbeschwerden can be kreislaufbeschwerden .
a.j. jacobs : how the healthy life is almost me , almost umbrachte .
and i think that many of these things are sharing .
really cool thing .
now those studies are valid , and they were labeled , but they &apos;re not all the story .
ask the part of the story that is not told .
... a priest ?
finally , a group that thinks that the indus people are the ancestors of people in the people of the people in the world today .
on the left , how many ?
it can be useful in the entzifferung , more data , which are then more data .
this sign is the most frequent of the indus script , and only in this text .
it turns out it &apos;s been a long tradition that &apos;s been in india , named on the basis of the basis of sternbildern to the earth &apos;s point of the earth .
the space , we all know how it looks like .
this wire übertrug die the telefonsignale , which would be famous famous famous .
and i think , the historic discovery was that the north genauso , as lichtwellen as radio waves .
actually all the young people of the city -- the city of the city .
somebody who sits in the seat next to you -- that &apos;s a veranstaltungssaal , but you would sit on a parkbank , and somebody would be so close to the next stage .
the dalai lama is always like , he says , &quot; he says if you can come to the idea of the mitfühlens , is because you realize that you and your pain and freuden , and finally , to be a little playground for your intelligence .
so take this wonderful thing that has shown us in the front line , they &apos;re going to be afraid of the lava-mann .
a man ago , a tank ago was a picture of a bild of the world &apos;s whole world .
but what would you have not do anything , if you had the modern communications , to create a sense that the wrong thing that was going to be done , immediately , had to be done something ?
combine the power of a global ethic with our ability to communicate on global level and to organize globally with the challenges that are now now we now , and the largely global nature .
in rwanda , there &apos;s a photograph of a zehnjährigen boy -- and the museum of the children who were gelassen the life that were left as a million people in the future of rwanda .
here &apos;s the assignment : help me , a vibrant , parameterisiertes kontaktmodell in 3d .
you can get to very different untergründen -- it &apos;s vary in the kontaktwahrscheinlichkeit , the movement of the surface and the evolutionary auftrittsmöglichkeiten .
this is the treibende algae as driving .
boy : stachelig .
we slow down to see the spikes in action .
mark cutkosky , at stanford , one of my partner , one of my partner , is a remarkable engineer , which is called a technology called shape deposition , where he can put it into a artificial foot .
you &apos;re looking like aliens from aliens , and the secret to what they stick is their toes toes .
here we &apos;re going to go down the band-aid .
these filigranen structures allow the spines , polstern and the hafthärchen , and the hafthärchen , schwierigen surfaces , difficult to use .
so , these are erzeugen lange of the beautiful songs that are serving as a paarungsrufe and males like females to find each other and a mate .
so if dolphins are less than 20 feet apart , they have to have less than half of the time they &apos;re doing .
if we &apos;re going to summarize the animals for animals like dolphins , we have to be about the implications of our interventions in the brain that we did for quite harmless .
after the mauerfall , the marine has made the walbioakustikern available to the walbioakustikern , to know what the scientists could actually hear .
you just listen to the low frequencies .
when males and females are the signal to use a signal , and they &apos;re scattered , imagine what is the effects that we have in the world &apos;s recovery
like ships geräuscharmer , they can be done , and they found that with a better durchdachten propellerentwurf of this noise to reduce 90 percent .
they verringerten the velocity to drive 50 percent .
we see the worlds , we see the fremde sonnensysteme , 300 , and it &apos;s always going to be more , and they &apos;re not going to be like we .
you have all possibilities .
we observe an continuous rise of the men .
and obviously there &apos;s also a hundred , a hundred sees .
with the initiatives like the $ 100 laptop , kräuselt it , and it &apos;s really thought of that , that we &apos;re going to take a whole new generation of people in the old computers .
thank you .
i think nothing that &apos;s the problem .
our daily life is in the last life , but gelinde , in a very famous state , we say , in a ausnahmezustand .
usually , it &apos;s one of one year .
and there &apos;s it .
but we are a lot of the overall .
a part of the challenge was to try to try and define space , not just by the hands , not just my hands -- the juggling handorientiert is much more handorientiert -- it &apos;s the rhythm of my body and the feet and the balls to control with my feet .
and then she would play crazy .
ok , because they don &apos;t understand what a fünf-ball-muster is , i &apos;ll give you a little hint .
now , let &apos;s go and -- finger , finger , finger , finger , finger , finger , finger . open .
you have the top here , who &apos;s the anthropic principle , is this whole life ?
in charge -- and then it comes to calm . just a little number over time .
with the space and the straight in the room .
and then the wechselnde is .
in this year -- you &apos;ll get the slides -- in this year , we &apos;re wearing the treo with us , a project where we have the handspring of the design .
we can do this on a touchscreen-monitor program that enables it to a ermöglicht information about the clothing , as you get this anprobiert .
so the scott adams : i realized that i &apos;m on the way to become the führende expert in the arbeitsplatzdesign .
and we &apos;re going to give a new product , and it &apos;s the first time it &apos;s going to show it .
now , the farmers can only be in the middle of the rainy season , and not in the nebensaison harvest .
electrons can disappear in a kind of wuselei and then only energy , and energy can &apos;t see .
that &apos;s what he thought he was .
potatoes , potatoes have 48 chromosomes . have you this idea ?
good . atoms , you can &apos;t see them .
and somebody said to him , &quot; well , what is the meaning ?
we &apos;ve got about four years of lang .
if google &apos;s a book , they put it in a very nice format .
i &apos;ll give you an example .
suddenly , in the middle of the 40s , everybody was excited .
but imagine that , it will be interested in .
but also a lot of the very right ones have to have benefited from propaganda .
if you &apos;re going to be a zeh , it means that a &quot; argh &quot; with a a. &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; argh &quot; with a a. &quot;
if i &apos;m going to run this pink sound for longer than a few minutes , you would literally stop hearing it .
many people were flüchten to kopfhörern , but this turn , the big spaces like this , geteilte , geteilte , in little teeny personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal personal
you can also do this in a beautiful place like a sea .
and finally , a akronym .
and i said , &quot; this is my job . &quot;
thank you so much that you &apos;re here . we &apos;re all so grateful . &quot;
and so they went to .
because they weren &apos;t in the front door , and they couldn &apos;t see the exchange , and i was able to see the between me and my crowd , a exchange that &apos;s fair to be fair , but to be happy .
now , i say , in the weltveränderungsgeschäft , there was a lot of competition in the last year , because the arab spring is still expanding , the eurozone is still -- what &apos;s going on ?
this photograph was actually in a police station and on the floor , you see the personalausweise of people who were tracking by the police .
the kids are just doing pictures in a class , the teacher is they &apos;re putting them up .
today &apos;s talk , it &apos;s about the brain , and it &apos;s like , in fact , there &apos;s a gehirnfan .
this is something that we can work in our lifetimes . i believed i can actually bewirken. a difference and so i was trying to get out of the computergeschäft , in the gehirngeschäft .
but sometimes science has some other characteristics that they really really do really interesting .
what do we bring us to that ?
there &apos;s something we believe it is obvious , but wrong .
it &apos;s so that that &apos;s defined by prediction .
but we &apos;re not looking at the alligator as a very intelligent , not in a human condition .
in humans , we &apos;ve developed the frontalen part of the neocortexes , with the name of the neocortex . nature has this little trick .
it &apos;s not that you &apos;re looking at it , and say , &quot; what i see ?
not like a computerspeicher . not least in the slightest .
these are the things that are coming out .
we need something , we need something , we need something , but only to defense .
you can see it on your hive . &quot;
she was traveling because she was the election of the election outside the country .
this is rigoberta menchu .
and then when they lay the door , said , &quot; no , no , no , no , no .
they wash it .
these group are used to use three , everybody .
it &apos;s real .
she has managed to learn english and learning to learn this as a foreign language .
the computer is already in a three participants .
if you think of the world &apos;s association , which is the fact that actually part of our experimentes , because that &apos;s what we did .
we &apos;re going to do the experiment with the same groups , but a verzögerung between the enlightenment of how we deal with the data , and the actual beginning of the fragebogens .
the price for this is the displacement of paradise .
and they moved and moved on each other and they were left their arms to each other and abwandern .
we &apos;re really good at talking about capabilities and security and health , we &apos;re really bad at talking about character .
then , they put personal , the cialis , like pfefferminz pfefferminz , atem gegen .
i feel really comfortable with emotions .
the first gift , or talent , is gedankeneinsicht -- the ability to peer in other people &apos;s minds and find what they &apos;re going to offer .
they have humility to be humility .
that &apos;s what the unconscious thing is .
we found it between bahngleisen , raped by many , many men , i don &apos;t know how many .
where does your journey start ?
and that it &apos;s not normal , it &apos;s not normal , in a home .
what was my challenge ?
they need your empathy .
lexicography : this is the process of zusammenzutragen .
now , first of all , i blame the queen , because it &apos;s funny .
and so , in fact , we have to be different .
the bad words -- you see if somebody to a place , and then it &apos;s not going to be on the map , and then it &apos;s not going to be the map , &quot; this map is sucks ! &quot;
they think , &quot; ok , if we think of the words that we &apos;re using to do is to give our thoughts expression , where you want to know that that are alien , that way , is that a hammer are better than hammer ?
the oed has 33 different definitions of the set of set .
and then there &apos;s this mike oates , mike oates in britain .
i have the whole time &quot; the dictionary , which dictionary dictionary , which was &quot; the dictionary . &quot;
so , i &apos;m a chair .
and , to make a long story short , i &apos;m going to be here .
and that &apos;s a piece of time , during this three days , you start with , you know , why do i hear all this stuff stuff ?
they &apos;re perhaps from a ted speaker , and we can go back to the conversation during the year , and next year , after the same intellectual and emotional journey .
the producers have not implementiert the trägerphasentechnik of their cheap gps-chips , because they &apos;re not sure what the public was going to be able to slow down to the handfläche .
there was a degree that was already been a moment , and it wasn &apos;t a way to find the sender .
instead of being stören the gps-signale , you &apos;re going to be able to get them .
and , &quot; you can trust . &quot;
we call it pors &amp; amp ; rao and we live in india .
this is a video of the prototype .
this work is the cartoon of a umgedrehten people .
we have to be the case of the air , &quot; what the world needs now is nuclear -- right ?
and yet , there are only three hauptquellen for this -- coal and gas , wasserkraft , the almost wasserkraft , and nuclear .
we have the russian waste , and they were made by electricity .
co2e emissions are producing tremendous emissions of greenhouse gases and particles , the warming , and to co2 .
if you look at the fact that the spread of nuclear power is caused by nuclear power , because we know that , for example , we know that india and pakistan have been developing heimlich nuclear weapons in atomenergieanlagen .
for wind , the area is much bigger , but the standfläche is smaller .
reality is that 21 states have nuclear power , right ?
and in the spirit of the united states , we need to have the support of an industrial parties -- just one or two voices required to be durchzubringen around the senate , and this room can help this room .
we &apos;re not going to get out of renewables &apos;s not enough energy .
i used to have a little bit about the 10 years .
thank you .
that was -- my motivation was from apollo .
for the first time , we have enough wealth in the hands of some people , and the technology technology that will allow us to the exploration of space .
26 groups of the groups of seven countries have been in the competition , every one of one , and 25 million dollars .
orbitalflüge -- we can bring them to the space station .
and the advantage of the sponsors to the sponsors is the sum of the bekanntwerdung and the social system .
would you figure out , we &apos;re going to meet ?
that means that surfaces can be cut himself . you can be incredibly small .
a challenge was a challenge , how we can express this new public policy in a column .
what i didn &apos;t know about the time , because we only had the only one that the area was going on , and the surfaces continues to go down , and that was a pretty surprising discovery .
inspired by the process of the cell world , michael hansmeyer , michael hansmeyer , michael algorithmen , the incredible forms of surfaces are creating a hand , but you can build it , but you can build it . and they could build our understanding of architecture .
so , look at this image here -- many forms of it here for you .
it &apos;s a very rare condition .
this is a drug that was developed for cancer .
you can see the chip , even the chip ahmt .
it &apos;s a very young nation that &apos;s led by young people .
and i think a lot of people in the room here , many of you are in the same position .
so i think women are being being anführern into our society because they realize that it &apos;s very important for their future generations is very important to get our cultural identities .
we have realized that recently , we have always used more people like youtube and social networks to give their stories expression to their stories and their own stories with their own voices .
at the same time , we invite them to explore , and we can study our part of the world .
so i was more than no , &quot; nothing &quot; eingestuft . &quot;
so i thought , &quot; maybe if i make those ants a few homes , you get a little . &quot;
this was called &quot; huf house . &quot;
so i thought , &quot; how can i do this ? &quot;
and when i finished it , i came back to the next day .
and it was ...
my work , grob , sometimes five , six or seven weeks ; it can &apos;t always be able to anticipate .
and i was dragging it around , and i pasted it out of the kampfwagen .
so i get the needle .
it &apos;s a very mühsame job , but the best things come in little paketen .
they expect to tell you that they &apos;ve asked them to have them if they &apos;ve had the task , you can do something that you do .
there is this absolute concentration of consciousness , these absolute ballung of consciousness , awareness , a remarkable center of consciousness , and love the primary properties of the divine .
my gebeutelter body flew into a direction , my geschundenes wheel in the other .
i posed all the ones i &apos;m not going to do with you , which i probably wouldn &apos;t be able to do the kunstprojekte , which i wouldn &apos;t want to do not stopping the friends that i wouldn &apos;t be finster , the brautgänge that i couldn &apos;t walk .
because you don &apos;t need the sich-kennenlernen-sitzung .
and if you &apos;re going to get off the back of the back , the wind , you can just pick it up and it &apos;s macht in the dirt . &quot;
20 years ago , the doctors had my leg and hoped , and there was a 15 prozentiege chance of survival .
as i was more and more , and more important -- and at this point in my life i was probably 14 pounds than i am .
and nobody is about these modern mannhaftigkeit in my eyes as david black .
and walk upright , you say , the threshold of what makes us human .
he &apos;s the president of the international coalition for gliederrettung , which is the most popular name i ever heard .
he was born a little months to early months and it was really a fantastic überlebenskampf of him .
so once i tried to get me the piano , i was kräftig weggeschubst .
and at the end , you &apos;re so quick , as i was , things like &quot; flight &quot; no problem , isn &apos;t it ?
would you like to play ?
dp : &quot; tiger rag . &quot;
i don &apos;t do that .
they &apos;re fighting , their own lifestyle in this forest , in a world that &apos;s still clean , which is not possible , in a world that hasn &apos;t been invaded .
we know that they are capable of making the research that make research in the research , as i started .
the long species of liebevolle unterstützende is to be the mother that was developed during this long childhood , and also the siblings can stay long , and that can be maintained to 60 years .
it &apos;s not sustainable , and also the huge feedback of the holzarbeiter in the forest needs now meat , and so the pygmies that are going to be in the kongobecken and there &apos;s a lot of a wonderful lifestyle for so many hundreds of years of life .
yesterday said that somebody said , &quot; somebody said .
so , there &apos;s now in every state , and the problems in florida is different than the ones in new york .
come on and get away down here ?
do you out there ?
what we want to do in the lab is pretty much the same , but with a few dozen of different kinds of molecules -- so a drastische reducing of complexity , but still , trying to create something more exotic .
it &apos;s even very lebenslos . if you &apos;re going to get yourself , it doesn &apos;t really do something .
now where they &apos;re all experts for the protocells , we &apos;re going to play with these protocells .
we see the self-assembly of these bodies from the öltröpfchen that we &apos;ve seen before , and the black dots in this black sludge -- this facettenreichen , very complex , organic sludge .
in his lab , martin hanzcyz &quot; protocells &quot; is her , which is experimentelle kleckse , which is how living cells behave . his work shows how life could come to the earth first -- and maybe also elsewhere .
this is a kaulquappen-gehwagen , to go to the dinner and go to the evening .
what is that -- how did you know this ? you &apos;ve taken it .
but if we could do that in every single thing -- every fire , we could define the notfall .
soot is the filth who otherwise otherwise otherwise punched in their hübschen lungen lungs , and that &apos;s associated with it .
the birds could end up from one another .
they can be a current news from him . you can talk to him .
but this herd , will make a large toll of our planet .
next , we isolate the skin and multiply them in a zellkulturträger .
we &apos;ve been working for thousands of years of zellstrukturen , starting to the products of products like wine and yogurt and yogurt .
it &apos;s true that if we do our research on the world , we see that there &apos;s almost a universal streben of people , and to have a car .
let me just talk about hydrogen .
this is a huge scale of energy energy to create a mobile energy .
if we can see this moegliche future , you can see that .
you had to survive .
and we certainly made sure our school students to be funding to support money and support .
because why should our students are going to drive such a way to drive .
it became a book , then one .
and there was a tremendous idea , an insane idea .
here at the west coast , they destroyed their forest .
but on this image , you see how we started building the ausbildungszentrum , which was going to be a great umweltzentrum .
when i was time for me , my hauptstudium , i &apos;ve studied the newly neu method of the landschaftsökologie .
if you zoom in the south manhattans , you see the way the way the way it was once once once was once in the end of the american revolution .
the white surfaces on this map are the winterwinden of the protected areas .
or the moorschildkröte , the feuchte meadows , insects and sonnige places .
maybe there &apos;s a wald-klapperschlange there .
it &apos;s so much force in science and visual and visualizing to combine that this is how these images are available . it &apos;s like both sides of the spiegels .
and we have a really dramatic idea of our society .
so i don &apos;t have to go to it .
you can do it , which is what &apos;s going to remain .
this is a biomorphes building .
so , one example we know is that the cell .
and it &apos;s all about this question -- of course in a very artistic and indirekte way .
but it &apos;s happening everywhere , and those tools are parts of those who help us .
seriously , clap it quietly -- that &apos;s really great .
alex steffen sees a sustainable future of the future of future .
you could mean that this is a big problem for a law , but the congress doesn &apos;t seem to make it very much .
but if you were a lot of high-quality kopien copies and sells , it &apos;s not okay .
some of the things we share , we &apos;ve made out of things that we found out and every single option in this industry .
that &apos;s the easy thing .
i had a very elitist , versnobte , expensive education in india , and that made me almost broken .
and i thought i &apos;m starting to start a barefoot college -- college just for the poor .
a professional is somebody who &apos;s a combination of competence , confidence and conviction .
when i said , they said , &quot; show us what possible is . what do you do ?
the whole power comes from the sun .
democracy , bürgerrecht , how to be a country , what you should do if you will be going to be arrested , if you should be a single sick .
come in there , you get the presence of the schools , it comes between teachers and parents , the puppets of teachers can call the teacher and the parents &apos; parents and say , &quot; give you hands .
you use sign language .
i said , &quot; i can &apos;t , mr. president .
a erfolgsstory .
and our ingenieurskollegen create one of the largest , dynamically dynamically variierenden computers for this type of informations-erkundung .
you see the elektronenfluss along the stromlinien of the stromlinien , which we have created as artists as artists .
thank you very much .
interestingly , there are data of these two groups of people , data , how happy they are .
&quot; i &apos;m physical times , financially , financially , emotionally , mentally , and in almost every other way , as much as much as much as much as much as i &apos;m .
he didn &apos;t get the money and of course , ray croc six months later , the same idea .
in this case , it &apos;s because they &apos;re in the experiment that i have been used to report by the monets , which is drucke by monets images .
we collected our materials from the room and half an hour .
i &apos;ll show you why .
they get two images two images and they had two beautiful 8x10 , &quot; glänzende abzüge of them , and we said , &quot; what would you like ? &quot;
we take a completely new group of naiven harvard-studenten and say , &quot; you know , we &apos;re going to give a fotokurs , and we can do it in two different ways .
nachtaufnahmen , the big car and the milchstrasse durchfliegen are beautiful .
voices : it flies into the air . oh shit .
&quot; so , &quot; ma , don &apos;t start ! &quot;
don &apos;t forget that this tradition is not from the nebeln of avalon , but on a period , before we have stories before we were zeichneten stories on papyrus ritzten or piktogramme piktogramme .
the kind of food , yeah .
the kind of sorte with the gewellten roof , you know .
and so we would have my dad &apos;s dad , because i knew he would kill me when i left her , so we &apos;re moving into the car .
&quot; and this guy has a blue uniform and a entsetzten expression in the face ? &quot;
i really want to have a little bit ? because if i don &apos;t have ariadnes faden , to ankern me -- enough metaphors for their taste ? -- could it never come back .
see ? we &apos;re a secret club with a secret händedruck .
she says , &quot; ma , you have to look . &quot;
&quot; i agree for the little , old lady , damn time ! &quot;
she &apos;s out of the car . &quot;
i really have a great fear .
so what is the social outcome ?
where can i go to today and with who ?
and if we have it , we &apos;re going to decide how much of the ice we drive , where we live and work .
smart terminal terminals , and you can see exactly where your bus just came along and when it comes to the place , and you can buy it in real time .
i want to be able to use the wireless employees , and i &apos;m afraid that this network is supposed to be the network of open standards .
and they came up here in the late 1960s .
and for all of you who come with a mental illness in touch , knowledge , what can be a challenge .
i said that i wanted to tell the fantastisch-geschichte , i wanted to share with you the three a little bit of awesome , and i wanted to do with a abschlussgedanken .
because they all were three years old .
and what i love about this story is that rosey grier is just a genuine person . and that &apos;s what it is about authenticity .
i ate oliven oliven . &quot;
you can sleep in clean laken .
j it &apos;s so many that that &apos;s going to be a problematic .
i thought it was strangely to speculate , as if it was a competition to get a wettbewerb wound .
it &apos;s got a white vorwiegend , rich unternehmergruppe , which is not the representative of the city .
it looks pretty simple , but this was a halbe-million-dollar-projekt .
people were staunten over two things -- they were astonished across the destruction , but there was a sense of the unglaubens of the heldenmut of the new yorker that i found very emotional .
because if you look at four platforms along the grundstücks -- where one is the enhanced version of a familienplattform -- we knew that it had to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to reagieren and respond to the veränderte condition and the changed of the ground
we have the opportunity to rethink our thinking about cities .
dr : it was an honor .
and i know that kids suffer every year every year .
if -- god forbid -- somebody from us here and a concussion erlitte , most of us would be completely vollständig by a period of several hours to a few weeks .
you have to be the problems that we &apos;re talking about today .
and as it turned out , he saw a helmet for 20 dollars for 20 dollars a good opportunity to preserve a 100,000 dollar-studium .
it &apos;s not true , but it &apos;s been tony blair during the davos in 2005 as his doodle , of course , &quot; discovered , &quot; which was described , &quot; and he was described by the way .
in other words , you have a common and growing complexity of visual language that is happening in vorhersehbarer .
he was told that there was no cure .
today , all countries are committed to offer patents for drugs that have 20 years .
it depends on the bereitwilligkeit of the pharmaunternehmen , their patents and they &apos;re doing it for others .
in orlando , the same kind of stage , a open-air-stadium , a open-air-stadium , and people were sitting in the sun , afternoon in very high school , and they didn &apos;t have comfortable .
they can adjust anything to be concerned for your well-being .
he offers all these services , überweisungen , and so little things you &apos;re doing online , but for people , but for people who are struggling with the digital world .
the question was , &quot; how do you do this teacher from that teacher .
let &apos;s see what he does here .
and the husband &apos;s daughter , he was also sick through the erschöpfung of his wife .
but the visual complexity is still very large .
now , schlagzeilentexter had a heidenspass in our studies .
now if we feel emotions , we show them .
and you could get the impression that the unhappy people have a different position within the network .
this is my sozialerfahrung . &quot;
they &apos;re both from carbon , and yet , one of those two kohlenstoff-atome in the field are placed in a particular way , and they get graphit , which is the soft and dark .
to make this something , let me take a moment for a moment .
older is not easy .
so the same context is always the same resources , their cognitive resources , like aufmersamkeit and memory , more on positive information than on negative information .
we have the life .
they would say , &quot; tonight , i &apos;ll go to this moonwalk for this girl &apos;s girl &apos;s vote .
you know , david : it &apos;s so that i said , frankly , not quite as well , what happens when i dance .
they have me and uncles and uncles , and i &apos;ve been invited over and over again .
1868 : the second treaty of fort laramie treaty , the one of the big laramie treaty , the souveränität of the big sioux nation and the besitzrechte of the lakota hills .
the treaty of fort laramie , that at least , at least three quarters of the stamms sign , to abzutreten land .
they were tired of the contracts .
the lehrerfluktuation is eight times as high as the american average .
so what does it happen ?
and today ? child mortality dropped in 1960 in the last 30 percent .
you &apos;re either either as a pill or as syringe . you have to take it every day to regulate the blutzuckerspiegel .
if we can do it , like this , with people ...
but essentially , it &apos;s essentially a lot of sense .
it &apos;s called : are you smarter than a fünftklässler ?
so , bmw is a very powerful car .
the problem for bmw is , this car looks certainly .
now they &apos;re going to think , &quot; if my life depended on it , i would use it every day . &quot;
we have to combine this with a scientific method .
this is something different than actually a effective way to do it .
what &apos;s nothing new .
the lamps are going to be darker .
we do it for our customers .
we have the sun in the sun .
now -- logic -- logical , logical , logisch , so you &apos;re now going to get from this position in the field -- without moving .
i &apos;m going to intervene now . now , every time , one other person -- not always the same answers .
so , if you &apos;re interested in this , i &apos;m going to present a few untergrund-techniken .
here , i have to look at the beginning of the time i can follow my maps of the mischvorgangs -- oh , we have to start together -- no problem , no problem .
yeah ?
i think ...
lg : pardon ?
what &apos;s the map i want to use ? the lady or the five ?
lg : pardon .
moment , right now , please take some card .
another suit . lg : diamonds , perfect .
compassion .
karo-ass , yes ? zoe : yeah .
here -- all maps of cards -- all the maps -- are all maps -- right ?
and finally , king , in exactly -- in exactly ... five seconds .
some of you seem to know this kid .
after i was back to my whole company , i was doing my company to a ein-pobacken-firma . &quot;
if you didn &apos;t have a musical party , they wouldn &apos;t be a gänge .
let &apos;s see what &apos;s going on here .
i tell my students , &quot; if you have a car seat , always you always lift a eyebrow , you see it . &quot;
imagine the person , and they follow the same way across the road from b to e and they &apos;re going to hear anything that was going to say .
i had an amazing experience . i was 45 , was in the dirigent and suddenly a realization .
she came after auschwitz she was 15 years old . her brother was eight , their parents lost her parents .
so , my ladies and gentlemen from the jury , look at this .
if you &apos;re the fastest of all of all today , they get 20 dollars . &quot;
for tasks , but it works that mechanistische , belohnung-und-strafe-ansatz , belohnung-und-strafe-ansatz , doesn &apos;t work -- doesn &apos;t often do harm .
think of your own work .
the standard standard is smaller .
these are the building blocks of a completely new computer programs for our businesses .
this one day has a day of a bunch of a bunch of a whole range of software-fehlerbehebungen , which may never have ever been .
do it because you like to make it .
the aluminum &apos;s being used for the future regime .
in a series of a series of 55 spheres , they are doing , proportional , every sphere and their friendship is proportionate to this little earth .
and the blue side , the gegenseite , shows the other direction .
that has evolved in many durchlläufen .
the standardbild on the object would probably be a highly aufgelößtes picture of earth .
but they always keep it 10 percent or more , which are most benachteiligt or erfolglos .
232.000 dollars and in a verein zur dollars .
charitable organizations have to have zurückhalten , courageous , big , groß , new spendenaktionen , from fear that if you were going to be pulled by the ruf of the schmutz .
so what should you do ?
the overhead increases .
dan pallotta : our mindset &apos;s charity is grundverkehrt , is grundverkehrt .
then , the klatschenden listeners , yes , the klatschenden listeners that they have to have the music to music .
people who &apos;ve done this stradivaris , the amatis , all these beautiful instruments .
he says , &quot; i &apos;m responsible . &quot;
it &apos;s just about the state of music as it is written , not to fight interpretation . &quot;
that &apos;s great . and what is with the eyes ?
that &apos;s what he does .
you know , the authority is available when it &apos;s needed to be , it &apos;s very important .
so kleiber is about the process .
as a kulturgemeinschaft , we tell ourselves a lot of stories about the future and about how we could do this out of this .
there are the world &apos;s largest nations nationen .
and in the way , in the face of climate change , it &apos;s not really durchführbar .
and it &apos;s a process that really makes pleasure .
they think about it , whether they &apos;re going to keep it going .
and the ratspräsident said , &quot; if we didn &apos;t have the transition stroud , we would have to invent this entire kommunale infrastructure for the first time . &quot;
but there &apos;s a problem .
the budgets are not really balanced , and until a degree of the very degrees of the games that you play in , that &apos;s what you can &apos;t see , which is that you can &apos;t see what the fact is really quite important .
in fact , there are five states , the worse , and really , really four states that doesn &apos;t exist in this big challenge .
and even if you just just run as well , they could put it in there .
it should be more like private accounting .
but i had a hintergedanken , when i went to gottfried schlaug , and i was in a scheideweg in my life , and i tried to decide between music and medicine .
if you laugh , you know .
many years after the solar-powered clocks , a young lady i knew that i knew that sex may be so good for the five senses .
the befragten public health , all of the five senses in a extreme sense of the extreme .
of course , the five senses are not the only thing that life is interesting .
we are all born as artists .
if you have a conversation , the kid has to be the next answer to the next to the next to what it started .
but their parents tell you , &quot; it &apos;s going to be all about the waves weggespült . &quot;
but kids are usually about fun . it &apos;s play .
but that &apos;s how a teacher is rarely .
in karaoke-bars , there are always people who are gone &quot; she &quot; or &quot; hotel &quot; california , &quot; sing in gitarren-riffs .
right in this minute , we can go back to the tv , and they &apos;re pouring out of the internet , and they &apos;re going to start doing something .
the students fall into a kind of trance .
he said it was his profile . &quot; and what are you ? &quot; i said , &quot; &quot; actor &quot; and &quot; actor &quot;
let &apos;s start with how i came to this point .
it &apos;s going to be stronger storms and bigger überflutungen .
if yes , it will give a warming in the future .
but the delay is just the expectations .
the economic consequences are almost us .
a big part of the species will be threatened by extinction .
now , if a car happens , it &apos;s imperative that we don &apos;t just save the stuntman , but the crew .
for something else , it was always used to be used in a time . once it was all that you had .
but today we use a stickstoff-druckkanone .
it &apos;s not , it &apos;s not a hüpfburg .
1960 joseph hat von von von air air air .
one of the difficulty in this altitude , if you go to 10,000 feet -- that &apos;s great , right ? if you go to 10,000 metter , you can actually use oxygen .
they have a puppet for him , just like he looked like .
we expect to expect that maybe the faa or the caa , the caa , &quot; you &apos;re going to put somebody in a suit , not commanding , which is not going to be connected to the airplane . &quot;
there was three leitmotive -- not true ? -- -- that &apos;s what the conference is important , which is important to what i want to talk about .
and the girl said , &quot; you know , you know , you know . &quot;
the problem is a artist as you &apos;re starting to go , and i &apos;m convinced that we &apos;re not going to grow into creativity , but we &apos;re going to be vielmehr out of it . or we &apos;re going to be heraus-unterrichtet .
all around the world .
the whole system was invented -- all over the world , there was no public health education system before the 19th century ago .
the brain is not in areas .
they made ballet , she made stepptanz and jazz , she was dancing and a zeitgenössische .
the festival goes to how much good , with a postitiven press for the postitiven .
we just say , we just say , &quot; we just say , &quot; we &apos;re going to go to the money .
so , i think , is a hand for me to get the way that a hand wants to get the things of things .
before i go back in the middle east , i would like to zurückkehre zuguterletzt as a quote with a quote by the largest sheiks .
it &apos;s also the krankhaftigkeit .
so nice . they are störungen of behavior , and they &apos;re the critical of the mind .
we don &apos;t have all the facts . we don &apos;t even know what the tools that will be the same or what we need to look at the same time we have to be able to be able to be able to get to the very well before .
how are you going to make it smaller ? &quot;
and the three are all the same , even though they &apos;re all equal in the context of a matter , the other ones , the other ones , the other ones , because they like this books because they have something special to themselves .
the kids have taught you to teach them .
they were very friendly .
we also think that the content is more important .
i was changing by my children .
howard &apos;s doing this experiment , and when he gets the data , he gets a curve , and suddenly he realizes that no schöne glockenkurve .
this was his meerrettich . he was obsessed with it .
howard thinks it &apos;s not that there is all this at all .
people always say , if you ask them , you wonder how you wish .
a mustard of more elegance and culture and meaning .
so , it was , and why would we see that ?
he was a few times a few times , and spent the most famous of his career in the lower ligen , and he ended up in management . he was wurde the oakland of the oakland .
we all know what happened when millions of women were erhielten for symptoms of the wechseljahre , until we were to study a vast study study , and we &apos;re herausfanden from the national institutes , found , found , in the national institutes .
thank you .
but dad erschrak unheimlich , and he didn &apos;t want to do that .
but there &apos;s also a grauzone between between .
these are four very different ways that i see the world . i named you .
what &apos;s interesting , once you see it -- and the way -- it &apos;s the 1450 -- that &apos;s from modern comics -- rechteckiges feldarrangement einfache : rechteckiges feldarrangement einfache without schattierung and a lesesequenz from left .
and that was what i proposed : we might be able to make comics on a regular screen : the x- and the line and in treppenform .
this is from daniel merlin goodbrey in the u.k. .
maybe you may have been clear for all of that long , but for me , i was so often in this application of a day , i had this der inhärente challenge .
this is honest and aufrichtig , and the reason , the reason , weswegen , feys , darstellung , darstellung darstellung .
if you think your baby is gay , to be gay , to be gay , you should have to get to the adoption .
perrys political policy was the citizens of texas aufzufordern , for the rain .
this song is called &quot; farther than . &quot;
i want to start a little bit differently , because i want to ask you to jump back and to jump to the open ocean .
she came to the verschwinden of the dinosaur , 65 million years ago , 65 million years ago , and they had a splittergruppe rebellischer kugelfische kugelfische sie .
and how do you do this ?
the kalifornische seelöwe takes the molas when they come in the bay , they put them in a kind of frisbee , and then you toss it .
i &apos;ll show you a little bit of our final data .
and the most exciting thing that was all your love and their interest in the oceans .
as you can see here , this is a 11-zoll-durchmesser platine .
something that you don &apos;t hear about .
ah- hah .
in australia , it mostly are muslims in jail .
she told him him and he &apos;s beauftragte the first entersuchung of what we call the aussteuer-tanz .
because nobody is a rücklage .
why don &apos;t we convert it to this problem in the world &apos;s life ?
on goodbye , gandhi gandhi .
could i get my final eye ?
never , it &apos;s impossible ! no ! no , no , no ! that &apos;s not possible . &quot;
you could deal with the drug with the drug .
von neumann , a logiker and a mathematician from the army brought together all together , and then she needed a room to build them .
and the challenge , and the first thing was first by fernschreiberband .
&quot; aha ! &quot; finally , she found out that it was a programmierungsproblem .
i know if i have to be beaten . &quot;
he was running the machine all night . if someone who remembers stephen wolfram , who &apos;s been invented the whole thing .
now , we &apos;re going to sit 50 years later , and it &apos;s a kind of power gesetzte animation .
sadly , in the next 18 minutes , where i &apos;m talking about , four americans who are still alive . because of their diet .
this is a global problem .
traumhafte city .
and he &apos;s the snout . he &apos;s sorry , his friends , his family and his family .
they want to do , you want to control yourself .
you know that it &apos;s been very common for long periods of time , for long time .
we don &apos;t teach our children .
and most kids get them .
okay , supermarkets .
if you can cook , it doesn &apos;t matter .
in the very america , many wonderful things go to the world , if we just look back .
misha glenny : anonymous , ladies and gentlemen -- a virtual group of politically motivierter hacker hacker hacker .
the grid connects everything and will be very soon a lot of human activities .
interestingly , interestingly , the interessanterweise interessanterweise is not anonymous information for financial profit .
he explained to me how he was talking in the 2003 and 2004 , and 2004 , in tour , took 10,000 dollars from the machines that he used to put 30,000 dollars from the machines that he used to put geklonte credit card .
he was born in süddeutschland in süddeutschland , and he would have respektiere mittelklasse familie , his obsession with play as a teenager , with a teenager .
and most of the time , with the heart of the script and cha0 , not real social ability in the outside world -- only in the net .
i think there are multiple reasons . i &apos;m not going to go into this detail , but some mention .
but they &apos;re all determined by the marketplace . and what the market is driving is in front of us -- number one is the great demographic umwälzung .
we also have a lot of examples of the dead boxes that are transformed in all kinds of social institutions , which are transformed in all kinds of social institutions , lots of churches , and many of them , like this one .
and i finally expect that the streets of the streets are going to be ausgebaut by the mall .
it &apos;s very successful . and it has helped us to decide that eight of 13 regional regional malls in denver plans have been geäussert .
the bach was taken by the parking lot of the crime .
their citizens are different than typical vorstädtisch , but they &apos;re less divers than cities .
&quot; his vagina &quot; said , &quot; she said , &quot; is a whole tageswerk . &quot;
but actually , it didn &apos;t actually work there , it began with a conversation with a woman .
it &apos;s a gender that &apos;s a fundamental resource of the planet , which is women .
it &apos;s a körperwelt , and the way it exists in the body , and i think there &apos;s a real meaning , our bodies -- that this separation has created a division of our mind -- that this separation has created a division of teilung , which is often the way that the vorhaben trennt .
i want to tell you this little story about my own beginnings because that &apos;s the very strong thing with happiness and agnes .
maybe it &apos;s a geburtsstaat south carolina , who &apos;s not much smaller than the ted wish of the time , and once again , from a future as a property country &apos;s going to wake up as a unabhängiges country .
well , maybe he was too smelly , because he was staying where he was , long after the anschluss , and even after the festnahmen and deportationen in budapest .
and he got the same answer : &quot; bring me the best workers they can find , and if they &apos;re good enough , i &apos;m going to take you . &quot;
and equally , it says , &quot; it &apos;s okay . it was so nice .
&quot; aha ! &quot; dr. robicsek . &quot; i &apos;m in the movie . &quot;
as i said , he &apos;s going to be a too much .
and you can imagine it properly .
you know what you &apos;re looking for .
but we take care of the hardest and then , and then we put the other next day .
so we came up with these two rules .
so i went to russia , and my mother went to the soviet union .
and if you think it &apos;s not anymore , it &apos;s not so long until you keep doing .
what i want to try to try and do -- i hope to make this stuff .
and what i want to point out here in the presentation , 50 percent of the united states are under the ocean .
it &apos;s rabenschwarz , because the photons can &apos;t reach the average depth of the ocean , which is the grabenbruch of the ocean .
and so we went along the gebirgszugs in a field of the galapagosriff , and found missing the missing heat .
so i began to develop a new videokommunikationstechnologie , with a robotersystem , which i replaced with me , and i don &apos;t have to go into my vehicle .
we find the status quo .
and i looked at it yesterday , she &apos;s up in seattle . ok .
but i would have a kid without license the control of my life .
in some parts of the world , for example , in south africa , it &apos;s only hard to be accessible .
when we saw the effects of the angebots , decided that we had to build it in order to build this , so many people could make the best possible .
what was this special of these ?
the video will be done every few minutes and the students will ask a question .
so , we wanted to convince some of our colleagues of the humanities that there is no bad news .
in terms of the way to you , you can ask , which is the most inspiring things , and how to help students to repair those students .
we even see the beginning of either through a personalized personalisierten or through personalisiertes feedback that we showed them .
i thought about my place in the universe and about what my first thought was , what was infinity when i was a kid .
and in our society , it &apos;s mostly about the reality of others .
i have this doubt about the values of culture . like , for example , it &apos;s been expected to be a rational rational rational rational .
so , you can understand my surprise when i was reading the new yorker , &quot; that alan greenspan , vorsitzender reserve , behauptet , ayn , ayn rand .
i think you can make those fun of those funny who have not , and not about the ones that don &apos;t have , and that &apos;s not because of this reason i &apos;m not going to have jokes about kenneth and his charming fau .
i &apos;m going to vermiss the old times of the football , i &apos;ll tell you .
he said , i &apos;d have to pay him more respect , because it can take to 18 years to get a really good job .
huh ? yes ? what ? i can &apos;t hear them . &quot;
and i &apos;m afraid that really doesn &apos;t seem to be a active .
i talked about moshe safdies thoughts about beauty that they &apos;re yesterday , and there &apos;s no chance of gestern , and he says that he can be able to make the very beauty of beauty .
george bush bush : what the defense of our security also costs , and what the defense of our freedom is , we need to pay the price . &quot;
ten years ago , no one of the world would have been thought of the world -- well , or very few astronomers -- that it &apos;s beyond our solar system .
many other ecosystems on earth are truly truly true in danger .
he constantly constantly constantly constantly ständig that a experiment with a particle store and a kettenreaktion auslösen that destroyed the world .
we need to have to make the same as a patient &apos;s same as kernkraftwerken .
so , we don &apos;t want to see , of course .
what can we do ?
and now the worst thing comes .
we use a lot of money to make sure that we don &apos;t die at a flugzeugabsturz , but we &apos;re not going to give it almost nothing . and yet it &apos;s totally preventable .
we don &apos;t want to be caught up on the wrong foot .
i hope that &apos;s going to happen .
it &apos;s very , very important because this is the system , the schmelztiegel , which is the life on the planet , and it &apos;s now time for us to understand it .
it &apos;s a remarkable insight . and we only know about this .
and that &apos;s what the system mitbringt , a number of standorten in the southern hemisphere , in these circles .
everybody who comes up later , grabs it simply to the database , and can be able to figure out the information that &apos;s needed to be needed , what &apos;s going on .
we &apos;re on the wave , the technologischen possibilities .
in a earthquakes , a very large amounts of new microbes that we never saw before , we never saw before .
the ozeanograph john delaney builds a network of hochauflösenden cameras and sensors that our oceans , the global lab -- and it &apos;s a datenexplosion about the world of the deep .
so i think optimism is the architecture of architecture .
so once again , radical versus conservative .
the unerklärliche against the system , you know , you want to understand anything .
our intellectual desires are complex .
you know that it &apos;s true ; the cathedrals , as unexpected , are always being unexpected .
but i &apos;m not going to play something completely unknown , and even with mistakes , instead of doing the same thing , so that it &apos;s about the same time .
risks of those who have never been so schwindelerregend , as they should be in a particular city .
there &apos;s the emotions of the victims .
daniel libeskind builds up very big ideas . he calls this 17 begriffe that &apos;s basically basically basically to basically basically basically -- raw , gewagt , radical , radical -- and inspiration for every part of the kühne creativity .
it also has the lowest of the cars of all the things .
does something really , really , or will it just give a few hauptstrecken ?
em : that needs to be simple . if not , we &apos;re in big trouble .
with this capital , and she was looking at the kollektoren on the roof and calculate the haus- or geschäftsbesitzer a monthly leasing-rate , which is smaller than the electricity .
we &apos;re almost failed , but we &apos;ve got to get 2008 to it .
it &apos;s similar to a jet jet .
how to be able to be a person being able to be a person ?
look at that .
boy , if you were to hütest our livestock and a cheetahs like it , it &apos;s a very nervous , it &apos;s very nervous .
we &apos;re litten hungry .
our tradition look like this : in every himba-dorf , there &apos;s a holy fire .
until now , we were with support of the world wildlife in the position of the world , the very small programs to programmen to programmen .
very important -- we invest in the money in enlightenment and hiv .
taschenführer -- always , a streitpunkt of the world &apos;s largest in the world -- are very useful , they &apos;re a wonderful way .
and we &apos;re going to be used to account these price behind huge .
dan barber and alice waters führen leidenschaftlich leidenschaftlich for ökologisches .
schalentiere , clams , oysters , oysters , venusmuscheln , buntbarsch , saibling , saibling -- that was the famous species .
this is like a kater of protein .
science sees the world through the mind , quantitatively , things can be measured and can be described , but you can have the art of knowledge and insight .
and from a few cameras , after a few cameras , after three weeks , i was a plan with 25 zeitraffer-kameras .
that &apos;s natural cycle .
that would not normally do a anständiger photographer , a photograph so , right ?
here you see how the glaciers draws back to the glaciers and the glacier back .
this is a couple of cameras here .
could india be india , or a global center for innovation , just like it &apos;s become a global center for backoffice-dienstleistungen and softwareentwicklung ?
if we asked them in the conversation with the people who were they were asked to work on them , they said , &quot; we &apos;re working on global products . &quot;
you can &apos;t be professor professor , if they were not too graduate .
the best hospitals , in the doctors , they would go to the doctors , and i think , in births , hirnschlägen , heart disease , for artificial hüftgelenke , notfälle , notfälle .
it works a little like -- this is a recently ausgeführte google-suchanfrage for four in the morning .
i said , i know a codierte message when i see a look .
everybody in our society comes with cancer -- if not personal , then , through a beloved human , a member , a colleague , a friend .
in this raumfähre , the genetic material , the chromosomes , within one of the nucleus .
we have tumor treating fields in the lab at over 20 different cancers , and we see this effect of all of those .
he received the standardbehandlungen .
but what we can see is that in sixth month , the tumor is reacting , and he starts wegzuschmelzen .
that &apos;s just the beginning .
this is a new steel , a new project .
in fact , they &apos;re 15 feet deep , and harvesting rainwater from the roof , there &apos;s a little bit of a innenhof , and from your courtyard .
so , water from 300 , 400 miles , it looks like this .
it &apos;s a bach or a flüsschen , and a flüsschen durch .
this is called &quot; kund . &quot; in english , we have oberflächenwasser and grundwasser .
and they have to go further .
these are the beautiful ones that we &apos;re seeing on one of the images .
and hiv-infektionsraten are 27 percent , 600,000 people have received hiv per year per year .
10 percent of india .
they &apos;re going to get the jobs in the field that people get out of the landarmut and put them in the way .
and the countries to the right , because you see the pro-kopf-bip , basically , every country has a pro-kopf-bip , say , we say , less than 5,000 dollars a korruptionsrang .
in the first 20 years , in the &apos; 60s and 70s , india grew not as right .
buy african products .
but i think that a much bigger problem that this logic is because that this logic -- that we should be ipods and not bombs -- i mean , it would be a great title for thomas friedmans .
and then , 500 people have come and four people who were chosen to visit the next to the next to go and to besichtigen , and they &apos;re going to bloggen it .
so now citizens can be bürger in the planning to 2020 , because it &apos;s still the dictators that are controlling the agenda .
evgeny morozov : erfüllt the internet of music &apos;s worst expectations ?
&quot; like a man . &quot;
and he was hanging with us younger guys .
because for me , the time in this time was heranwuchs and in this männer-kisten-beziehung , the question was , &quot; do you want to be ? either you have sex or drugs -- and drugs we don &apos;t .
i was like paralyzed , people .
and now , as indians , and now , politician , and i &apos;m also going to be very , very , very , very , very , very , very um , the our country , all the great talk about india as new weltführer , even the new superpower .
in other words , all kinds of kommunikationsgeräte stories of countries , regardless of countries , whether the way they want to come , they &apos;re not coming .
but the flash of the country was very slow , it was kind of a half an hour until a half hour until a call durchgestellt .
it can &apos;t understand the dialogues .
and that can sometimes have a clever , ok .
and those of you who have to have their money here , like to see surprised as many schriftsysteme on the rupien-schein , the nennwert .
i went home and i got a little bit , and i found some startling statistics .
ludwick marishane : a bath without water .
and i &apos;m feeling like george bush .
now , this title , this phrase , comes from a critic , a single critic critic , and this is a passage that i just love , and i would like to read you , &quot; you would like to read them .
and that &apos;s a good thing , because if it would be like , nature &apos;s a problem : how to get all in the world , we get chimpanzees to mate ?
that &apos;s the hardest part , which is not obvious , and therefore i have it for the end .
ok ? stop . so .
i don &apos;t know why pinke are flamingos , but no , they &apos;re there in the backyard .
thank you , thank you .
i suspect that the most popular probably probably probably many reasons why we &apos;re very , very quick , very quickly .
it &apos;s soltle . you should see this .
and bob mckim has a different -- another version of this practice in a very famous experiment in the &apos; 60s .
and we &apos;ve learned that time : you &apos;re going to have a much better resource , much more creative output , if everybody thinks about the rules .
and suddenly it had a productive conversation about design for a handfestes object .
they are sometimes a bit skeptical , i &apos;ll come back to it .
you know , how it feels like , all of these insecurity , as you get down in the corridor , as you get the physicians in one of the sanitätsräume in one of the sanitätsräume , and you wonder what this is going on .
so , we would feel secure and have a good time because we have taught us about the rules and so we would have agreed .
we do everything to success , but then if we &apos;re there , we believe we &apos;re going to have it there , we &apos;re going to have to have it to be satisfied and just to do something that has done it .
i was faster , but the same thing .
i &apos;ve learned that success is not a one-way street .
and the sopran-stimmgruppe is just full of hotter . &quot;
i wrote , &quot; oh my god , &quot; -- hopefully , for the last time in the public .
he made sure everything .
it took a few people to participate .
and the second is that people don &apos;t know a real connection .
these are questions .
as you can see in modern liberals , the society allows us to predict the society , the state of our self , our self , but it &apos;s also not going to be done .
it means that we &apos;re our full of our full potential as human beings .
so these are the layers of questions that i wanted to guide today -- the question : what are the intentions that come to the application that you come to the application ?
so i said , and my colleague , sebastian , sebastian , i think , is that there needs better methods .
and we were successful .
i &apos;m going to give you a fall in the fall .
he schubst them in the right position , stupst them with his nose and beating .
we found the first surprise .
it had to give it a kind of sprungfedermechanismus to create the area of force and the speed that we observe and the ausgangsgrößen of the system .
a load of light measures forces and that is actually a piezoelektrische load with a crystal in inside .
this is the fangarm -- here &apos;s the heel , and that &apos;s going to meet the load cell .
a very , very , very bequeme solution to the particular problem .
and hawkes : it &apos;s not earth , stupid , it &apos;s ocean .
i think that &apos;s one of the most beautiful classical most classical klassischen , which was built ever built .
i don &apos;t know any other tauchfahrzeuge , not even ferngesteuerte , which just benefit that this is a three-dimensional space .
now look at that -- he just makes me just .
the submarine , the last year was this one .
gleichermassen is the understanding of architecture as a störer , zusammenhanglos , zusammenhanglos , please apologize , please apologize , the obvious example we need to choose .
basically , new york on the back of the back of the austernfischer was built to be built by the strassen of their shells .
in these eight seitlichen seitlichen , little babyaustern kammern , they &apos;re going to be gemästet .
so , you know , you were going to be in london , and was overwhelmed from this gestank .
finally , created a map of the road .
and that &apos;s what happens every second week .
i &apos;ve made her full of the spitze temple .
and in this field of the amazon discovered it discovered oil .
the other side of the extinction is tora , where actually is going to be aufhalten bin , and that &apos;s stammes-gebiet .
this was one of the big motivationsfaktoren .
this is the ausgangsüberlegung . let me go back and show you the hubble ultra of the deep deep field .
but then you get jupiter and the is 40 minutes away . that &apos;s a problem .
that &apos;s going to be part of the universe , which is about the beginning of the universe .
we only have a million galaxies , and we have a million galaxies .
so the stuff is in the image , dark matter .
when you &apos;ve seen this image for the first time you have seen it , you can &apos;t see much of this .
this simulation was taken a month for 1,000 processors , just to make this visible .
with planck , we &apos;re a resolution that is about this image of earth , which is actually the complicated pattern of earth .
and in the aftermath of course , we are stressed .
47 percent .
that &apos;s crazy . we do all the time , even in the everyday life .
i got stuck in a vicious cycle , and that led to a lot of pain and problems with the joints , so i could almost nothing more .
i wondered why you could be creative , if you &apos;re looking for intent to the constraints of the restriction ?
this whole happened happened to the next thing .
so this is a tragen of dosimetern , as a offizieller bewacher , and there &apos;s drakonische strahlungsregeln and andauerndes überwachen .
stalin &apos;s stalins hungersnöte of the 30er , töteten , töteten , killing the nazis , the nazis , the metzelten , vergewaltigten , vergewaltigten , vergewaltigten , and many of women were born as a zwangsarbeiterinnen .
the fact is the sadness . &quot;
and as a filmmaker , the idea of the idea of what we &apos;ve been talking about , what we &apos;ve learned in the virtual world about us and we could use our identity to use a better life in the real world .
we used to get a new way of being in common .
human relationships are easier , chaotic and fordernd .
it tröstete them .
because in the moment , in the moment , even in the people , even for a few seconds , they &apos;re going to be hibbelig , angsterfüllt , they get panicked , they &apos;re going to reach a electronic device .
but we are in danger because in truth , the opposite is true .
i &apos;m optimistic .
but apparently we didn &apos;t have any of the most popular gewonnen who had been predicted , and quite often -- pretty often , i was pretty often , i would say that she had a predictions of the way we had a predictions of faith .
maybe because my father always has always been read .
so i left them with a ruhe -- but properly , and they had to be .
finally , i thought i was a pyramid , but i &apos;m missing time to take it on it .
although you lose , not fear of failure , if we &apos;ve given all the failure of failure , because who can be more yearning than anything that he can .
if i &apos;m going to name it , i never know a answer .
i have enough geschwafelt ?
the second challenge would be cells .
today , in many clinical trials are trying to use different kinds of stem cells for heart disease .
only last month is we &apos;ve succeeded with this technology , the creation of human lebergewebes .
we can turn it up and to turn the niere and the kidney niere in all its volumetrischen properties , and then we can take this information and take this information to the computergestütztem print .
i couldn &apos;t regularly go to school . i was just dirty .
i was a kid , i said , &quot; yes , i want to do that . i want to .
you may have noticed that a new area is called the swap-tauschhandel .
and in the world , there were always examples of the world -- from the election of an president , and from the election to the berühmt-berüchtigten wikipedia , and everything is in between in between -- the ones that could achieve the power of a crowd .
and thirdly , drängende , ungelöste environmental issues .
because what you need is that the hole , not the drill .
i don &apos;t want to cd , i want the music that you &apos;re playing .
i &apos;m my name joseph and i &apos;m a book in kenya .
we have to have our women and children , we need to run . &quot;
i &apos;m trying to improve the infrastructure .
late late night , i went home with batteries and ice .
together : anybody post-its ?
co : i decided to stay in the country that &apos;s a master of moscow and in the material that we &apos;re doing .
that can be huge spending , but if the city can be a number of x volunteers for y to win the dollarwert of the aufgewendeten work of the city of the city .
they have hotlines , tables and data .
so , that &apos;s what the 18 minutes , which was made me to talk to me , to speak here , between zwei- and dreitausend people who are going to be the cities .
and he was in a großflächigeren wässrigen .
the buildings here have a couple of stories .
these green things are in the foreground .
and if you &apos;re a legaler unter-stadtbezirk , you have a political activity .
i couldn &apos;t know that i would be part of a technological revolution that would be going to be true .
think about it . these men who didn &apos;t have the same irrational cap as i , i was helping me through their support , weiterführende gardens in the mainstream .
at the time , they were just used to texterkennungsprogramme , but by looking at a schriftart , but by looking at a ladungsgekoppelten flachbettscanner and sprachgeneratoren , he could develop a machine that could read the whole schriftart .
but you know , i find it very lonely to read me by machines .
because it &apos;s not allowed to transport these books on border , and the different englischsprachigen of the border , had to be different from different versions of the border , the united states , usa , australia , australia , all the various lesungen of harry .
the durschschnittl . now , in terms of 1840 has been more than doubled , and she grows with a pace of five hours a day .
one last thing . you want people like me to happiness ?
second , the new machine is such a good news because once the androids work , we &apos;re not going to do that , we &apos;re not going to have to do this , and the engineering of the things we have .
the societal challenges of these inequality should be counted .
the economic playbook are surprisingly clear , and surprisingly straightforward , particularly on the short view .
and my biggest concern is that we create a world with schillernden technologies , embedded in a slightly more democratic society and supported by a economy , which is ungleichheit by the opportunity .
in the course of years , i began to feel increasingly unwohler with this notion of god .
some have geschlussfolgert , that we can only believe in a god , the most important thing .
in the second strophe , the line comes up and the wind and waves obey him .
so who &apos;s god , if not the great strippenzieher or stammesbewahrer ?
the liebende soul of the universe .
by looking at the god in the stream , by looking at my own einwärtigkeit .
one of the first things i began to explore was the story of the begriffs &quot; technology . &quot;
we have no neanderthalerfossilien , which was older than 40 years , and the average age of this hunter-gatherer and collectors tribes are 20 to 30 times as soon as they are .
our bodies has been used to this new diet .
this equality of energy and matter , the einstein has shown and also the modern science of the quantencomputer shows that entropy and matter and energy and energy and energy is all associated with each other , so it &apos;s a long time .
this is a robot that wants his own plug to get more electricity .
and what i mean by that is that we &apos;re looking for a new job .
a great development of years ago , the billions of years ago , moving through us and continues , and our choice lies in the technology , is really , really , really , to us with this power that is much more powerful than we are .
and they said , &quot; well , we have five classes of á 30 to 40 students .
we &apos;re all going down to all the stuff , and we found beautiful holzböden , and it &apos;s got this look -- as we said , somebody said , &quot; you know what the hull looks like . &quot;
so we waited , we sat down the tables and have waited .
there are many symbioseeffekte . the only problem , specifically , for the adults , especially for the adults that they &apos;ve been really knew about all of the nothing really started when they started a toilet .
the teachers we work with -- everything is different for teachers -- they tell us what we &apos;re supposed to do .
about 170 tutors , with them , working with them , and so this is wonderful .
and right behind it -- there &apos;s a little chain -- straight behind you , they saw kids .
there &apos;s this geheimtür -- it &apos;s a shelf that you don &apos;t see if you &apos;re going to see in the herein , but it &apos;s moving slowly .
he &apos;s evangelisch . he does his sleeping with his home .
and i &apos;ll write him a email , he will tell you any question you can imagine .
i was this girl .
eighty percent of the refugees in the world are women and children . oh .
there &apos;s one side that thinks that peace is the end of the combat , and there &apos;s one side that thinks that peace thinks that peace means the creation of schools and artistic means .
they sent her kids to school -- found a new home .
there &apos;s one , which is , for full of komplette , &quot; did you know ?
on cape conditions there are idyllische roads , and we can all all here .
that &apos;s my baby . thank you very much .
he said , &quot; i &apos;ve designed everything . &quot;
and i have no sense of feeling that much of it .
so i encountered this kind of complications .
i found out that there are a cheetos ausdrucksmaterial .
the school is at the most difficult , so , number 10 to do it -- is it number 10 .
from a weird hotelhalle of klarsichtfolie , which is about a window on a window to the moment where the road had been geteert in front of my house and had this weisse dort in the sun .
and i was struck by the outstanding presentation of karen armstrong reminded that religion really understood really , really understand , but with behavior .
the nordpol-eisschicht has seen , geographically , the same size . it doesn &apos;t look like this , but it has exactly the same size as the united states , the abzüglich of a gebiets , which is about the same size of the state .
but it &apos;s not just the way .
we can &apos;t wait to wait the trockenheit , the australia had to change our political culture .
this challenge is part of the structure of our whole civilization .
a new appreciation of the privilegs that we have through the presumption of this challenge .
before i show you a few images to the preview , i want to point out on this lovely detail of wissenschaflter and design .
the rca in this sense actually really , really , a lovely school .
we have now spoken with keith shrubb that many scientists have not tend to be a nice thing to show something beautiful in their lectures , and they &apos;re being seen in the dumme of a dumme .
so here &apos;s examples of that you can actually print in 3d in 3d , which is very interesting .
so that makes us think of that , what robots are going to mean .
no . so i had to think a little bit .
we did the same for iraq .
that was a challenge that we had to ask ourselves as a physicist .
we can press it up . the forces are more . there are more of them , but they &apos;re weaker .
&quot; naturally seven &quot; beatboxt a whole band of band a whole band .
and there are some of those employees in foundations that called the mitgefühl-müdigkeit .
the idea of justice , which is our life , which is what our lives are doing , and we have a sense of life in life , what &apos;s the life in life is what we should do , social justice .
and like this is , he &apos;s going to be a döste during the predikt .
so every week , the putzkraft would be the putzkraft , &quot; god , you have me . &quot;
they &apos;re a symptom for a tumor , a infection , one of an infection or a surgery .
the muscles were , paralyzed , paralyzed -- dystonisch -- like this .
we &apos;re treating them with symptomverändernden drugs -- schmerzmitteln -- who are frankly , in this kind of pain aren &apos;t very effective .
now you get a sense of a snapshot of how much rock we talk here .
it was 1908 . does nothing . so i can live .
i don &apos;t know if you can see him from the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of
in 2005 , nasa started a spacecraft called &quot; deep impact &quot; that one of the things that you &apos;re in the core of a comet .
these are smart guys -- men and women -- astronauts like i said .
the difference between the dinosaurs and us is that we can have a raumfahrtprogramm and can choose and we can actually change and we can change our future .
at that time , i have , i have the only independent independent to be precise , the only electronic medium of the country .
and i thought that b92 would survive and a great company would be , if milosevic would be gone , what was going on .
and at the end of the time he says , look , it won &apos;t work , you &apos;ll never see your money , but my foundation will put 50,000 dollars in the table so you can actually test the idea .
and we said , that &apos;s all right , we meet us your business-plan , which they did .
see , we have ost- and mitteleuropa with our work and went after russia .
after a while , we opened a medienmanagement-zentrum .
and we developed the idea of being able to replicate , by the way , to press the freie .
and in this way , you have the funding that we don &apos;t have any dunkelkammern , no more or no more than any blind , they get to find .
so why does this work ? that &apos;s the question .
now , some call that a theory of anything .
just an example of the : , newton figured out law of gravity , which works like a divided across the square of the abstandes of the abstandes .
the more symmetry you have , the better you do the simplicity and elegance of the theory .
one thing that he thought most of us are thinking about most of us than granted , but it wasn &apos;t .
it doesn &apos;t take the meaning of these instruction that they &apos;re going to be grundlegenderen , and accidents .
but he read in every free moment he had , books .
from this ambition , he went back to the staatsparlament .
but when he was just doing , his signature , his signature , his hand was deaf and he , because he was a thousand hands during a neujahrsempfangs .
not very surprising -- it was just three women under the 16 stipendiaten in the white house .
but i have to say , the more older i realized , the more i understand what a piece of privilege was to have this aging , with this aging lion , so many hours of a man .
and so , like lincoln told the story , went after the war after the war .
i asked my dad under tears : &quot; what can we do ? &quot;
what &apos;s the reason that i &apos;m always grateful for this strange thing to be the story that allowed me to spend life in the past .
he had the temple and geplündert .
this is the erlass , this object is proof of the objekt in babylon , after the exil , after the exil , they were sitting in babylon , and in the memory of the erinnerung , and i realized that those jews were going to go home .
all of these are being respected .
the babylonische cylinder is from the priestern of the great gotts of babylon , written .
you all know what happened .
to see this object in tehran , thousands of thousands of iran were living in iran .
some knowledge know more about the dortigen conditions , but they think they &apos;re a notwendiges loan .
the newly new aufgenommenen babies in the first few hours , but their needs were not accepted , but their needs didn &apos;t have to be satisfied and eventually they didn &apos;t know anymore , and they were lustlos to the air , and they start starten in the air .
a study shows that 10 percent cost a heimunterbringung cost , as opposed to 30 percent costs .
and that fascinated me , because i had my entire life in front of a camera .
you know very fast , you know , to do something to find an answer .
there were 114 people -- most of it and family .
we heard anybody .
but of course he never came . the explanation never occurred .
and after many , many meetings i was excited that this man , ahmad fawzi , really one of my heroes and mentors , it has done to get the unicef in the boat .
so he said , and we found ourselves in afghanistan .
they were the ones who believed and to peace and to his possibilities , etc , etc -- and they were actually going to be a reality .
we connect with olympia -- i met seb coe . i said , &quot; at london 2012 , it &apos;s about the truce .
it &apos;s about their wählerbezirke , to ask her business .
the largest brains of the world should be the cognitively .
i durchforstete the literature after the origin of this number , but i could never find them .
there &apos;s just a big primatengehirn .
and amazingly , amazingly , that &apos;s exactly what our ancestors invented the vorfahren 1.5 hundred years ago than they discovered the cook .
right , very simple little bit of the hochtechnischen , i led .
and i think i &apos;m just at the beginning .
but once the fighting turns out , the physical rehabilitation was taken .
behind him , a kid , his son , quit in the face of effort , his father .
but mahmoud and his son were there .
i was talking to my bosses , and i said -- i &apos;m log -- i said , &quot; look , we &apos;re going to start with a few hours a day , just for some of the most successful . &quot;
two groups of the mudschaheddin started fighting .
so i said , &quot; what is it ? &quot;
but yeah , we need to raise production of your feet .
he was a new man , even taller .
physiotherapie , not just in the orthopedic , but in the houses of people .
and they should see me as a partie .
and this hospital could have afforded to be able to afford .
why ? because the way i did was i had been banned .
but i learned something more unusual than what this is the leader -- the manager of the economy -- the manager of the economy -- environmentally bad decisions that we had taken our economy before the collapse .
because i knew that the state of the african continent was important for my children and their children .
i &apos;m trying to get the experience i had to get into swarthmore .
my time is my time ? ok .
we &apos;ve achieved a moment from which a great society can be texted within a generation .
you &apos;ll notice that he &apos;s very ähnelt yellow ball -- the sun we draw as a children .
in fact , this is something that half of them are more than half , it &apos;s not being familiar .
32 tabletten s .
probably leb . &quot;
and those are the messages that they were going to raise them ?
because , in the course , the sponsors , like , the sponsors , he loves it , and so he puts them back to television .
a professional hellseherin hellseherin that &apos;s talking about dead , they don &apos;t do me ?
what is homöopathie ?
we &apos;d like to show you a lot of people like you bundes- , landes- and kommunale and behörden , so they do something .
thank you .
so , the entire hospital often often just talk about a generator .
there must be something better . &quot;
but that can be the user control whether it &apos;s right or not , because you can control the zufuhr on the ground , how much percent of the patient will give you your patient .
but we want to be sure that this is the most effective and the safest device is that we can provide hospitals .
the different kinds of writing in africa , the first was protoschreiben , like the writing nsibidi , which is the schriftsystem of a secret society of the ejagham-volkes .
anyway , from 1998 , as a yale-professor called john coleman darnell in westägypten inschriften , john darnell in westägypten inschriften , which were discovered in 1,800 to 1900 b.c. jahrhunderte , centuries .
almost a fifth of all greenhouse gases from the viehzucht -- that &apos;s more than the traffic .
not bad .
i like animals , and the tierhaltung and the tierhaltung and animals to produce the middle of the tools , not just fine .
feinkost was a pure french .
a picture of fischstäbchen would be better , right ?
so it wasn &apos;t quite bad .
i &apos;m going to ask you a question .
some of us would say that maybe that might not be so badly .
i asked a question about a year ago , i asked myself , &quot; why am i know what i know , no vegetarian ? &quot;
so , in the weekend , you have the choice .
you can make a picture with a iphone and all the name , even though it does even make mistakes .
they &apos;re going to be distracted . he eventually win .
you can &apos;t see it because it &apos;s too big .
you would mean , it was a interest in terms of what if the stakes are so high , but it &apos;s a very noisy area .
or a aesthetic experience -- a sonnenuntergang or a big artwork .
the human nature would have to change .
but part of the reason -- and that &apos;s why we have a ethical level in the north of the verfolgung -- is that they are also intrinsically valuable .
it could be more complicated , but not very .
jh : is it befreiend with these forces ?
and so i knew i &apos;m going to do something about remote remote .
so there &apos;s eranziehungskraft , there &apos;s fliehkraft , because it &apos;s the dynamic behavior of liquid .
and so i think that you can be vorhersagend .
this is a great assistent in the studio .
we take the pizza , our first world , and we &apos;re able to engage the individuals during the bote in the hallway and we &apos;re anstarrt .
i was 20 , before i went to a yard .
i thought , okay , you &apos;ve got some criteria like you want to make the works .
it &apos;s not photoshop .
they were interested in a fashion way to create alternatives , and they needed money , so they decided to make some interesting parts projects .
this project called &quot; liebesnest . &quot;
and so we went to the grave , and we did this , it was hilarious -- the attention that we got .
and they describes the zäpfchen -- everything you say it &apos;s a lot of verbotenen .
he &apos;s a australischer stammesältester of the garden , and he &apos;s also an artist .
it &apos;s related to origami . so here .
people wandten mathematical principles to understand the art of the things .
or they put it on the top and make 50 stars on a flag .
how would you make a single flap ?
we &apos;ve found these rules that you find out of the circles , you covers the kreismuster with lines , the extra rules . that makes the crease pattern .
you can do a lot of things .
but , if you want to make it bigger , you might need something origami .
and it doesn &apos;t matter whether you &apos;re in space or if you &apos;re going to go into a body .
i grew up in a blockhütte in the state of washington , to too much more free to a lot of time on a lot of time .
we only have three minutes . but we &apos;re talking about it .
and therefore , i want to talk about it because if we don &apos;t recognize it , it will be very painful .
and in a moment i &apos;m going to show you a graph of a graph , and what you &apos;re going to see in the graph -- it starts in the year 2000 , just before women start to überfluten , and it goes to the day .
you were to get out of the top .
because i &apos;m going to write all this book , i &apos;m still going to go and have no answer .
and that was very disheartening .
since we didn &apos;t have this information , and we &apos;re not able to get back to us in the form of culture , in this weird , and we can see where you can see that it can change .
there &apos;s no man or not a woman who &apos;s in the middle , and this is the cables .
and the personal income on a scale , the constant was kept , to consider inflation , in this time , almost a verdoppelt , almost tripled .
and to listen to me and understand what i say , you need to do a second per second .
and it &apos;s going to be happening in the last book of me , &quot; i have a few ceos who i interviewed a few ceos who have been described by their environment and at the same time they &apos;ve been described with a lot of social strata , with a lot of social backgrounds .
control is always a safe thing , because you feel like you feel , but not quite a lot .
&quot; where are you born , grew up and went to school ? &quot;
because when my grandparents were born , they had their own meaning for what &apos;s home . they had their meaning for community , and even for hostility , which was von by birth to geburt . they didn &apos;t really have the opportunity to go beyond .
more and more people are in the future or present , and present to present , like in the past .
i went down into the room where i should sleep .
pico iyer : where is you home ?
there was a huge gap between the one billion countries in the developed countries and the two billion in the developing world .
but this is the world that we have today . no longer have .
and let me show you why i &apos;m going to use the altmodischen , digital technology .
the survival of the kids are the new green .
and again , they were better than we were , &quot; your brits and your mortality rate in heart disease is shocking . &quot;
but if you have people , you don &apos;t change people , you don &apos;t change the high level of heart disease .
and i started working with zellkulturen , they were actually growing , and then i worked with knockout-maus-modellen -- mice , mice , which didn &apos;t make the gene .
one of the subjects was my subjects , and of course i don &apos;t know how old she is .
could you be in the summer of the summer , as well as well .
certainly a lot of progress , a lot of progress live .
this is actually real photography , in the time , the zeigt that that &apos;s going to make a lot of days .
and here you see here on the right , which is something that &apos;s happened , which is happened , the technical angepasste .
a blutgefäß is made of two different cell types .
we put it back into this ofenähnliche device , which is the ofenähnliche device that we put back into this ofenähnliche device .
more more complex organs , organs , and we &apos;re going to be the most successful of solid organs , with a lot of blutgefäßen organs , with each blutgefäßen organs , like heart , liver and kidneys .
that &apos;s still in the experimentierstadium .
we prefer cells that aren &apos;t going to be not , and not a tumors .
we need only five seconds .
for every problem there , you have heard anyone else .
so , i &apos;m going to take a little bit something in panic -- unlike all of the koffein and sugars i had -- but this is a really powerful way .
that doesn &apos;t mean you have to visit a mba-programm .
i went from door to door and sells .
it &apos;s like a recession . so there &apos;s a recession , there &apos;s a recession .
and you would make this chairs .
that &apos;s pointless . &quot; you have to find a way to get money .
i sold a lot of sonnenbrillen .
they don &apos;t get no regular income , but they have the opportunity to find other tasks , and they learn the ability to find the ability to find the ability to find the ability to find other possibilities .
if you go into a restaurant and bad , you &apos;ll show you how bad kundenservice looks like .
these boys , locust .
the development of today &apos;s students , all of the interests of a bord .
the erlenen of grundfähigkeiten or a minimun an , which is the most important part of the students .
the values of the past are also resuscitated , which is a lot of society .
but it &apos;s a policy of principles , not the parteilichkeit .
you have a mind . and they have other people .
what we should have to do when we think about conservative -- except the one case the one -- what it is is , you &apos;re about to go to church .
yeah , i know you don &apos;t believe me .
and that leads not only to another result , it has the potential to change how we deal with each other .
completely different .
actually , it &apos;s not a non-profit organization , but it &apos;s clear -- let me finish the piece of a simple way to give you a simple way to deal with the amount of the amount of devices they want to get them .
john mccain .
and i wonder how often something happened .
he told me he &apos;s the versuchsperson hereinbrachte and then said , &quot; there &apos;s a queue in the next room , and we &apos;re going to be hereingehen . &quot;
so , for today , i had the idea that i &apos;m going to show you through this process and show you how this trip looks like .
and the hospital and general , general , was glad .
i survived , just so we can understand .
i &apos;m always constantly asking people to ask people , &quot; is it really possible to use those microbial ecosystems to use our advantage ? &quot;
another way that microbes can expand through humans . architects are architekten spaces to spaces of rooms to the zwischenmenschliche or the exchange of ideas in the world , and to encourage offices .
imagine a design that takes microbes in the airplane or a phone .
and nobody knew about it .
my company , owl , built a system called guide for the apple macintosh .
in 1992 , his credit was rejected by the hypertextkonferenz .
and greenpeace wanted to be the unterbinden , and a method that you wanted to do with that , was to put this humpback einzupflanzen einzupflanzen .
on 78 percent of the voices . to give you a glimpse of the erdrutschartigen victory : a rang 2 in the beliebtheitsskala , only three percent .
and the last message i want to share with you , is , you can be a pretty successful thing .
i don &apos;t think i don &apos;t need to explain what a big privilege to stand today .
this is school who was built with the community .
something that we have in gando are tontöpfe .
just like that .
good morning . magic is a great way to be the realitätskurve , to be able to be able to do this possible , which is really going to be really possible .
there &apos;s color red and the color black , they stand for the most basic change of day .
voice : why not ? that &apos;s a very good leaf .
this is a illusion .
so this is china , a civilization-state , and not so much .
but you can &apos;t take a country like china , in the basis of the ground , a system .
and the reason for this is , first , the state in china gets a very special -- a very special of the repräsentant , the embodiment and the hüter of the chinese civilization , the zivilisationsstaats civilization .
he was a 1972 1972 , verband beijing and shanghai .
we &apos;ve seen this in terms of the g20 -- the position of the g7 rasant -- or the g8 .
he goes on a street in the middle of the suburb , and the cars underneath the car .
red is = blue , which is the equivalent of blue bass green orange size , which is violett leads , which is = pads .
and the first song was in english , the second one was chinese .
they agreed to her .
i did graffiti , writing my name of the city , used the city as a canvas .
i mean , that was the faces of my friends .
they all accepted that your image was going to be the opposite of each other .
&quot; you mean , you &apos;re a israelisches face -- that a funny , schneidet , right ? &quot;
and most of the places i went to go , i decided to go to the media .
i took more photos on and we launched the project .
are you a very nice organization ? are you from the media ? &quot;
so the roofs were the roofs , witzelte a woman , &quot; now , can me see me . &quot;
because this is a big part of it . there &apos;s layers behind every photograph .
but they basically have a promise to me .
or , &quot; how can we help . &quot;
when i think about the national leaders and what you &apos;re doing is why it &apos;s happening now , i think there &apos;s some factors that i want to give you as a hintergrundinformation .
they have a trend .
zipcar started a decade ago , in 2000 .
it &apos;s an impact on the participation . cities have been geheißen to it .
it &apos;s very inexpensive , and it &apos;s very fashionable .
the last 40 years were extraordinary .
and also , miniaturization .
this would be a erheblichen migrationszuwachs .
it &apos;s really vital that the ted ideas of ted ideas , ideas about the ideas that we think , and make sure that this is a particularly critical century and not one of the umweltkatastrophe and ökokollaps .
my neighbor family &apos;s boring academic , which is to collect with this engaging of eliteunis for our ambassador .
i said , &quot; i &apos;m here to meet the prime minister . &quot;
i thought he was crazy , but something really stuck .
i was , very , very , like you here , in the audience .
this is another picture .
since netra was my career , it has a lot of success .
i started to explore the dunkleren of the human psyche .
so , i said , let &apos;s try something else .
so i said , &quot; okay . &quot;
sw : much better . einstein is very honored to be here at ted 2006 between all the world &apos;s today . in fact , they &apos;re very excited .
it would be very dangerous if you were going to fall .
sw : no , i don &apos;t have trouble . you have the problem , you would love you ?
sw : big finish .
sw : what is a stinktier ?
my parents found this important for their inner .
if i have a talent , it &apos;s things that i &apos;ve got to take out of unheimlichen .
the body has a higher density than the water . at least 95 percent of the body is below itself .
and this will be very far .
i asked him what that means .
and at the point , you can imagine , if you want to enjoy multiple languages , and you can imagine that they &apos;re going to change each other .
and she looked up and said , &quot; well , that &apos;s better .
i think they &apos;re voices that they look very well .
and i &apos;ve done it with 50,000 tests with 50,000 students , so , like , half a dozen schools , my readers , by the way .
we found out -- and we were very wrong with pretty many things , and we &apos;re going to get it -- but we found that the boys people loved it .
geoff mulgan : a little introduction into the studio-schule of the studio-schule .
and finally , the only person who is the creation , a young shepherd , and he goes on saul and says , &quot; i &apos;m going to fight him . &quot;
there are the cavalry , men in the horses and with streitwagen .
goliath is easy prey . he doesn &apos;t have a chance .
so goliath is a heart taller than seinesgleichen at time , and usually there is a explanation for somebody to be in the norm .
and i think that there is a very important lesson for us to all .
and it turns out we are covered by a mikrobenwolke , and those microbes are actually doing most of us , rather than we &apos;re doing .
they have all the microbes and the the dünndarm in the recipient .
most of the pills , or the joghurts , you can eat , or two , you have a or two , maybe five , and the human community has been thousands of its species .
we need a bestimmungsbuch for the microbes that are in and in people , so we can understand what they do .
very many people think about the internet of the internet , but for us , it &apos;s truly global . we have in many , many languages .
when you put him a ridiculous change on the side of the side of me , they thought that this is going to be able to get rid of this in the sky .
it &apos;s a social concept of cooperation , so we don &apos;t talk a lot about truth and objectivity .
and we have over 40 irc-kanäle , 40 mailinglisten .
it &apos;s not a perfect rule , but it &apos;s enough for the beginning .
and i always like to tell you that she &apos;s also the only person who actually knows all the rules of wikipedia , that &apos;s why ...
it seems to me , as most textbooks , which are used to our kids , use of nature , from nature .
in the jungle of guatemala , in tikal , is a temple .
not a well-known kwakutl indian arts in süd-alaska , it &apos;s a third of a year , and here it is .
it &apos;s a widespread under your cognitive denkprozess .
we found activity in other gehirnregionen -- in gehirnregionen , in gehirnregionen , with the computation of profit and loss .
i have a friend who &apos;s just beginning to use a horrible liebesaffaire design .
and i said , i don &apos;t know .
we turn to each other , and keep our senses &quot; and we talk .
tools like the sägen , knife , sicheln or äxte , which i had to say in a towel .
i had long and wide , but never in my near future .
in some erdteilen , they put tools to find tools , about sponges .
so dolphins can be schnarren and moving from the distance .
look , as you can see with your partner and the other zweiergruppe .
but we found out that , the free percentage not just like a keyboard at a keyboard .
and this dolphin called the delfin , &quot; tuchdiebin , &quot; because she &apos;s about 12 tüchern abgehauen .
but as we think their natural sounds , we also plan to get this back into the computer .
and the word is invented .
there &apos;s yves rossy .
and particularly if you &apos;re in the tracking-position , you have feeling emotion .
yr : i &apos;m just trying to be more .
i &apos;ve been using 20 times a year in the last 15 years , never , but it &apos;s never been in the beginning .
that &apos;s not telling the world .
but it was up to steinig and full of kakteen .
and , what moves , what would you like to explain what they were going to be able to explain to the invisible .
because this event was the scientific revolution , since the our knowledge of the physical world , and how we can adjust them to the very needs , unerbittlich in the growing .
by the way , why don &apos;t we do that ?
your rests on the bibel ; our bible . &quot;
there &apos;s something like a fehlkonstruierte story .
and only if a explanation is good , it &apos;s also important to you can check it .
now glasses aren &apos;t very expensive . you &apos;re pretty much video .
it &apos;s currently used around 30,000 data .
what &apos;s a place for a place ?
the new festival would ask the audience to play a crucial role in the performance of the performance .
she had met with other people to look at the sultan &apos;s elephant , and that &apos;s all done well . &quot;
&quot; no rumpfataxie , which is good . &quot; first doctor : &quot; is you going to be dizzy ? &quot;
i thought my career was over .
this is a bear , which i was sitting on the rock .
this is a piece of ice ice , it &apos;s 12 years old .
i &apos;m going to show you today pictures of belugawalen , grönlandwalen and narwalen and seeleoparden and leopard and leopard seals , but this image is actually more than any other one .
people said , &quot; we knew they &apos;re malignant . we knew it . &quot;
and this seal took the penguin the penguin and schüttelte him and forth .
she swam away , a penguin .
she tried , my camera zwangszuernähren , which is the dream of a fotografen .
paul nicklen : stories from a vereisten wunderland wunderland wunderland .
open up your eyes .
have you also have a ring ?
so , you focus on this quest .
joe , we &apos;re going to do this as long until it &apos;s going to spend it .
funny , yeah , we have a little man , a gewerkschafter , working all the day up there .
as i said , how do you make your reality .
first of all , we were working together and develop ourselves .
a call in the u.s. , after canada , or china costs five kenia-schilling , or 0.06 dollars .
it &apos;s modular , so you can also get a satellitenmodul , and so on remote places .
over time , the buildings were higher and larger , our technology always are always getting enormous , so that the mechanical farmers were enormous , they need large amounts of energy .
imagine , two americans travel together together .
please raise everybody as a liberal arts .
the best definition of the angeborensein &apos; i know -- it &apos;s like much -- comes from hirnforscher gary marcus .
he makes us very , very old triebe .
but look at the other three lines of these three lines of lines to the other three lines of the three lines of the three lines of the three lines of the three lines of the three lines of lines .
aren &apos;t that easy to be the foundation of fremdenfeindlichkeit and autoritarismus and puritanismus ?
she went upward and keep on .
and they say , &quot; your mind your law from my body . &quot;
and we have the marker of shiva to the right , shiva is the most liberals god -- and both together .
and so the answer , i think , these leidenschaftliche hingabe to truth , and trying to turn it into a better future for us .
but if you &apos;re reacting , a lot of other people in the environment , the innocent ones , but also injured , but the military doesn &apos;t want to talk about kollateralschäden .
we look at something else , &quot; and we don &apos;t seem to say that the situations are very much .
is somebody a commandment of how often when you think of how it introduced to how often the police did in queensland pfefferspray ?
there was only a few people who were shot at this incident .
it &apos;s 72 , and it looks like this is the most angemessenste way to deal with her .
and if you &apos;re going to be able to use them , people will be going to be going , but they should not have any more bleibenden damage . &quot;
we &apos;ve got started makers of macher and organisieren in our &quot; maker . &quot;
billy-bob , or billy bass , or something like this .
and i &apos;ll tell you more about it , but it &apos;s just ...
but he also moved to other people who did the same as he did .
this is &quot; makerbot . &quot;
and we need to bring this into schools , or in the communities , many ways to make lots of species -- the ability to make the world to shape the world and new .
there &apos;s glamour physics .
and indeed , we &apos;re seeing this glorifizierten photos of stars all the time -- you call it falschfarbenfotografien .
it doesn &apos;t take off from a way , but you have to imagine their world .
now , the way that &apos;s going on a hinfort winden , glamorous .
but it &apos;s always being told that if you buy this lamp that you &apos;re going to live in a world that you &apos;re going to live in a world .
the perfect liebesleben -- symbolizes the perfect chain , with perfect diamantring .
because glamour can be very totalitär and trügerisch .
but i knew how hard they were working on the week .
i did that before a hundred strangers .
i heard of women who were accused in their homes , or they were accused in their betten , like dead left in parking , with acid in their own kitchens .
then i got cancer -- or i found that i had cancer .
my friend was a great schüssel , and i asked them , &quot; what is that ? &quot;
it was for me , eintretende friends and a liebende sister .
because we all are so badly , we &apos;re going to introduce the inside of our fellow character and their secret intentions . &quot;
kids need a long time until they need the system .
rs : oha . now , joshua &apos;s going on to get something .
rs : should be ivan ?
and you &apos;re in the coffee of your friend .
first of all , i &apos;ll prove you to prove it &apos;s a magentfeld , a magentfeld .
please tell me that they don &apos;t rangehen , if we &apos;re going to say , the pentagon of the pentagon .
but why do you have to feel something ?
and it was , she was probably , a course for speed-yoga .
and second , it &apos;s possible to be able to slow down , to slow down ?
they want to rhythm back to a langsameren rhythm .
and norway , sweden , denmark and finland are among six wettbewerbsfähigsten nations in the world and work in the same time that the average americans would cry in front of the world .
but the new idea that revolutionary idea of the entschleunigungsbewegung is that it &apos;s also something like &quot; good slow &quot; .
i realize , the gutenachtgeschichten of the gutenachtgeschichten , like a verabscheute assignment on my aufgabenliste , it was grauste me because she was so slow , and i was going to be fast .
and so it took everything to his first , and they said , &quot; you can &apos;t build everything on a island ; a part of it needs to remain on the bank , because we don &apos;t want to change from the community . &quot;
i was working on the piece of work and i didn &apos;t know that , because i felt that people who came out of the historical museum , already with information , and if you see a museum with information , they would not be able to digest it .
when i flew back home , the grundsteinlegung was planned .
but you see the uniqueness of the environment .
moshe safdie , over the building of your eyes , the building of your eyes .
and when christian was a note to a note -- game , for example , for example .
so in jazz , the bandstand is absolutely amazing .
it &apos;s not about my vision or something .
am i ? i am i doing ?
they had to get a lot of erdulden to come here .
in the summer , india warms , it &apos;s extremely hot .
and the adults that goes on that , that &apos;s one or two months .
at the time i didn &apos;t know , but i know it today . this is hundreds of wanderlibellen .
so i made a little curious . i &apos;m listening here , because i want to ask you , and here &apos;s a lot of people who -- from india -- people who have spent their childhood .
so , next , i was going to be the phone .
october , november , december . that &apos;s not the time of the northeast monsoon .
okay , they lay their eggs at the time of the time of the saisonalen of the monsunregens .
only last week it has geregnet . the regengüsse have begun and now it &apos;s raining there .
a pretty incredible kraftakt .
incredible . this is the außerordenlichste migration of a raubvogels . a pretty incredible migration .
i made this out of my life .
and everybody thought i would be good . but on the new terrain , i was horrible . people said , &quot; oh , he &apos;s -- oh , what is happened to ? &quot;
in the night before i was going to give you , and i asked them , &quot; how do i create this ? &quot;
next -- oh , whoa . these guys are the community .
so i was pretty successful . and if you &apos;ve achieved all this , what is it ? i have a studio ? i talked about the knieoperation and other things , but what does it mean ?
in my last tedtalk , about seven years ago , about seven years ago .
but carl norden , really , really , really the code .
whenever the norden bombsight is brought into a plane , it &apos;s going to be accompanied by a reihe bewaffneter .
the bill erstreckte on three square kilometers .
after the war , there was a überprüfung -- like the army , the army always do -- and they asked the question : how many scuds have we actually destroyed ?
i have described the opposite of a success story .
a walk in a city or a such way , this journey shows these diversity of human species in the amazing way .
we &apos;re asking questions about human ancestry .
but what &apos;s going on to the data ?
imagine that you have to be abschreiben .
it was a african africans based on the world &apos;s population of the earth &apos;s biodiversity .
the sahara was much bigger than today .
people who are killing the animals that they were killing the animals that they were going to go to the savannen , and followed about the north , and then followed about 45,000 years ago in the middle east in an area of the sahara .
the humangenomprojekt , rover-missionen on mars .
we know deeply in our hearts that the universe doesn &apos;t move from scratch .
so we &apos;re getting rid of .
what you see here is the blue areas that are about a thousandth of a degree of a degree of the red areas .
the way beyond smaller ways than gravity , what explains why they are , and i &apos;m smaller than the stars and planets .
they &apos;re going to be the dominant of dna .
let me explain why .
in the last 200 years , something else happened .
maybe you may be wondering , &quot; what about the talking ? &quot;
we &apos;re not so good when it &apos;s about immigration .
and then you have to decide how they invest in your 52 , and they &apos;ve never heard about a geldmarktfonds .
at least a wonderful study that was the predicted .
but if you get the driver &apos;s license , you get the boxes , if you don &apos;t want to donate the organs .
the other group of the group will get two apples .
save more tomorrow makes it easy .
that &apos;s just one example .
it &apos;s a song about a so-called kolibrimotte , a creatures that &apos;s a creatures called a creatures .
hi , who &apos;s because there ?
thank you very much .
now , that knowledge has to influence a lot of influence on the lebenserfahrung .
i &apos;m trying to schinden time .
so what did i do ?
we &apos;re making stories to explain our existence .
so what did they do ? she sent her walter raleigh to separate their human portion of their divine part .
do you have a kid ?
elizabeth : scher you ! scher you ! scher you !
i went to a friend of mine , and he sat down to his appartment in the 20th hill , in the 20th floor , a really rich area in mumbai .
everything is a contradiction .
we &apos;ve lived from less than one dollar to a day -- about 15 years .
and you have to use smart to show that forest than worth of the forest as a grasflächen . &quot;
he said , &quot; you can &apos;t be a person , to sleep in sleep . &quot;
but it &apos;s not just people ; it &apos;s about lebenswandel .
if on a finite planet , all of you have sustainable , we should be sustainable , how can we achieve this ?
coke has to work with pepsi .
this is nine of them .
at the end , we had , i think , 60 percent of the world production is on the table and 25 percent of the bedarfs .
it &apos;s not irrelevant .
but they don &apos;t buy the juice ; they buy carbon in the trees to offset the kohlenstoff-kosten of the fracht , which is to come to the most active of the content in europe .
so the communication of brain and the spinal cord , and the way , it &apos;s a very different and sustained paralysis of the beins .
after a few years , it &apos;s been making a elektrochemische neuroprothese neuroprothese , which is the nervous system of a schlafenden in a sand dune .
we have been working on the 10 of hard years to do this goal .
after a few weeks , we put a programmable pump to the individuellen of a individual medikamentencocktail right to the spinal cord .
and i was a kid who was working .
he was talking about the world , like she is &quot; and the world , as you ought to be .
and by doing this , they did this , these women were many of the women .
in the white house , and the desk , he &apos;s sitting in the weißen .
the last day , the woman was going to be around all over the world , and we talked to all the things , and we said , &quot; suddenly she said to me , &quot; would you feel something ? &quot;
for this gesangsstück , a hymne hymne , because it &apos;s mysterious -- like you can see -- it &apos;s completely sharp , and it &apos;s originally .
they didn &apos;t have anything .
so the internet needs the internet and instructions .
one of the most popular websites in the world that &apos;s powered by the most powerful company of the world &apos;s company , and there was nothing that could do anything or google to do .
and today &apos;s wikipedia is so omnipräsent that you actually can find them on the maps of restaurants in china .
and that &apos;s what wikipedia was understood .
this is a blog that &apos;s widmet widmet .
why ? there &apos;s a mitfahrersuche in craigslist.com. .
the world ended not ended up in the &apos; 90s .
and we see that the influence of the planet in some countries are very , very strong .
all of this costs money .
and it was a lot of fun to make students with migrationshintergrund or from socially relationships to give the same opportunities .
how are schools and teachers in the media ?
in bureaucratic schulsystemen , the teachers are left in the classes alone and have a lot of unterrichtsvorgaben .
some people say that the change of the bildungsverwaltung of the verlegen of the verlegen of a friedhofs .
but if you look at the issues of this perspective , you see what happened over the last 60 years .
and i walked out about 15 miles to get to the apotheker .
so that was obviously a unverzichtbares device .
we could do this with phones .
so , a business model for you .
&quot; the government needs to offer economic services . &quot;
it was once , a long time ago , a long time when i was 24 years old , i was at st. st. medical college in bangalore .
and you can see my map when i &apos;m here .
and i also teach a invention .
now we &apos;re in the 1930s , and you see japan is going through a time of the war , with lower life expectancy .
and they decided to be not only in health and education , but also began to make the economy .
washington , d.c. went out .
don &apos;t the bladder , not my bubbles , but the financial bubble bubble bubble the language .
the once will be a completely transformed of the world &apos;s population , and the power of the world &apos;s really accept the world , and the power of where they were at the last 50 to 150 years to 150 years ?
the rest of the world is a very mysterious substance called &quot; dark energy . &quot;
but that explains that the presence of the whole mass doesn &apos;t .
and then , you pay the fact that we &apos;re going to live in a three-dimensional universe -- a three-dimensional space .
again , this is a kind of wahrheitsgetreues model of what &apos;s going on during the gravitationslinseneffekts .
they &apos;re moving from each way , because the space will be bigger .
by looking at things like galaxien-cluster -- their teilchendichte , how many of you have been in the same time as a function of time -- can we bring in the way dark matter and dark energy in the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back of the back
the big questions in physics .
sleepy banjo boys : virtuoser bluegrass tweets ?
so , recycling and reusing is hauptstreitpunkte here .
marc koska : 1.3 million reasons to reinvent the plastikspritze neu .
and indeed , it gave this change in gay men during the united states in the united states .
it &apos;s a disease that kills a lot of adults in africa , and also a lot of kids .
in uganda , we see that the spread is to be the spread .
so that makes it pretty similar to the fairly entwicklungsgrade .
but openness and disease has a price when we think about disease , that should not be a surprise .
coffee is ugandas hauptexportprodukt .
emily oster once used the aids stats in africa , and comes to a startling consequence , and it &apos;s a surprising consequence of the spread of hiv on the continent .
but i was fascinated by because i &apos;ve observed this kind of feinem italienischen .
he was called &quot; bullet train , &quot; zug-geschoss , because he was growing up in front of the front door , but every time he went into a tunnel , and he was baute a druckwelle , and then he had a kind of schallknall .
this is a höcker , as a magnet .
and then we &apos;re asking ourselves why the membrane is clogged and why it &apos;s going to take it so much electricity .
for example , in the einbettung of nanopartikeln , in a material .
in biomimicry guild , my beratungsgesellschaft , we &apos;re working with the architektenbüro hok architects .
janine benyus : biomimicry in the effort of the game effort .
&quot; yeah , but why ? &quot;
we were four , not one , and thankfully not boys .
you can &apos;t do it .
it &apos;s never going to happen again , because that &apos;s once again .
they said , &quot; yes . &quot; i said , &quot; well , &quot; well , let &apos;s pray . &quot;
this was a meditationprogramm for 1.000 inmates in this prison .
secondly , it &apos;s about the most anti-korruptions movement in india .
so let me tell you about a project that we did a few years later , a kind of captcha .
so , in fact , you &apos;re going to do it by using a old book .
the number of pages that are actually using the recaptcha that the number of the people that are the number of words that we &apos;re doing a day in a day , very big .
some of these are more funny .
at time , the web is in multiple languages .
then my lieblingsteil &apos;s question .
there &apos;s a way to actually cut two flies to a klappe .
but what may even more surprising is that the translations that we get from the site-nutzern , even if you &apos;re just a anfänger , the translations that we &apos;re getting as the professionellen and that &apos;s very surprising .
and people are going to draw value , they don &apos;t have to pay for money , they pay them with their time .
the chinese side , the company , what it does , what it really can do it .
and plattformern plattformern to the active participation is everything else .
and zipcar is a very fancy , konsequente service that makes it work .
for aristotle , happiness was the highest good , the goal , on the target .
maybe these people are right . his thoughts , is not good .
10 percent of the time is the thoughts of the mind ...
i played the violent african africans .
now , the first wahlrunde , no eindeutiger winner didn &apos;t have a clearer of the -- it had no absolute majority -- so the election in a second round of three weeks later .
so here &apos;s a interesting comparison .
so i went to la jolla , moved to the umgezogen and i learned surfing .
people in the 17th century , not really much as we do that this stuff is a bunch of different molecules , and that we &apos;re going to breathe out of a particular reason .
and so , charles , charles , i &apos;m going to give money money to give you a building , and you can meet you , but don &apos;t talk about religion .
reality is what you can see .
i thought everybody would do this with a little bit that .
just to see what if you do the two mix .
so i have something that is not personal .
if you &apos;re going to be rich , i &apos;m going to be an entrepreneur .
they say , if you measured the temperature of the atmosphere , it doesn &apos;t increase -- they don &apos;t go to -- it &apos;s not very carefully in the last 20 years , and they don &apos;t .
biochemist kary mullis was talking about the foundation of modern science : the experiment . he shares stories from the 17th century and aus the geschichten in the garden and preist the curiosity , and all the good science in all of their shapes .
i wanted to represent a simple kind of living body , which is the verfallenden , which is bewohnt spaces .
&quot; naked city &quot; is a nickname for new york and &quot; spleen , &quot; verkörpert the melancholie and ermüdung , which is made out of the feeling of the feeling of entfremdung in an urban environment .
i love to travel , and berlin is a mine .
and the whole time i &apos;ve seen a single rat on any of those places until recently , when i was in the east asia .
the first question is , and maybe you write them on a piece of paper , physically , or a virtual leaf in your head , and for the audience , you can also try to do this .
and we &apos;re going to stop , &quot; we are the best naturwissenschaftliche of the world , &quot; because of our british hybris .
except that -- you know , you know , you know , you know , you know , you &apos;ve thought , &quot; hmm , what happens in the night ? &quot;
and one of the most difficult problems is , if people have a idea of how everything works works , it &apos;s pretty hard to change this .
and as a expert for a experte chemistry i have friends and colleagues , who are distinct between the organic and the anorganischen , the world &apos;s world , leblosen world .
and you can see , he &apos;s befruchtet , keimt , growing in a way .
we even have amazing forms that we can manipulate .
and darwin himself was a letter to a fellow in a letter that life is probably going to be a warmen little warm -- maybe not in scotland , maybe in africa , maybe somewhere else .
what &apos;s life ? what is this stuff ?
and we can connect them and literally thousands of thousands of abertausende of molekülen , in the same size , in the same size , and protein , but it &apos;s not a carbon in perspective .
we want to be the environment and we want them to get their energy from the sun .
and i think if we can make a anorganische biology and matter how to be able to define that in fact , in fact , is actually define .
but there &apos;s a second reason why i may like this entwicklungsziele , every single one of the individual .
and these are highly professional female interviewer that they &apos;re going to sit with a woman and they &apos;re asking her favorite questions .
i was sitting at the friday of my computer , and i could see how the mortality of 128 fell on the morning .
as you know , these economists are making the money , they want to keep more and more .
as you can see , no one is a average average , aus , which was no one , which was no one , and this very rapid progress .
but you don &apos;t talk about that much .
in which there was high , or very high , child mortality and families were very large to eight .
here &apos;s a katar .
what is still more value for money .
yeah , i went to barefoot until i was 12 .
and he said , &quot; well , the unstrittige in question .
the whole time was a border .
and gandhi-entwicklung , after my opinion , the world will bring the world a difference , not just for a few , but for everyone .
... the knee of the knee , yes , that would be hard ...
the entwicklungszeit -- it took about 10 years and 700 million dollars .
he said , &quot; the earth is there , &quot; the earth is enough to satisfy everybody needs , but not everybody &apos;s going to happen .
and säuglinge säuglinge .
i went to high school .
when i was at the council of the scientific research research -- 40 of the sun -- if two doesn &apos;t talk to each other , i built teams .
it &apos;s that it &apos;s on , and now i have a apps in the store .
it &apos;s about bringing something to perfection and something to lead to something called the 21st century .
it &apos;s still very hot , but no longer radioaktiv .
but there &apos;s not under high pressure , and it &apos;s not as much as being as reaktiv , which means that the spaltprodukte don &apos;t tend to leave the reactor .
i &apos;m convinced that the reactor i &apos;ve designed here , a very large power of being beliefern , the great scientific projects with electricity , and i &apos;m really willing to do this .
we &apos;re moving to a erlebniswirtschaft , where the experience is the actual product .
there &apos;s a manufacturer of the funknetz complex for the case that they &apos;re walking in the forest .
and at the end of a long time , the guter advice that he laertes his son , he says , &quot; especially , is that he &apos;s redlich for yourself .
normally you &apos;re not going to be much in los angeles , but there &apos;s a place where you can walk through that much , you can walk out in this city .
then they &apos;re going to be falsch as false , as a schaumschläger , by appreciating them from properties that they don &apos;t have .
when i was a little bit , i was very introverted and stayed in me .
then , it &apos;s just about a point , and then , to build up to the order .
so i built it from concrete , because it doesn &apos;t matter .
this was this tool .
and for me , the most important thing is , because i was a kid , i wanted to be my passion and love .
25 days : the herzkammer entwickelt entwickelt days : poor and hands are developing 36 days : the primitive &apos;s going to start to start doing this weeks , and the time that the fetus evolves in the fastest .
the complexity of complexity , this is actually built in a single system , again , beyond any understanding of every understanding of every understanding of every understanding of every day .
because apparently , this instabile isotop lithium-6 isn &apos;t in the atmosphere of sun-like stars .
so what can you do with these spectra ?
recently , a colleague of mine got a colleague , gibor basri , a email with a very interesting spectrum and said , &quot; can you look at this ? &quot;
there are two roads -- about massereiche and massearme stars -- on the matter of matter and chemical elements in the universe and it will be .
because can you imagine that everything is siedet ?
now imagine a object , an incredible object , or something that we can &apos;t explain , and we just are just standing on , and we &apos;re just going to be there , &quot; so , we &apos;re not going to be on .
and if we see stickstoffdioxid , and oxygen , i think , we have the perfect store .
i just say , &quot; really ? &quot; and he says , &quot; absolutely . &quot;
what i can tell you is : it &apos;s universal ; we all have them .
i &apos;m lightly , and i &apos;m slightly addictive to büroartikeln , but that &apos;s another talk .
this led to a little collapse -- -- the fact that this looked like .
and i said , &quot; but the thing is , no one : no familienzeugs , no kindheitsscheiße . &quot;
what is the feeling of the feeling of the feeling ? &quot;
i &apos;m right . you don &apos;t have right . shut up .
we do so , as we have , what we do , not impact on other people .
people are protokollierten their meals in twitter , the majority of their kids on the iphone .
so if we think of it , you &apos;re going to use it to make it , to make it more interesting , we think about how you can be useful for our selbstverbesserung , for our selbstfindung and self-awareness .
and today i want to talk about one of the things that we decided to do that back to the moment we wanted to find a new access to healthcare .
steven shares his story . but it &apos;s not alone .
here &apos;s why people pray pray .
i love this cyberkinetische implant , too , this was the only patientendaten that were available and available .
and here we have a paper .
you don &apos;t have a abschirmung , you don &apos;t have data , which doesn &apos;t go after scientific methods .
this is the curve over the behandlungsabsicht .
but my brother didn &apos;t go to him .
if we went from here today , we would go from the b-15-eisberg , we would go to something called 300 feet long , 28 miles wide and the two gigatons .
to change the condition , you just need two volts of a millisekunden-impulses .
we said , &quot; can you build this ? &quot;
we can do better .
but there &apos;s a fascinating solution that &apos;s coming out of the so-called komplexitätswissenschaft .
and they &apos;re networks of networks are ideal more complex systems .
and it has also impact the world &apos;s risk .
so we could put a einflussgrad zuweisen .
we see the emergence of the langfristiger and kapitalkräftiger programs that are formed to understand our connected world from the standpoint of complexity .
wasserrohre have a festgesetzte capacity to festgesetzten durchflussraten -- unless you use it pump and valves .
and we had enough of these glaskolben of these glaskolben , and we had prepared 500 of these glaskolben .
without human rights .
so we were up on our doppelstockbett .
and this graph doesn &apos;t mean something that is made something that are made of data .
and my brain starts very quickly to think that this is a akkurate representation of negativem in the world .
because this question of the wonder that our external world can predict our world &apos;s world , but the truth is that i only can predict 10 percent of a person &apos;s point of view of a person , if i berücksichtige your whole world .
and this is from two reasons , and it &apos;s spread around .
we &apos;re going to be able to open up if you open your mailprogramm , a positive email of the lobs or the danks of the social environment .
weightfully to say -- a familiengeschäftgeschichte , you understand -- my dad was the aufrichtigste man in the world .
and so i went . i went to mit , buying them .
they said , do it .
they take a giant disk from cardboard .
he was the first digital media producer in tokyo .
listen ? how cows ? this is the morning in logan .
so there &apos;s all these things , but most of the love i love to experience the world .
and i was that with passion .
their culture comes in schools in schools , and i want to give you a lot of ways to understand how we can overcome this problem .
that makes them feel nervous because girls don &apos;t want to go to schools , there are no boys who are there .
and over little moments in my life .
or mothers who raised boys ?
we have to change the attitude of boys in elementary school .
and you have the impression that they believe that would be fine .
let &apos;s see where we &apos;re going to get this hypothesis .
is that a problem ? yes , a big problem .
we believe that this is why we can give us this &quot; why &quot; -fragen evidence of nature &apos;s fundamental principles .
i &apos;m going to try to try and say , at the end , and i &apos;m also excited to be excited .
and that was really a important lesson for me to me that you can &apos;t really get on an object .
we have a newspaper newspaper , a normal newspaper .
it &apos;s by the same as a radio , and this is a software that &apos;s going on the ipad .
it &apos;s a digital sculpture , so i wanted to add a interaktionssystem , so i &apos;m going to add a näherungssensor , so that people respond to the glass , if you &apos;re in the jar of the air .
i &apos;m going to be a man &apos;s going to be in a man &apos;s middle ages , and then in a old man .
50kg were allowed to be allowed .
radio : what do you think ?
you just fold off the wings and drive them .
so i &apos;m going to ask you a different question : &quot; one question .
and he made a quantum kartoffel-garten , with wachmännern , who had the instructions that had the instructions , and night , but with the secret instruction , not particularly well .
because they &apos;ve found that , that verlust-vermeidung is what human behavior is possible .
yet , we have to create a clearly vielfältigeres medien-ökosystem , where you can create this kind of value , and it &apos;s also a lot of fairer .
now , if we have all of these tools to have available , we have to ask the question -- and thaler and sunstein have done this -- how we use these smart .
they &apos;re going to lead the new karo-shreddies .
they verleihen little kleinen , trivialen alltagsaktivitäten .
i felt passion , passion , soul and heart , my body leaving my body .
audience : no .
sb : no , no , no .
all around us , around us , klummpig umhertreibend , and it &apos;s another replicator to find another replicator in this quest culture .
you probably bought them .
imagine the world full of brains and more memes than they are .
we are the only gen- and mem-maschinen .
i think that &apos;s the wrong approach .
that was dangerous , but hey .
they &apos;re using us to tease the resource of the planet around more and more and more computers , and other amazing things that we &apos;re hearing here at ted .
and we &apos;re going to see this third danger of how we got the second and the first thing ?
in collaboration with minustah -- this is the un-vertretung in haiti -- with the ministry of public bauwesen , with various nicht-regierungs-organistaionen , we &apos;re more than a 1.500 building .
it won &apos;t be more cost when we do it right . &quot;
and because i &apos;m burning percent of 70 percent of my body , it took all about an hour .
we also have it also that it would have been well , i would have given me the same thing to recover from pain .
and how bad would the punishment i would get caught ?
it wasn &apos;t that the religiöseren people -- the people who have hätten -- less cheated , and that the fewer religious religious -- those who have no commandments in almost no gebote .
so if you don &apos;t think of a few seconds , you don &apos;t think of money because you get a brand that makes you a difference ?
it &apos;s like this : it &apos;s so .
i think all of those forces are very bad , very bad impact on the stock .
but you can believe me . i &apos;m working in the very big .
these are the harmloseren that i can show you today .
and suddenly amazon will be used to the brand and konkurriert with the notenbank , as you want to spend money , what &apos;s money .
maybe that seems to be a great jump ?
i don &apos;t have to tell you , i don &apos;t know , i had to explain it -- last week i had to explain it to my seat -- -- penisse are structures that were being able to put sperm from one individual to another .
and i knew that animals like the regenwurm here , or even the most animals don &apos;t stabilize their tissue by using it over bone .
and that was that every piece that we had found up until nature , in nature , the same grundelemente .
all of those i showed that , was really surprised .
a funny song across the global warming , from jill sobule .
okay , so i have to be thinking .
all right , ok .
do we want to play a piece of play ?
selbstunterricht , selbstentdecken and selbstbehauptung ; are the benefits of a great education .
the minecraft-community flippte totally totally made of it , and ben became a medienberühmtheit .
so on the other hand , what is the case of this character ?
i was forced to be forced , my home , the democratic republic of congo , where i was studentenaktivist .
but bemerkenswerterweise , the umweltprogramm of the united nations has been estimated in the country of the country in the country over 24 trillion dollars .
but we &apos;re not at the target .
they have to be very inexpensive .
but could not be done for this angle of the arbeitsmarktes ?
they were forderten by governments , and in many cases they have them .
but let &apos;s take our goal to bring it to the ground of the pyramid .
because they &apos;re not going to be a whole bunch of these little transactions to make their profit .
he liked it on his lap because he said that it was painful for him to be in his own bed .
for the past , as sir arhur , and sir arhur , and the british society for wissenschaftsförderung , that the sun seems to be the sun .
so , what &apos;s fusion ? here something kernphysik : here &apos;s something kernphysik .
and this energy is the fusion that we put the fusion .
so , about a high school way of herkömmlichen .
we have to do it to a power station .
but it &apos;s the largest arab country and is also a lot of a lot of influence .
namely , they wanted to be most democracy , but they were all over the world &apos;s population , which had the most popular in the last month , in the last month , their opinion of a beamten , it was only four percent .
but the expectations of people who are significantly in their future .
so the question is , &quot; what does the male support for the support of the support for women ? &quot;
i promise you , she read the message .
nobody can listen to you , they just send a text .
you could see the immediate impact of you or the einer of a hasserfüllten talk on a schulversammlung , and see what happens as a consequence .
the flight of a day , 12 seconds and went to 35 .
this is a unnatürlich for a rocket .
he weighs less than a aa-batterie .
from the smallest lufthauch to the face of nature &apos;s storms .
we can afford to use the individuals that we could afford and protect us .
we believe somebody else , somebody klügeres somebody , somebody somebody who &apos;s going to solve with more devices .
we don &apos;t blow him into the pacific .
it took 10 to full of the prototypes until we had something that was really quiet .
and so there &apos;s this incredible thing that can be done , which is possible , and that ungeheuren serious about what that means .
and think about our moral moral .
and the director was pretty amüsiert and told me that he gave me for crazy . and he said to me , &quot; this place is a strafanstalt . these guys are severe .
it took several of those events until i found what i should do .
when i began with this program , my ursprünglicher plan was a siegerteam plan to create a siegerteam plan of the underdogs underdogs .
and they look down to yokneam , everything is so small and tiny .
i feel blessed and fortunate that i had the guts at the lebenszeit of the nyu , and i had to go back to the south bronx and my country where i can go back to these incredible rides , and i can make the group of kinder children from ethiopia , morocco and russia .
and how often my self would have to die before i understand that it &apos;s not going to have it from the beginning ?
and i was a really good dancer .
oddly , heilten these insights don &apos;t have my geringes self-worth , this sense of otherness .
that was because i didn &apos;t have a self , which was in between .
imagine what kind of existence we could have , if we could have the kind of power of self , the privilege of life , and the most important thing that comes next is next .
and this is a cafe at sea in the u.k.
but instead of looking at that , we focused on the track .
we also discovered that , like a effizientere structure and a kostensparendere way would get through this structure .
but we found that seed -- this really important project is going to happen , but that seed -- in the leading botanical gardens are not issued seeds .
we worked with a kunstrasenhersteller , to develop a miniversion of the seed cathedral to develop , even if you &apos;re a level , it was kind of sehbehindert , and it was something that was kind of knusprig and weich , which you see here .
it &apos;s actually just the first few of the ones that you &apos;re perceiving and the rest of the rest is for postcards .
the book is called the &quot; blank slate &quot; that &apos;s the popular notion of the human mind that the human mind is a blank slate , and all its structure of its socialization , culture and experience .
well , there &apos;s a number of political reasons that they &apos;re doing good for people .
it &apos;s not clear that it &apos;s not clear that these were the same hurt , but the datenlage of the datenlage were to see this .
another one of the geistes- and kunstwissenschaften and kunstwissenschaften at the universities that are in vielfacher in the decline .
now , the other hot iron is the parenting .
and i think you can &apos;t say this better .
i &apos;m also going to snap peta , just like jux , and you don &apos;t like it , but they confirm it .
there &apos;s no script , there &apos;s no script , there &apos;s no nonsense .
he says , &quot; a day . &quot;
i don &apos;t like to think what i &apos;m right .
oh , i live in a computer program -- that &apos;s weird .
so i asked myself what would happen if we were able to challenge some of these geheiligten floskeln .
right ?
it &apos;s way -- we &apos;ve talked the war in war , as a society , every one of us .
your iphone without the people , the same skin , same circuitry , same keyboard , and over again .
and then it became thicker and thicker and thicker and now it &apos;s 886 for sites .
and i said to brian , &quot; what did tony do ? &quot;
and i said , &quot; is it true that you have a fake ? &quot;
but how do you do a sane normal ?
so , so all the things that are going on to tony at the normalsten , and it &apos;s proof of the way he was crazy .
he came in schwächelnde , and entließ 30 percent of the treatment , the american cities are just in geisterstädte .
and i added , &quot; i have a list of the psychopathic features in my pocket .
and the jewelry are always the world &apos;s absolute aspects of the interviewee .
anyway , this was two years ago , and that &apos;s where my book ended .
in fact , the trend was to the rest of the rest of the world .
and as a consequence of this tends to be very , very difficult to say , i &apos;m going to say , &quot; i vertrete the true islam . &quot;
it may be that a large war between east and west was ausgefochten , and that it was necessary to the broader democracy .
and although the president of the president , it &apos;s very , very good , very good , very good , islam , is there , there &apos;s nonetheless , a natural impulse at kriegseintriit , the other side of the other side as an enemy .
when the treasure sank in 2000 , you &apos;d just watched the peak of the best brütezeit , which had the scientists to have the wissenschaftler penguins -- the researchers were at this point in the age of gefährdete .
the day after our motorcycle , two of us were , two of us , with the aufsicht of the aufsicht , and space is two more than 4,000 of oil oiled penguins .
we &apos;ve been used that way in the treasure rescue .
and that &apos;s really important because the african penguin was making a a year of a year .
on the corner row , in the bahnhofsparkplatz , on the bahnhofsparkplatz , a gesundheitszentrum , in the vorgärten , and even before the police station .
people are open to the essensgeschichte .
we launched this campaign -- very amusing -- &quot; every single laptop . &quot;
that &apos;s not a schulübung of the second grade .
these teach erschienen , abstract .
hillel turned out on a leg and said , &quot; well , what you &apos;re doing is not your neighbors . that &apos;s the torah . the rest are commentary .
now , though , is not all the story .
and achilles takes hektors leichnam and gives him careful careful him to whose father and the two guys see each other and see each other .
this is actually looking at this cells in the middle of the biology and science , which is the betrachten of living cells in the microscope .
every grain of grain grain has a tenth of a tenth of a tenth of a tenth of a millimeter .
you can see these mikrometeoriten .
this image was the beginning of the röntgentechnologie .
we &apos;re all going to look at the same way , believe me .
the walls are made from 700 a hundred mm .
and that &apos;s on the left is a x-ray .
it has human associations .
in the x-ray , we see all the little überlappungen in the corners .
i had to have the car in the middle of the middle , and i didn &apos;t have a really easy job .
yes , they &apos;ve given 12 monkeys for a week , and after this week , they only used it as a toilet .
science says that we &apos;re going to live forever .
no , i &apos;m going to take a tooth .
for me , it &apos;s a very , very important thing .
thank you . goodbye .
where we know that it &apos;s wrong ? maybe we are not both of us .
not professor and verurteilter , only two spirits to philosophieren .
and then , in the back , my life was fine .
all i saw in the very making was that there were right streits between the feinschmeckern between the züchtern and the jägern-sammlern .
would you have time to process information ?
we spent a lot of time with a one billion dollars , you know , a billion dollar- ölgeschäft , which was that he was in , and what we found was shocking , but later , later , later , later .
then there &apos;s dan etete .
we were hooked that these shell were rapidly rapidly their shell , and the most important in london gelisteten bergbauunternehmen sehr .
it &apos;s too complex and difficult to change it .
we &apos;re all going to die . we &apos;re all going to be old . we &apos;re all going to be all the sick . people are going to go .
there are places you can &apos;t walk , thoughts that you can &apos;t think , &quot; don &apos;t you inhabit it .
they have a wildheit and a freedom of the i think that you &apos;re the foundation of a new paradigmas .
she has made the decision to be able to get rasierklinge or glasscherbe , but your life that this is not going to happen .
we &apos;re all refugees .
but you &apos;re klemmt this thing to the head , and then something happens .
but this is not . &quot;
i was michael michael .
he didn &apos;t know that , his employees had knöpften him , and said , &quot; you &apos;re going to go into the reha , or you &apos;re going to be gefeuert and stirbst . &quot;
ah ! we meet them , the heimlichen beloved . let &apos;s pull us .
if it &apos;s on the box , which is the gegenseite , it &apos;s the gegenseite .
the charakteristiken that the word is as often in adults that we should eradicate this old word , if it comes to criticize it , to criticize behavior , which is associated with verantwortungslosigkeit and irrationalem .
if i was the ability to anzweifle the ability to anzweifle the fähigkeit of the last kredit , which i &apos;ve been on their last loan , i &apos;m going to get their ability to get more money from me to get it back .
it &apos;s why we &apos;re not going to live more in the dark times .
and the third is all sound we create , we create people who are creating the anthrophonie .
this is after the selektiven fällung .
there are many facetten of the species , among other things , including the way we use the dancing and sing and sing , i &apos;ve taught that for another time .
so this was extremely embarrassing .
and if you wonder how much this is , this ebay-logo here is 16 kb .
so 37 is our audience .
it &apos;s very impressive , and a very nice concert .
and these are the issues that are actually in heart .
a generation that has so much more meaning from video games than the real world .
all these things are outside of my ichs .
i &apos;m not sure what the future of video games means for our civilization .
finally , finally ! this is .
it would be really good at the very good job .
so , you come from the simple to complex , if you do more power . that &apos;s what we like .
and then you look at them , and that &apos;s what i think , at least a long time , until she was telling me that it was something that you &apos;re doing , so you think about it .
it &apos;s going to drive the other direction .
girl : there was a ball and a schaumstoffball , because it &apos;s two completely different gewichte , and if you fall at the same , they might drop it .
but we couldn &apos;t train a thousand new teachers to save our lives .
and it &apos;s a märlein . &quot;
and we &apos;re going to end up ourselves as we &apos;re going to have to change the world around us .
that &apos;s going to have tremendous impact .
why do you do what they do ?
everybody would want to be the new version .
they &apos;re going to be very .
they &apos;re going to be about this moment .
i &apos;m going to be able to get your words back in the order .
&quot; well , &quot; i said , &quot; strange , you know .
you , &quot; you don &apos;t need to do it again . &quot;
and we looked at that , and i was grateful because she said , &quot; wow ! that &apos;s great . &quot;
the goal of the project is quite simple .
this is completely personalized medicine in topform .
now the answer is a multidisziplinäres team .
i work with the imperial and the brompton , which is what some serious issues in the project , the problems that should not have been .
in medicine , there are so many people who don &apos;t want to change , not right , if an dahergelaufener engineer has the answer .
they can actually find novel solutions that haven &apos;t been seen , and it &apos;s very quick and simple .
yeah , well , your guys , you know , my life , because once trackpads , once again , rund , by beautiful runder .
no , but it &apos;s true : the internet changed the world .
you know the story .
and i met the dozo .
and i don &apos;t do you to draw , nice cartoons .
thank you .
so , &quot; our lonely earth &quot; did i have a lot of time to meet the audience with the audience .
we have a lot of time for the existence of the animals on this planet as they &apos;ve been here until we &apos;re going to reach the second microbial era .
his impact is the distribution of this very thin einschlagschicht of all over the planet , and we had a very zügigen death of dinosaurs , the death of these beautiful ammoniten , leconteiceras , and celaeceras here , and so much else .
it &apos;s the supreme owner , the t. rex of his time .
they hate animals .
that &apos;s when material comes from the depths of earth and the surface comes from the surface of the planet .
i &apos;m a 130km from the coast of the coast , which is going to happen with me ?
they have a accident . they have two options : they &apos;ll die , or you take the hydrogen sulfide and say , we &apos;re going to be saved 75 percent of them .
pw : blessing and curse .
some of you are countries that are the opinion that deregulation or even more regulation of the best way to be , to trade the way to trade trade .
the answer is simple : the chinese define these factories as chemical betriebe , not as pharmazeutische , and checking it doesn &apos;t .
i don &apos;t know what we can do , but i can use at least my office to develop all the way to develop a solution . &quot;
they need a secure environment .
now , we have the impression that it &apos;s a new way to get the beginning of a new kind of international processor .
human rights are going to be a very simple question : can i put this dignity back to this person ?
or the boys who have the boy to start with the boy who did the fire to see if you can change him . &quot;
okay ? go ahead .
i was fire and flame .
again , we saw how the spoken word poetry walls are mauern .
and after the fight , he shook his nasses , wolkenweißes hair and said , &quot; no , you &apos;re a god . &apos; no , you &apos;re the god . &quot;
i travel a lot , if i teach , and i don &apos;t always get always to see how my students reach their third step , but i was lucky to see that their journey evolved as they did .
my parents have called sarah called the sarah , which is a biblischer name .
i want to talk to a few ideas that i &apos;ve been able to get to be a dokumentarfotograf .
when i saw that the war for every building is such an incredibly intelligent consequences , and that the fotojournalismus could actually be a factor in the konfliktlösung , i wanted to be a photographer to be a fotograf .
at the same time in south africa , after nelson mandela had been discharged from jail , the black population was the last phase of the apartheid .
the next day i went to rwanda , and it was like i was in the expressfahrstuhl in the hell of the hell .
after the end of the suharto , i began to explore conditions in the country that was in a country that was on the road .
a hospital of &quot; doctors without borders &quot; in an absolute refugee .
the kriegsmedizin is so efficient that the percentage of soldiers that survive , the world &apos;s population , which is a verwundung , in this war , in any of our history .
to make sure that as little as possible as possible , we can do all these procedures in choice .
so you &apos;re using it .
but this is a product , and pretty hard theme , so i had to do .
the size of the population -- here &apos;s a big china , here &apos;s big india .
and all the eastern religions , but japan was the same .
because the death of one child will be a child with a child &apos;s child .
and what is the reason in qatar ?
they have a great deal .
all religions are in the world in the world , and the values , and adapt to those new world .
and then , like all of our generation , we lived in a himalayakloster .
eight day .
in india alone , my 150.00 friends , and i went to door door to door to door to the same image to every single house in india , and we did a billion hausbesuche .
this is the überwachungssystem .
i asked them -- it &apos;s all grippespezialisten -- and i asked them to ask you that you want to ask them .
i think we owe the gphin of gphin and ron st. john st. john sehr , i hope , ron is somewhere in the audience -- it &apos;s the founder of gphin .
larry brilliant : first , as first , is not a pissed of the lesion of copyright ?
have a klimawandel-ngo , &quot; the climate group . &quot;
why should we have a positive influence on the world , the world , as a company ?
they save 85 percent reduction to a led to the alten light bulb .
sometimes people think that 100 percent are pretty heavy , and we had this conversation in the company .
a solarpaneel paid himself to be in seven or eight years .
from our 17,000 managern in the world today , 47 percent are today , but that &apos;s not enough and we want to follow this gap and that way to the high management management .
there was a equation in my family , something like you &apos;re intelligent , you &apos;re not able to understand .
this , he said , &quot; it &apos;s the map structure of reality . &quot;
anyone , any of the attitudes she was talking about or whose of the mind is making the ears .
finally , the end of our mittagessens , we realized the openness of the other .
as i would go back to the bangalore and often diskussionen of my friends , where we spent different topics , as they were heftig through new kneipenöffnungszeiten , where a drink is going to be used to be more than what they &apos;ve been paid to be used to the 14 years .
he searches to be looking for forgiveness , and i decided that he wants to make the life of his child life .
this seemed seemed to be a very happy , and it had no deaths to locate a group , even though they &apos;ve been killed dozens of dutzende in liberia .
and the way we &apos;re responsible for ?
it &apos;s troubling -- not ? -- that the media of the world is so bad for the world that a small group of activists in the position of activists in the position of the informationen of this type of information is to release the rest of the weltpresse .
j yeah . that was the front page in the guardian , and it became in all the countries around kenya in the tansanianischen and south asia .
j the impact on the people who were working on this .
and there &apos;s a lot of information .
and i would interested in interested in that , because of what we &apos;ve heard about -- i &apos;m curious to the opinion of ted audience .
and we said , &quot; oh , tell us more .
so you &apos;re going to be careful with the term .
and just a month ago , it was all done by the isländischen parliament .
and from all those numbers , i &apos;ll start with just two or three variables .
this piece can be very disparate entities , depending on where you get it .
first , i read about it in a complaint at a arztbesuch , which is between the ärztekomitee of the ärztekomitee of the ärztekomitee medicine and seven fastfood-restaurants .
so according to these studies , the best zubereitung for a chicken is not too short , but with certainty not , until it &apos;s not going to be black , and a marinade , braunem , braunem sugars or warehouse .
and then in the next summer , i worked under the leitung of dr. basu at unt-gesundheitszentrum am , texas .
and this is incredibly incredible for the efficacy of chemotherapy , perhaps for many different cancers .
for example , it &apos;s volatile organic organic pollutants , which are in our schools , and found in the workplace .
because all these solutions are natural , of course , they are sustainable and they &apos;re langzeitinvestitionen -- langzeitinvestitionen for our generation and the following generations .
and then , a voice called a voice , &quot; hops ! &quot;
after the conference , after my talk , i came to me , men and women .
weightfully me !
a prosthetic is not more for the need for the need , a lack of a auszugleichen .
we &apos;re all different from different perspectives .
i was in the peking of the olympic games .
about 80 percent of these microblogger are young people , under the 30. .
and they are most unemployment , inflationen , anziehenden anlehnen , werterhöhung anlehnen , werterhöhung anlehnen , werterhöhung anlehnen , nachfragerückgang , nachfragerückgang and america that make them go .
they have a kind of a kind of a kind of a type of chicken , or fish can turn fish , and it looks like cattle .
people think about this question , is we &apos;ll be going to take our environment on a greater subject of a greater broad value ?
there &apos;s nothing to eat it , but the conditions were ideal for the winterruhe .
now , the series of the series didn &apos;t even notice , so they are the first ones that can see this .
the mars than earth as earth , he seems to be the same as being as talkative .
sousa , the way that we had lost the opportunity to lose this , quote , &quot; you would take it .
but much more importantly , the bmi used to create the world war to create new kinds of arrangements , which is to weitergaben it to their clients , and then in the year , in the year , as a ascap , wechselte , the majority of the sender sender .
and i ...
for the ausgleich , for the ausgleich , for the ausgleich , i &apos;m trying to do a good liberal , of course , something from the government , a mistake , not true ?
this realization is incredibly zersetzend , unheimlich beschädigend .
okay , i want to be anybody here , but i &apos;m just saying that the person on the right is going to be a liar .
&quot; honey , you don &apos;t look at it , no . &quot;
another study showed that strangers , three times the first time in the first 10 minutes .
here &apos;s koko with your kittens , koko .
i &apos;ll say it again .
don &apos;t look at the eyes of a look at the eyes .
we say , &quot; yes , &quot; as we shake the head .
science has been brought a lot of stuff in the middle of the daylight .
look at them , and you &apos;re going to see the verräterische of the video .
in this case , this much of lauteren world can be for us to be useful , a little bit of our moral rules .
and that &apos;s not true , right ?
you know , we often think that language the world that we live in , but that &apos;s not true .
so what &apos;s going on as a exzentrischer , if not even tragic joke about harry , fungiert as ethnic hetze .
six months after that , without any reason , they would get me free .
that &apos;s what i &apos;m doing .
when i was 10 , i &apos;ve read james country &quot; another &quot; country &quot; country &quot; and on this book .
a new song i suggested you , i would you to give you a new song .
so i took a time to study a time .
and in the remote other places , it &apos;s hard to find a good road .
how do you have to be based on the effects that you &apos;re doing to this remote villages ?
don &apos;t worry about it as hard as &quot; waving flag . &quot;
they &apos;re waiting for being cut .
a lot more people have been angesteckt .
today i &apos;m going to tell you two things . first of all , what we lost , and second , how we gain it .
here you can see the biggest part of the living of the florida keys .
if there &apos;s no fisheries , because it &apos;s a fishery , because it &apos;s fair , or you can , it &apos;s great .
after a few years , after five to seven years , the fish coming back , eating the urchins , and then they grow the algae again .
you can see the border of the schutzgebietes , because there are the boats all the aneinandergereiht .
if it &apos;s so good , if that &apos;s so simple , how much is it ?
so the protection of the visual and the oceans become a sink of governments and philanthropischen institutions , and that &apos;s not the case .
in the coral , we &apos;ve found that the pyramid is the equivalent of the serengeti , where five lions are coming on a gnu .
okay , enric , thank you for you to have a part of the profound of spiritual erlebnisses . thank you .
it has been as the longest creatures in the sea .
they come to the submarine -- they come to the eyes in the window and watch .
among other people , we &apos;re trying to try to do our partners with the woods of the world -- this world -- this is the world that we get into the lab .
bl : these worms have no verdauungssystem . they don &apos;t have a mouth .
what we &apos;ve been seen before , was from the pacific .
we &apos;re going to try to show you the pacific in the hd .
these worms grow up several centimeters in the week .
the concept of the bestandsbewahrung is futile .
and the rest of one percent of one percent is based on the formula that you can use in the situation .
they also have the mathematical structure that are von by rastern , messungen , punkten , achsen , achsen .
students have to be this amazing . they have to ask them .
and the best , or one of the best parts , is that we don &apos;t get the answer to the end of the lehrer-version .
what is probably the small hadron collider ?
here you find the fastest growing young people worldwide .
it &apos;s privatschulen . there &apos;s no government schools in the slums .
this is a computer that has been installed by a slum unternehmer entrepreneur of a revolutionären entrepreneur called sugata mitra that showed that kids were able to demonstrate that kids can learn from particular conditions to learn from a computer .
now , the key is motivation , and that is in the number two ways .
this is a school in a bus on a baustelle in pune , the fastest growing wachsenden of asia .
they should be in a mcdonald &apos;s mcdonald .
there are formal frame , schools , hochschulen , hospitals , hospitals , in the innovation , and informal environments , communities , families , social networks .
every kid to age 15 to 15 , which is a place in a school , 2015 will be able to get to get a chance to get .
and as i look at him , this scene that comes to tears , and i &apos;ve been in love with me .
here &apos;s a few of the teenagers of teenagers ? let &apos;s have to do it for cooking -- and they &apos;re all sich every night for two , three or four times . it &apos;s ridiculous .
he sits down everywhere and they &apos;re all using anything .
this gay , people like me , want to be treated as a full citizen , and it &apos;s right in front of our nose .
and there &apos;s people who have to have people who have fear of their jobs , so they don &apos;t show you who are in home . it &apos;s not just about north carolina ; in all states , no more .
think about it .
and i got scared .
so about three years ago , i read a paper in the new york times .
who were my grandparents ?
they helps us to be what we could have .
so , how evolution works .
and in fact , this is this insect .
i have a hint of someone who i had to do someone .
he was not only shifting 43 to 43 to 44 , degrees fahrenheit , 125 for about two days , but it &apos;s holding a constant temperature .
but contrast is going to be something like this . they &apos;re going to go out .
here &apos;s the americans the russians , and yes , it was -- actually -- a game .
they started telling me , and all parents are going to see the schlüsselworte .
i have a irische machine .
our life is determined by data , and the presentation of this data is to create an excellent fantastic interfaces , which can tell great stories .
i &apos;ve been thrown a glimpse of the various perimeter , because you can select what you want to do from the present .
it &apos;s a beinloser man who &apos;s sitting in the box , and that schachspieler controls .
a sammlungsgeschwindigkeit of about 11 sheep per hour , which is called a stundenlohn of 68 cents .
in the reason , you can see that , what you see on the left is the originalframe , and on the right hand , you see the frame of the frame as he was interpreted by the 16 people who had no idea what they &apos;re doing .
daisy : daisy , daisy , aaron koblin : and we took all those pieces and speisten it into a weitere turk .
but we knew that we needed to be the right person to put us behind and to make it something we could build .
and there &apos;s all individuals that are submitted to the project .
thank you .
so i made a series of images , and they &apos;re fügte , and they &apos;re fügte them together .
a unvorhergesehene consequence of it is that you &apos;re always going to see one part of his picture and that leads to a very free .
and sometimes i have a emotional response to news , like the earthquake in haiti .
then i ran 50 miles , 60 miles .
it &apos;s like the different layers of the way we are , and what we &apos;re doing is our identity .
another glasprojekt is in a public library in san jose , california .
so every building has its own personality .
it &apos;s perhaps easier than ever before , ever before , to make a good living .
i don &apos;t think we &apos;re particularly materialistisch .
it &apos;s just too weird .
you know , in the middle ages , if you met somebody who was very poor , you called this one arm , &quot; literally , someone who was lucky enough , not hold , it &apos;s a un-glücklicher .
and that &apos;s going to do the youngest court , and they do with angels and trompeten , and the sky will open up .
i told you the action of madame bovary .
what i think i think really , is success , and failure .
we should make sure that it &apos;s our way that we are really the future of our own ambitionen .
alain de botton : a freundlichere , sanftere erfolgsphilosophie erfolgsphilosophie .
if you train for those exercise , you don &apos;t smile .
you know , you &apos;re talking to beschlagener , and you &apos;re at 60 beats per minute , so you &apos;re never really focussiert , you don &apos;t see it .
they are in the fluid .
my breath is down to three atemzüge .
the should worry about me , i didn &apos;t do it anymore .
i swam in this thing .
it &apos;s the only schwimmstrecke that interest me .
now , there &apos;s already today .
the gateway can be a smartphone , or it could be a particularly eingerichtetes gateway , how today you have been spezielle and spezielle in this stuff , because they &apos;re not so good .
many of you have received the phillips of the phillips life .
this is a very important part of our life . we should sleep a third of our lives .
ok . let &apos;s go from sleep to the schlaf .
so we can change medicine in the pflegebereich of the pflegebereich , and ungeborenen kids , from frühgeborenen to the seniors , the pharmazeutische arena , the whole range of disease -- i hope i &apos;m mediated to give you a sense of that .
so , i hope i &apos;ve convinced you -- the impact on the krankenhausressorcen are enormous and the effects on disease are also astonishing in all these different diseases and more .
how do we create a stable societies ? longevity . longevity . longevity .
and in the novel , a particular one called alvin , and he says , maybe that &apos;s not the best way , and destroyed the whole system .
and so they were not there .
and she &apos;s a great thing .
and it &apos;s been a look at the time .
maybe you may wonder , how we do this schnittbilder .
our only cookbook of the world is in the partielle differentialgleichungen .
this is the finished hamburger , the most famous hamburger .
a talk about surgical robot is always a talk about surgery .
and surgeons were more than doctors .
but ultimately , the aufgewacht are also fighting .
they had to give their intuitive movements with the instrumentation .
i have to tell you about the big , complicated robot .
and as you can see , how it does it , to do something useful , it can &apos;t remain so zusammengeballt .
and we don &apos;t even have to do that in this case .
we &apos;re here to speak about accidents .
but we had a problem .
okay , well , it was partly my fault .
we don &apos;t just showed that bacteria can be the solution to be plastikmüll , but also that the openness of the openness of ungewissen ausgängen and the ability to make the eingehen unexpected discoveries .
the movie that we &apos;re going to see is you &apos;re going to be made for the weltausstellung in new york .
i &apos;m not a exceptions .
it went on . they always always always do things better .
they didn &apos;t say , &quot; our style are curves . let &apos;s make the house . &quot;
i think in my family , we had very lucky . because we &apos;ve learned that design .
&quot; well , &quot; well , very good !
ed : and then embassy row is a historic stätte , because in the kymaericanischen history , the pariser is in the anfang , where the message has been in the beginning .
see this chair ? the orange ? this is the organic chair .
because it &apos;s part of what we want to be .
it was nachrichtenartikel voller . they were fully spekulation . they were anekdotisch . they were anekdotisch . no sound information .
one of them is famous : the population . the world population has increased by two billion people in the last 50 years .
i want to be a very brent : beautiful .
you see the lines , the way the size of the size of the size .
before i think about the cost of the cost , i have to really understand that i really have to really clear .
so , the liberation actually actually .
but only since we have a boy , we can actually demonstrate the quanten-levitation , and the quantum quantum quanten-arretierung .
so , first of all of your magnetic strands are stuck inside of the inner forest , but the superconductor doesn &apos;t get if they &apos;re moving , because your movements use energy , and so the supraleitung noise .
and that round magnet , i can also expand , of course , to form a broad citizen .
and it was inspired by this quote by douglas adams . the situation is from the galaxy .
because you don &apos;t tell you how to do that , if you want to make it , and no schmelzanlage .
but although they weren &apos;t convinced they said , &quot; okay , we call back . &quot;
tt : yeah , i .
so , as a result , what &apos;s going to happen if moore &apos;s law to be stößt ? &quot;
today , you can buy half a billion , and they are even better , because they are faster .
but where are we going to get software ?
larry page has a passionate talk on our gründungsveranstaltung , where he was able to put this big challenges of mankind .
they wanted to catch fish .
that may be insignificant , but it &apos;s incredibly frightening to hear that a lot of rumors , even more than the many know , taller than the last , right , right now , or maybe ...
so the tsunami can be seen as a kind of a bahnbrechender moment , a moment that was going to be the blogosphere .
probably , it &apos;s probably not until three to five percent of the jellybeans of the geleebohnen in the jar , and it would be better than 90 percent of them as 90 percent of them .
somebody has something that has been linked , so , well , etc .
he finished his erläuterungen , and i wait to a 300 pounds of paper , and it &apos;s just saying , &quot; that &apos;s all i want to do . &quot;
so i &apos;m going to show you a moment of a 30 seconds of the thing about the thing that looks like without the skin .
this habitat is covered more of the earth than all other people .
many of us , i &apos;m in the process of thinking , think that the exploitation of the oceans are only in the last 50 or 100 years , and maybe 100 years ago .
these cables are fahrzeuge in the way our eyes and hands for the work on the sea floor .
so there &apos;s a barcode on this product that &apos;s exactly what the product is .
but i want to share with you some of my favorite discoveries of mine .
we don &apos;t know why they do it , we don &apos;t know .
this graph is based on a brand-new article that &apos;s going to be done in the journal of plos .
but that &apos;s not yet anything .
as an architect , i have something to be too .
mitchell joachim : build not a house , they grow it !
i think it &apos;s very interesting and very proaktiv , because what you &apos;ve heard about the last few days , is the sense of what &apos;s the sense of going on , directions , and are the ones that are specific and unique to the problems .
now , we all think that shelley obviously a tremendous visual poet , many of us who remember a great essays , and the most famous essay is one called &quot; a defense of poetry . &quot;
i &apos;m going to read you .
and to a certain time of his life , they were going to go on rocks .
but let me show you the latest movement .
if you used to be the digital radio , the radiosender einstellte and &quot; krrckkk , &quot; on the available possible dangerous network , this noise was this noise .
the basic idea of the bayesianischen is that you have two sources of information that are the implications .
that means that i have to make predictions about the future .
now , there &apos;s a very clear example , where a lot of me feel very different than if he had been tortured by another person .
and in the meantime i got two daughters .
so they knew the rules that the other person plays .
if those dots were on a rennparcours , you would have no idea what &apos;s going on .
we &apos;ve shown that we can explain a big part of data -- people actually plan to actually get their movements exactly to the negative consequences of the time .
this is from vorbeiflug mariner , iv iv , iv .
mars has the largest einschlagkrater of solar system , the hellas-becken .
that &apos;s my lieblingsbild . it was taken by a few weeks ago .
the oldest stone rock on earth is just 3.6 billion .
and the upshot of our teammates was a raketengetriebenes roboterflugzeug called the ares .
we fold it , and we put it in a raumfahrzeug .
this is about tilamook , oregon .
i think i think , in the packaging , let &apos;s look at this -- &quot; eight to 12 . &quot;
and there was a guy who sold these weapons for lego , because lego -- the dänen -- no , no , they don &apos;t exist .
and then there are some examples there are real stuff , real stuff .
i have to tell you , for me , it was all changed .
perhaps most important , the impact on other companies is enormous .
in fact , politics is a politik .
in brazil , there are now 29.000 ethanol-zapfsäulen , whereas the united states is only 700 700 , and the u.s. only two in california -- and within three years , the percentage of average percent of the population is in 85 percent .
that &apos;s not unwesentlich . the biofuels are a big deal .
scientists are explaining us -- and that &apos;s only estimates -- that we need to have to have the emission of greenhouse gasses , and that &apos;s how it works .
i can &apos;t wait to wait what we &apos;re going to be the primary company .
there are fewer people who are available to be available , and then you get this plateu curve , and you get this classic sigmoidale curve .
b is located on the edge of the network .
and that happens in every single nodes .
the red dots are going to be the grippe-fälle , and the yellow dots are the people who are friends with flu .
would you get to get a immunity to get ?
and there are , i think , three kinds of ways can be used to be used to this massiv-passiven data .
the building was in the field of the venezolanischen economy and the death of the bauunternehmers &apos; 90s .
although it seems to be a totally chaotic place , if you see it from the top , it &apos;s a whole net of wasserwegen and the channels that every single one of the individual .
in this tradition , the future braut all the way their possessions , which will soon be their new husband .
what a place like the torre david david david is a remarkable thing , is this kind of skelettrahmen , where people have a base that you can do .
we can only ask , &quot; how do the rentiere rentiere of the weihnachtsmanns ? &quot; and i can experience it immediately -- or what we want to ask .
it has replaced the workers through technology .
you can see the left on the screen that are showing what is going on with his right arm .
they are older , and they &apos;re always getting older .
or even if we &apos;re going to get much older , our cars , we can go to people .
they were in a moment .
it &apos;s always been more apparent that we can &apos;t win .
the two specialists behind the curtain will help me to get the outcome on the screen .
one of the journalists said , &quot; what is happening ? &quot;
the evangelikalen are hinzugekommen , just like jewish verbände .
i think there are some of the reasons , but there &apos;s just a few of us to focus on us .
he was caught by the flames of the flames , he was going to be like a motte , a little bit of a adrenalin-junkie .
let me go from door to door to door to the international community and see if somebody or truppen for this stuff .
but for sergio , it was too late .
he saw her .
samantha power to a complicated heroes of a complicated heroes of a complicated heroes .
this is the same jobs and possibilities of all the wertschöpfungskette .
but today , i &apos;m going to talk about the old food of food , last year , last year and 2008 during the hungerskrise of the hungerskrise , for every 2,700 pounds .
and i &apos;m going to go into these stores , if you &apos;re there , it &apos;s a little bit of the fields to see what you can get to see , and i realize you can &apos;t get food .
we see changes of the participation in schools .
i want to talk about something that i call digital food .
and what i found is that they &apos;re instead of going to subventionen and other things , invest in a very big program .
thank you .
we could do the same thing .
they &apos;re not going to go to a brustkrebsklinik .
it &apos;s not abstract ; it &apos;s the interaction with the environment .
it &apos;s a umwerfendes device , not because it shows me how many 15-hour i &apos;m seeing it , but because it &apos;s been offered to be 24 hours to do what i do .
that never was really shown .
the leistungskraft of these magnets is so large that we can see that a single neutron with this technology .
you don &apos;t have to shrink the tumor .
if the magnet is large enough , and your resolution is enough , you can actually get all the proteins in the body and begin to understand the individual system .
most of us find that business , and interestingly , 12 vibrations per minute , a minute about a schlafenden human .
if i &apos;m going to go here -- -- more than a few seconds , you would feel uncomfortable ; longer than a few minutes , and you would leave the room in a moment .
that &apos;s all the one . and this is the tune that is to hear the most part of the world &apos;s most frequently in the world .
and i was there with two very good friends , richard weber and kevin vallely .
as we meilen miles and miles of sastrugi , gefrorene eis-schneeverwehungen , the hüfttief .
so i &apos;m standing here today and i &apos;m talking to you , i was running over the gesamtzeit of about five years .
just 10 miles off the coast of the coast and in 381 feet .
the ocean determine the climate and weather , and weather , they hold the temperature and shapes the chemistry of the world .
one-way-reisen there are easy ...
this is the result that if you don &apos;t know that there &apos;s a frontiers of what we &apos;re going to get to make the oceans .
in the past three years , the united states have been gut to the united states of beispiel miles as a nationaldenkmal protected .
we need tiefsee-u-boote , new technologies to exploration of the ocean .
so much of my early career , i wanted to figure out how the wings of insects are doing to keep the insekten of insects to keep themselves in the air .
so let &apos;s study this idea of simplicity .
this is a lovely picture of the visual interneurone of jeff , and you can see the incredible pictures of brains that he showed in his talk .
they selektieren a zellsatz , to make any behavior , a different neuronenregler of a different brain , and you can think of it in a very complicated system .
our mission is to build a detailiertes and realistisches computer model of the human brain .
he &apos;s home and drinks .
if you watch the surface of the neocortex , you get it out of louder little components , and g5 processors , like in a computer .
how many of a typus tree is there ? where are you ?
we can look at the tissue . and we can change neurons .
we can upload all these neurons , every single one in your own processor , it activate , and watch what happens .
henrsy markram says that the secrets of the brain can be solved . mental , memory , perceptions , memory , you &apos;re going to be made out of neurons and electrical signals , and he &apos;s going to be able to find a supercomputer that &apos;s going to be able to find the brain with the brain in the brain .
it would be two or three thousand bombs .
the air force began to build models , and began this .
that &apos;s what nasa did was to get a acht-mann-version machine that would fly to mars .
i &apos;ll tell you a little bit about irrationales behavior .
it &apos;s a fantastic time to write . because there &apos;s so much resonance that you can get from people .
the lower ? yellow .
if you ask people , you think , think , you think it &apos;s something that is something that is to do with culture .
the countries on the right-hand side , those who are very much , a very different form of doing it .
i &apos;ll give you another example of this .
but it &apos;s back to get back to once , once again .
a online online plan for 59 dollars .
the other idea here , by the way , the way we don &apos;t know our lifestyles , which is not so good .
in fact , in medicine , this is our view .
and radio waves are limited .
in infrared -- you can use protection to the eyes of your eyes with lower energy .
your intensity can be very quickly , and they can be very quickly .
they are critical for us to be critical .
but that &apos;s just by the way .
cars have led-scheinwerfer and led-rücklichter and can communicate with each other , and through the datenaustausch traffic , with cars and so on .
dna is that , what is all life .
it &apos;s actually not that many data , actually , not so many data .
you &apos;re the apotheker of the genome , and the power of it is the better medicine of the today -- she has no side effects .
he &apos;s really easy -- has just 246 genes -- but we could be completely synthesizing .
we &apos;re not going to be able to walk as small organisms in the world , but are part of a big ecosystem .
the consequences can be bad -- if we poison ourselves or the earth -- but that &apos;s just a consequence of us .
now i &apos;m mostly here because it &apos;s a kind of digging in the moment at the moment we have a lot of people who think that you think you &apos;re a dog , first by making the rules of rules , human rules .
they &apos;re just as &quot; schlagbar , &quot; just to beat . and so they &apos;re going to be beaten .
no , we &apos;re doing puppy , sit . &quot; -- boom , he can try to try to try to try six to 10 to 10 .
they are like the golden retriever .
and i would say if you don &apos;t need it , then you might not be .
not only with the pups , but with the rest of the family .
these beziehungsfähigkeiten are so simple .
their kids are just train .
wk : i want to make a windmill .
so , this windmill -- does it work ?
wk : yeah . i always think it &apos;s still working with energy .
because although i used scientific concepts in songs , it &apos;s very hard to make it lyrisch .
and yet , if it &apos;s accompanied by selbst-bewusstheit and sprachbeherrschung , as in my case .
one is a white flash .
64 to 75 .
so let &apos;s look at the third question .
the desert was a mile or two per year .
the homo erectus , the same tool is about 30 generations .
you can teach them a little bit of tauschhandel , and there &apos;s also a reziprozität in other animals , but the exchange of a sudden , a different one is never going to happen .
it is the wealth of the wealth ; at the wrong of your needs , time .
we have achieved as a species .
but there &apos;s no evidence .
and when people started talking , objects like this far herumzureichen , it was a hint that there was a full hint that there was a exchange between groups .
but who knows how to make a mouse ?
but i &apos;m also because of the connection that people are , and the so-called one is not because of the ideas that we have to be connected to face and to the begatten , and i &apos;m sure that the technology will continue to inspire and therefore going to make the lebensstandards further .
this is as high as a 42-stöckiges building . i &apos;ve got the statue here as compared to the statue as a comparison .
we don &apos;t talk about it , we don &apos;t take it seriously .
they &apos;re just way , these emotions , they &apos;re gone .
if we think about the herrstellung pan-viraler , then , the rapid development is the problem of how we can detect things that are changing ?
i talked about -- know what you &apos;re familiar with , if you &apos;re not getting a diagnosis in the hospital ?
what about real people ?
we &apos;re going to be a part of their viruses ; it &apos;s new , far ungesehene .
after 10 days , she came back with a fieber , and yet , again , fieber -- -- wenig oxygen -- little oxygen in their lungs .
it wasn &apos;t even very often very often .
it &apos;s a classic retrovirus , but it &apos;s completely fresh . nobody ever seen it before .
a huge battery could already .
we &apos;re going to reinvent something that fits the kostenpunkt of the strommarktes .
i got a flüssigmetall with dense density at the top , a flüssigmetall with high density , and the same salt .
but david is young and clever and he wants to build a doktoranden-stelle , and so he &apos;s building the first one of the chemical composition .
so what did we learn from all of those ?
this video was taken in the aquarius-unterwasserlabor aquarius-unterwasserlabor . six miles before the coast of key largo , about 20 feet below .
soon , we realized that our garage didn &apos;t be large enough for this growing project .
i began to become maria and their methods and her methods and how they found it that umsetzte and how important they found that kids found that kids and they &apos;re not taught to you , to give them a open source .
evolution is often often as a way that we &apos;ve ever chosen , but they actually actually represent a large number of possibilities .
i &apos;m going to skip this to the edge of the phase .
our cities are endangered , because many of them are in the coast .
there are stars and whatnot .
so if we think about nonverbales behavior , or body language , how it &apos;s going to call the social scientists , it turns out it &apos;s a language , so we think about communication .
this expression , as a proud of the jessica tracy , was studied by jessica tracy , and she showed that people and born from birth to birth people do , and that &apos;s when they win at a hedge of sportwettkampf .
so i thought about it . you &apos;re entering these people and see how they participate . could you get it to you and then you get to get more ?
what happens in a rollenänderung , what happens when you &apos;ve got on the top level , if you &apos;ve got the allerkleinsten level ? how the power of tiny manipulation , this tiny einmischung ?
this is happening in the lab . the little practice for just a few minutes , where you really use that , of course , that &apos;s important .
these things . people are going to show her , you know , you show yourself .
she was completely published and said , &quot; i &apos;ve got nothing to look at here . &quot;
they need your body , privacy and two minutes . it can influence the other way in the big way .
lachse swim schwimmen to get to their laichgründen , and leberegel kapern , kriechen a ant , and drive them into a blade of your brain , and drive a blade of a jeep .
and you have to have a kind of autoaufkleber , you have to have an answer .
so , it &apos;s like i believe , richard and i think that these ideas aren &apos;t being abused .
and of course they &apos;re essentially in the light .
but among all these ideas that are all very much in the world in the world , are many toxic ideas .
and as viruses , we &apos;re not trying to try to destroy them .
and in my game , you know , you &apos;re übergestikuliert .
we set some beliefs on the legs , we went to tour .
i know you &apos;ll say , &quot; t &quot; is not in music . &quot;
audience : t , e , d.
nobody hears each other . nobody else .
they &apos;re going to see the orchestra in a kind of mürrischer revolte .
i don &apos;t want to put that that that not should have been to happen , but we need to be better , if it &apos;s going to be able to answer questions that you have to consider in terms of the consequences , and the reactions .
they work in regierungsbehörden . they &apos;re the driver .
five dollars can save a life .
she deserves about two dollars a day , building a erziehungs-fonds and told me that they &apos;re not going to be told you to be married before those things are done .
finally , from desperation , they went and konsultierten a wise old lady .
it &apos;s not even new .
and as you say , if you &apos;re mad , you &apos;re going to be the best talk you &apos;re going to be ever .
okay , the vast majority of us .
his message was also a unit that was the interconnectedness of everything and the unity of everything , and his favorite value was respect , kindness .
who fights when he goes ?
they start to go to israel and palestine , in jordan , turkey in the turkey .
and so more and more wanderer , and it has been in the process for a income to support their family .
go just to somebody to somebody , with a different culture , from another country , with another ethnizität , which is somehow different , and she uses him in a conversation .
i &apos;m going to start to start where the story started in 1985 .
now tomorrow , before you herkamen , who had the möglichkeit of you who had the opportunity to get showers ?
you see here -- 35 percent of this weniger houses in which 50,000 indigenous indigenous people live in 35 percent of the houses had a functional shower .
21 percent of what we fix , are consequences of baumängeln , things that are actually being added in .
we did this . he besorgte staubmessgeräte .
we found out later that in this region , in this region , the sun is the leading of disease and death .
so , a thing that we have in related to everything that we &apos;ve done , the 2000er mandela said , &quot; how slavery and apartheid is not naturgegeben . it &apos;s the work of people , the work of people , it &apos;s the work of people , the work of people .
i don &apos;t give me it if you &apos;re going to call me a lesbe . really .
it sounds really abgedroschen , which is to say , but if you &apos;re trying to use it , it &apos;s called the enemy .
so , with this statement , i think , i think , kids should be leaving their community , to live in a better .
this is the recent federally staatlich arbeiterschaft in america with our bezirksbürgermeister bezirksbürgermeister .
this is a picture of the bronx of the bronx , who &apos;s kids in his house , not in jail , so they felt zugehörig .
we gave something back .
if you &apos;re large kids with little zusammensteckt , they &apos;re the big , thick man in the middle , what &apos;s cool , and they create those responsibility under the gleichaltrigen , the incredible .
now , you may wonder about these kids .
they &apos;re going to be the kids from these shops .
and i think , a teacher who was the south bronx bronx bronx .
second , i bet you &apos;re seeing here as a laien , and the difference here is a death of the st-segments right after this sharp line .
to 10 : 06 , the pig was a heart attack .
people with migraine , who &apos;s a aura of vorausgeht , a band with nervösen neurons -- here in red -- that &apos;s three to five millimeters to five millimeters .
the problem is that 30 million americans have americans , and we need a behandlungsmittel . i think we have now .
my first wish is that the reaktive neurostimulator neurostimulator is neurostimulator , the rns , für neurostimulator -- a spitzenmäßiges acronym -- for treating treatment of other gehirnstörungen .
lawyers are taking over provisionsbasis in the hopes of provisionsbasis , fette shares the geschworenen of the poor patients of the poor patients .
a year ago , four years ago , four of five of the vollzeitbeschäftigten of the vollzeitbeschäftigten is called &quot; zeugenaussage . &quot;
how do you know what is important ?
so i thought , &quot; i &apos;m going to talk about death . &quot;
i have the first time to get it to get it here .
these people are below the barrier , i &apos;m going to call the barrier because they &apos;re going to be excluded from the process , you &apos;re going to know from the world .
they have to use connexions as being as platform to develop their lehrmaterialien and auszuhändigen , who teach them in the world &apos;s teaching the world of the world .
yes , books , from those may be sold or 1,000 spending in the year .
it doesn &apos;t surprise it &apos;s not all like everybody , right ?
how do we protect it for the future ?
so that &apos;s not very tough .
the days of the pilotprojekte are over , if people say , &quot; so we would like to have three or three of them in our country to see how this works . &quot;
no , it &apos;s not a laptop-projekt . it &apos;s a bildungsprojekt .
you can use a few thousand kids with two megabit .
so it &apos;s something like a electronic book .
everybody says , this is a 100 laptop , which can &apos;t do it .
and that &apos;s the markteinführung .
they click on things around and stare on screens . &quot;
he says , &quot; no , no , no . there &apos;s a better opportunity . &quot;
we &apos;re all playing &quot; i &quot; on a large subject , which is not in information , and we cannot keep up .
thank you .
i think most people think that a hiv-positive mom , always will be ansteckt .
that &apos;s not possible . this is not .
it &apos;s going to be good . they &apos;re going to live .
first , the first thing to prevent the mutter-kind-übertragung .
two years ago , one of the mentor years ago , one of the mentor people were to me and told me a story .
how do you create a better healthcare system ?
the außergewöhnlichste is how simple the system is .
if you look at the volume of the gray substance of the age of four or 22 years , take them in childhood , which is this graph . it &apos;s gipfelt in the early adolescence .
the idea that your dad &apos;s dad in the public , was able to get it down .
this is the gokart that we built together .
after the first year , it was invited to installieren the ars museum in austria to install it in his lobby , and i &apos;m happy to say that there were over there , 24 hours of nine years .
but the night , as we zusammenpackten , i asked the tele-schauspielerin , like the tele-regisseure decided they would kiss to sam sam .
and here &apos;s the result .
a place where my family has been working on four generations .
honestly , i have no idea what it has to be with it , but they &apos;re immensely findig .
the first thing you see is the schreckliche of the bisses .
he &apos;s doing it to take my leg , put me up , and i put me to a car seat and can bring me to a doctor .
it was a groove in the floor .
and she said , &quot; well , it &apos;s about them . &quot;
we &apos;ve calculated that 200 years of the end of our direct kontaktes are in the world .
it &apos;s just as easy as a metaphor for the memory , but our brains are not perfect speichergeräte like technology .
she &apos;s the mitbegründerin of my 200-jahr-plans .
i would like to think -- thank you .
and i can assure you , we can have corn in everything .
you should know that in every community , the number of hofläden is already beginning to be clearly .
i have three tauchexpeditionen in antarctica .
but tell me where you are and what country they belong . &quot;
we also explored the surface of the islands -- a very important nistplatz of birds , one of the most important vögelnistplätze in the pacific .
and we &apos;re going to be a problem with the rest of the world .
he coined the term &quot; reverse fischfanglizenz . &quot;
of course , the tiefseegebiete and the open sea , but the korallenteil , but the korallenteil , the one that everybody would like to look at was in trouble .
here &apos;s the pacific , with huge meeresschutzgebieten and huge umweltschutzzonen .
now there are mehrsprachige , immediate , automatische übersetzungsdienste for many of our devices , even on the right .
it &apos;s a endless debate , and there &apos;s no one , not a single answer , but if you &apos;re a geek like me , then you say , &quot; well , what do we tell us ? &quot;
instead , he was very careful what happens again , what happens when technology for the first time in a neighborhood and in a community .
so there &apos;s there , of course , two different possibilities .
this is a blue field -- it &apos;s actually a yves kline .
i mean , this was at least at least how it did me happy .
now , there was a question that was a very important in my head , well , i can do more of the things i like to do in design , and fewer of those who i don &apos;t like to do that ?
and here it &apos;s from the front .
you face a horrible situation without a moment .
they are going to be in hospitals .
as a 15-jähriger , for example , i was regarded as a student in multiplikationen , because i knew the mulitplikationstabellen of the mulitplikationstabellen , and i know how i have to use logarithmen , and i can work with the rechenschieber .
i &apos;ve seen this value of the older people in the age of my friends who are in their 60s , &apos; 70s , &apos; 80s and &apos; 90s still are activated than anlageverwalter , farmers and doctors .
as a christian ikonographie , and made of kruzifixen swastikas , made young jewish men in the united states and canada and superman are responsible and superman who were also going to go back to the bible .
the case of granada , the last muslim enklave of europe , all of the muslim enklave
the biggest biggest , rughal , wants to be , not that these rocks are updaten . so he tries to stop at the updaten .
and one of my favorites is al-batina from yemen .
&quot; and , when comes out of the article ? &quot;
rughal : there must be something that we can do .
&#91; &quot; 99 &quot; &#93; .
it &apos;s dangerous if a group of themselves identified themselves as extremely identified .
naif al-mutawa : from islam : , from islam superhelden
let &apos;s look at it .
so let me highlight it for you .
let me show you this .
and when i began to design , i &apos;ve discovered something curious about myself .
so they have the eye and then come to the concepts .
but of course china also has a tremendous population .
but what that shows is that this kind of information is a form of information .
it &apos;s actually a pleasure to employ to them , because it &apos;s visual .
the eden-kopfnote is after the eden project in the u.k. .
why don &apos;t smell it like potato or veilchen ? so there are two theories .
and a theory allows a theory to work on a less .
now , after a few months of the world , i discovered that there &apos;s a kind of molecule that you &apos;re called borane , and that &apos;s exactly the same amount .
this is the basis of the machine that these two people built .
they &apos;ve made it ... and it &apos;s just like coumarin .
that was a good thing .
at time , a number of things i want to do is , i want to make you want to pay attention .
and she didn &apos;t actually have a picture of the context that she was landed .
norman norman !
i said nobody on wiedersehen , neither my mother , neither my mother , neither my dad , not my sister , my aunties , my cousins , my cousins , my cousins , anybody .
i &apos;m going to tell you about this . i &apos;m just saying to say that i had two things when i was going to go to the orphanage of the orphanage , and that was one of the family , and the other one was to write poems .
and this is how we &apos;re looking for them .
and then you hope that one of us is there and see little parts .
he had a skoliose and therefore have to have a penibel of other , female and probably much smaller familienmitgliedern familienmitgliedern to be able to get his age of 12 years .
is that a good evolutionary adaptation , or will it be to be the way we will be the way that we &apos;re going to be the shortest of the earth &apos;s surface on earth ?
but we &apos;re going to do this , or we &apos;re going to take nature to take nature ?
one day , a year , a year later , i was a laden in a store of a shop for künstlerbedarf . i wanted to buy tonwerkzeug -- we had a bastel-tag plan .
that meant a basic transformation for me .
my hint : about 70 layers of this , matt-schwarze auto-grundierung .
do you know how i &apos;m really passionate ? this project is just for me , and yet i went to ebay a chinese newspaper from san francisco to actually get the bird from the bird to make the bird in the bird .
when we bahnten the way to the spectacular blue mountains in sydney , it was a perfect herbsttag , and the sonnenschein , the smell of eukalyptus and a dream .
&quot; no , it &apos;s too hard . &quot;
and if you ever walk back , just with a laufgestell . &quot;
i remember that my dad had taken me out in the wheelchair after the wheelchair , and i was from top of the top down to the bottom of the first time , and it was the first time to the sun on my face .
they said , &quot; we &apos;ll be going to put you beside you , because we think that that would be good for them . &quot;
she was going to me the telefonbuch and i called the orphanage , i buchte and said that i &apos;d like to go to a flugstunde .
and i said , &quot; jap . &quot;
and mama and dad ? were never up .
i &apos;m in this world , but i &apos;m in the same way .
it &apos;s like a anish kapoor of the richard of a richard of serra .
how to do it , i &apos;m supposed to do a phone in three weeks if i have this stuff that have evolved over millions of years ?
each of those elements could be attached to the wall as a kind of kunstobjekt .
in his days , he was the highest taxpayer in the british .
i look at a single oberflächenstrukturen and like they flow -- like they flow and flow , it &apos;s based on furniture , but it &apos;s not the endmotivation , but it &apos;s been made out of the gefertigt , as opposed to the aluminum and it &apos;s grown in the aluminum .
that &apos;s the car of the future . it &apos;s a wassertröpfchen .
if you think it reaches contemporary architecture , it feels like to me .
that &apos;s my studio . it &apos;s unterirdisch .
it was made out of a thousand .
so after i did my dr. dr. did i was lucky enough to be a forschergruppe member of the forschergruppe , which used to use it for the first time to explore the ocean .
there was one of those rippenquallen .
he uses red bioluminescence like a scharfschütze ein to tiere the animals that are blind to the red light and can see it without being seen .
so they use it to find out of the fressen and mate .
i urge you to call me a different science that &apos;s still using hundreds of thousands of years .
this is a kind of a place .
so i made me up , the value of the schlafes .
and on june 5th , i heard a noisy bang of the wheel , who changed my life and the one duck .
and here &apos;s the ducks again .
after the price of the price changed my life .
another example of the leading example of the einflusses of glasgebäuden .
so , if i like this , for example , this is the sound for purple .
depending on how i anrichte it , i can hear the dinner with the dinner and go .
one of them is &quot; i &apos;m a dream &quot; by martin luther king , and the other one is hitler .
now , you can always watch more and more often , that former rechtsberater are now hauptgeschäftsführer .
you don &apos;t want to say anything , which might be used to a use of a used to a use . &quot;
absolutely vital .
and what happens if teachers want to be completely ?
and why not ? you don &apos;t trust law . why don &apos;t you trust the law ?
it &apos;s so that freedom is a formale structure .
because life is complex . and here &apos;s the hardest and greatest change : we need to change the authority for the auslegung and the use of the law and the anwendung of the gesetzes .
a free society needs red and green lights , otherwise you &apos;re going to suffer about it .
now , the frontiers of interest , the kreditkarten-unternehmen , the kreditkarten-unternehmen , and they can take the fees that you can take .
well , if you think about it , it &apos;s really hard to get it with a ruler of a ruler .
he had a very bad job .
he had just a spielzeugpistole .
but the problem of shifting and incentives , it lies in incentives that they &apos;re demoralisieren the size of the berufliche , and they demoralisieren the average of the other activity in the number of things .
so wise gesetzlose are better than nothing , but it &apos;s hard to conceivably that any wise can keep it for the purposes of time .
why did this idea spreads ?
people want to be tugendhaft .
it was a extraordinary time . i &apos;m going to tell the mentality now something rather bizarre that we -- -- the americas and the rest of the world -- that had the rest of the world .
this was bert , the turtle .
we have this kompletten .
what i want to show you is what you &apos;re going to take to transport the 34 of the angereichertes of uranium .
what if you had nuclear weapons had had gotten rid of nuclear weapons ?
we get down down and bring the truck you saw here somewhere here in the finanzviertel .
part of the problem is that the katastrophenplaner self , are overwhelmed by the thoughts of the thoughts .
it was sent me from somebody who &apos;s been sent to me a kenner of the zivilschutzmaßnahmen . is that it had been hard .
there are a lot of black sheep out there that are doing wrong and the problems have been .
we can show our results . we can do things better .
how can we tap them ?
it &apos;s rentabel , a dangerous environment .
imagine , we could do it because if we could do it , we could do it .
the governments that most progress are doing most of the people who have found the ways to enable the ways to enable the ways to have a shared value in the business , rather than seeing the government to see the actor .
maybe i can look here , and i can look at the brain , and i can change my cut .
i want to thank you .
and you get a moment to me in the 19th century , very , very , very creative 1833 .
we could certainly be all so productive if facebook or twitter will not cost much time .
they &apos;re wirkten unerbittlich on the british government for the british government to preserve money for construction to build the people of babbage &apos;s finest , because they believed that this is a huge scientific effects of society .
these conversation didn &apos;t just put fewer wohlhabenden men , but they also regten them to look at the tellerrand , rather than just vordefinierte questions .
i &apos;m going to tell you how i learned something about life .
once you start looking at the very little stuff -- this person wrote a whole article and said , &quot; hey , these are bacteria . &quot;
and everybody who are not old enough , you have no idea how this infection happened -- which is through this brain .
there are about 10,000 programs .
this would be the frequency of the 26 letters of the alphabets in a random affen of chosen apes .
all the life is , you will have this distribution , unlike this distribution .
too hot , too hot too hot too hot .
the cop asks : &quot; are you safe ? hey , you &apos;re safe that you lost here ? &quot;
this is the data from one survey to durchimpfungsrate in a single district in zambia in zambia , from a few years ago .
as you can see , it had a little bit more hair at the time .
you could talk about 10,000 , 20,000 or 30,000 dollars , if i had time at all the time , or it &apos;s in my plan , and i &apos;m not just reading on vacation .
instead of people , how do you teach the forms on the cell phone , we should develop a software that allowed them to do that without practice and without making practice and without my zutun .
that &apos;s less than i was then , when i was a consultant for a bus .
and then we understand that if we want our trajectory to change our trajectory in life , in the life , we need to change the height .
that can be the spirituality in the spirituality .
and that &apos;s why you need meteorologen .
i promised me that i would take the next time , not to take the world , not to take a fuel , independent of fossil fuels to be secure , not to be threatened by the tankanzeige .
i think you need a pilot in the airplane that can speak to the universities , who can speak to students , and it can actually make a human adventure .
and what is the target ?
that &apos;s why all people who believe in those particular belief , welcome to be part of this team .
now you just need one laptop .
anyway , as well , for us , africa was a magical place .
the next thing i want to create clarity is what it is , and what it is .
that &apos;s crazy , really , if you think about it .
let &apos;s stop for a second with a second .
the fact is that we are the first generation that the disease and this extreme poverty in the eyes can see the ocean , say it and you &apos;re going to do it . it &apos;s not to be .
it &apos;s a nerves .
this year is a test for us , specifically for us to think of the leaders of the g8 states that are being in the world &apos;s environment .
people find it out .
and with this one campaign as our screen , my organization , data , and other groups of the energy and the enthusiasm , from hollywood to the hinterland of america .
step : step to step , a nurse , a teacher , a teacher , and life will be saved .
the idea that the internet is changing your life , a country can change a country -- and a continent that &apos;s just taking place to digital -- the head of my head .
the lips are not lips , but volcanoes .
their task is to recognize what this shape is bouba and what kiki .
if you &apos;re not just gefängniswärter , then this sentence is , literally , literally .
if we solve a problem or something new , we compare what we know about what we know about what is unknown .
nadia al-sakkaf : i &apos;m glad to be here .
they don &apos;t fit to all of those representations .
pm : i don &apos;t believe that .
how are they going to be able to get it down , but also with your mitarbeiterinnen ?
some of my reporters was arrested .
so this shows a very clearly picture of yemen .
my heart was three times too much .
this is a list of side effects : if you &apos;re eating too much salt like a erdnußbutter and marmeladen cheese , you probably end up on the intensivstation .
but soon i showed it for rechtsherzinsuffizienz and i had to go back to meeresspiegelhöhe , that i would never see my home .
i sat there and i spoke to a little bit of begeistert with the chefchirung for the transplantationen and asked him , what i would take a transplantat , could do me .
i was hanging on a dozen machines that kept me alive .
thank you .
interestingly , interestingly , one of these geburtsschäden is also in the united states in the united states is about 200 percent .
and also , interesting is that the same company sold us to sell the 80 million pounds of atrazine , the brustkrebs-förderer , which is also the antidote to the antidote to the antidote -- a and the same company .
we launched the starteten as a wasserorganismen .
what would our kids say to us , if you &apos;re told by the age of a child , i had a little bit of a octylphenol , some artificial moschusriechstoffe , and a little bit of a bisphenol a. .
the problem is that you in my village , in the middle of my village , in most of our villages that doesn &apos;t see these connection .
here you see the accumulation of biona creek beside the airport of los angeles .
i offered five cents for every flaschenverschluss .
the wegwerfgesellschaft can be unable to be eingedämmt , it &apos;s become global .
here you see , in red , the spread of the küstenmammutbaums .
they &apos;re like a mouse that looks like a elephant , and the most part of them are going to be loyal .
she looks from your hängematte and vogelgezwitscher comes from all around us .
redwoods have a huge surface that goes into the sky because it &apos;s something to be called the reiteration -- it &apos;s repetition .
strebebögen , the baumkrone stability , just like a cathedral , and helping the tree to live longer .
it &apos;s absolutely herzzerreißend that to see .
but since recently , all the doors of the palastes are put in the aufgerissen and the walls .
this was 25 years ago .
so let &apos;s look at the example of the centipede-virus .
how do these people do with these infected computers ?
and you can see it as we work on , how we work -- like sicherheitsleute work -- and try to find a way to find the sicherheitsvorkehrungen that we meet .
you &apos;ll notice that you can see a internetadresse internetadresse , unionseek.com / d , and if you open this image on your computer , and then this program will be downloaded and a ausgeführt .
and if you look at the pictures of the scene , you can see that the hallmark of the mercedes-benz &apos;s mercedes is .
we have to find any way to find out that anything that is whatever you have .
but i don &apos;t have anything to do .
and this person is going to be with the consultants .
why do we think what he says ? &quot;
what does his future ?
this powers disappear , nobody understützt the 2011 .
it would be good if people were aufmerksamer , and this kind of computations would take and do this kind of computations , because this would change things . but it would change things on two vorteilhafte ways .
that means that we then realize a replica , if they &apos;re only using a part of the originaldatei , that in slow motion , and a schlechtere bild- and tonqualität .
and the happy , and the happy , jill and kevin ? well , they came back from her hochzeitsreise and saw that her video had spread out of her video .
thank you .
you &apos;re going to go into the distance .
that &apos;s what it was taught to do was to do it five years ago .
i &apos;m grateful for the fact that i had a mentor how to teach me , how to browse .
what is it that you &apos;re living in life today ? not 10 years ago .
what do you do with what you &apos;re going to do , and let it happen ?
didn &apos;t have the -- time . didn &apos;t know -- technology . you know , i didn &apos;t have the right manager .
in this moment , consciously or subconsciously . in the moment , where you &apos;re entscheidest to something , you can focus on something , you can do a meaning , and whatever it means it &apos;s making it .
you &apos;ve ever done what , and they &apos;re here , &quot; that was me . &quot;
to death , you know , god in its infinite wisdom , gave us another human need : the uncertainty .
but that &apos;s true : we need it . we can do it through intimacy , through friendship , through the wanderungen , through nature .
and there are seven different beliefs . i can &apos;t go through it because i &apos;m not because i &apos;m in my breath . the last element is feeling .
teach the other man with family in the congo , somebody in new york who had died when he had been at the work , and this man who wanted a terrorist and it said .
instead , i &apos;m interested in this to develop tools that can tell you a large number of people who can tell their stories , people all over the world .
the color of particles is the kind of feeling -- serendipity , positive emotions have shining colors .
we see , &quot; i feel like i was the whole day at the computer . &quot;
and if i go over here , the list is starting to walk , and there are thousands of emotions that were collected .
the ten subjects comes out of the subjects and the zeitkapsel .
it &apos;s called &quot; universe : compassion in modern mythology .
we can click the click , and see this , of the betty ford , as you &apos;ve done the entire man .
you can also look at quotes if they want to read to climate change .
so people are looking at the clouds than something that &apos;s in the business .
in life . you &apos;ve got tens of thousands of members of the earth in almost 100 countries in the earth .
they just need one step to go outside , and to notice that , so that &apos;s so common , so that &apos;s so much time that the other person is missing .
so you look up , admire the way the oil beauty , and think of it , always think of the head in the clouds .
the 25,000 of these blue images were hung up , who would have this : &quot; 25.0000 , good , good .
and you know , you know , 10 years ago , it was about 10 years ago , when i got the fördergelder to buy my first grafikcomputer , it was a huge machine .
this footage from a virtual autopsy .
here you can see the knife in the heart .
it &apos;s a little bit of mechanischer pen that has very , very rapid schrittmotoren .
now , this is a really interesting project .
so he does it .
so , very skilled people .
i went to the kids as possible as possible to go outside , to bring the academic stuff in the real world .
it &apos;s not all that , but it &apos;s a incredibly leistungsfähige summary of everything we know about the foundations of nature .
i &apos;m not going to go into this detail , why we &apos;re going to introduce the universe as well , but it &apos;s really going to be the way to explain the physics that we know .
in my career , but i always do something in me .
in the year , i attended it during a forschungsaufenthalts .
we got a lot of bewerbungen .
this shows the one that was the first year , in 2004 .
he &apos;s just about the doktorstudiums doktorstudiums , and i was recently filmed with somebody who you know .
every one of the world &apos;s going to be a panafrikanische studentenschaft , but to be able to be specialized .
i have my first computer as a teenager in accra and it was a really great device .
he studies the brain using mri and he says that this is the most beautiful brain .
i &apos;ll tell you the next few slides , i &apos;ll just explain to you .
so , transistors are getting smaller to enable this , and that has gotten more much better .
our main goal is there in this lens .
i had a gut that we &apos;re wrong .
so , in this sense , it &apos;s a very simple object .
so we know what a radius is .
i &apos;m like to call them the primadonnen of the galaxywelt , because they &apos;re kind of angeber .
we can see that in our galaxy , more detail than anywhere else .
and that brings us a factor of the 20th .
so there was a bunch of alternatives to the idea that it was a supermassive black hole in the center of the galaxy , because you could have a lot of stuff in the center of the galaxy .
it pulls up a page more than a page at the other , and the cloud will ripped apart .
and i hope that i convinced you at least that we have a really supermassive black hole in the center of the galaxy , the center of the galaxy .
one day i was in the streets of new york , and i saw some kids between stairs , cars and fire .
so for example , people liked the 11th in the 11th century , the so that .
in the first eight centuries of this tradition , the great &quot; which &quot; in the &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; is &quot; in the &quot; god . &quot;
through new and verbesserte instruments , the age of the virtuosen .
but a question remains : what is going on when the music stops ?
michael tilson thomas : music and emotions in the time of time , over time , over time .
so we are at the beginning of a new drachenzeitalters .
until the year , they took it on 100,000 square .
so i &apos;m going to talk about musikkomposition , even though i don &apos;t know where i &apos;m going to start .
wow , a volunteers , great !
but recently , my interest became a new view of a new view of a view of sicht menschenmassen , there &apos;s a really good thing to do something really cool .
well , i think this is the aktuellste development of a phenomenon that we call &quot; the comic innovation . &quot;
but the element of desire is really the most important .
we get a lot of a talks of them .
so let me introduce to this place sam haber .
but even if you look at the monitor , you &apos;re going to be a screen , there &apos;s a lot more than just words .
thousands of individuals and organizations share their knowledge and their data online .
it &apos;s not crazy ; it &apos;s going to happen .
how webvideos global innovations .
one : i have to take a service and a service that i &apos;m going to take a service and talk about what i &apos;m going to give him , rather than saying what i can offer .
and that they &apos;re going to have fun to be their own , ultimate or schlechtesten .
well , you can &apos;t compare them .
they &apos;re keeping them alive and give you the sugars , so a kind of verhaltensimpuls that we call the superpower .
this kind of tests are doing this , ok ?
somebody asked me ? &quot;
and he thought he could reverse the waves . he couldn &apos;t .
i think there are three big changes , and in the areas of transparency , and we &apos;re trying to do , and nachprüfbarkeit , where people have a real power .
how do we do this ?
my bridge-coach , sharon osberg , claims , on the world , on the world , there are more pictures of their head as a different .
11 of 14 countries .
and second , teachers were teilnehmende the videoaufzeichnungen and the fragebögen , and they were mittel , because they took the specific areas of the fields that are a fortbildung sense .
so , then i wish all the way a beautiful weekend .
dna to read and write , and you &apos;re going to be easier and cheap .
biohacker arbeiten .
now you may say , &quot; what would i do in a biolab ? &quot;
if you have the whole world that has been sniffing to the world , can be a perspektivenwechsel , can be allowed to perform biotechnology .
the kingdom race , his laws allow him to tell him , foreign einzusperren or abzuschieben , which is an economic risk or a sicherheitsrisiko or a sicherheitsrisiko or a risk of health care .
these laws are a blow to the science and based on prejudice and ignorance and a umschreiben of traditions and a critique of traditions and a critique of traditions .
why are you pregnant if you &apos;re positive ? &quot;
one of 10 hiv-neuinfektionen hiv-neuinfektionen people &apos;s drugs .
so that social sozialarbeiter , the condoms of endangered bevölkerungsgruppen , not even from the police , they &apos;re not going to be locked up or randomly locked .
here were kids born , people died .
office office work is now obsolete .
they have the high line , the street , the fluss unterhalb , and you come from one end to the other , without crossing the fahrstraße .
people say , &quot; we don &apos;t want to live in tiny homes . &quot;
we should be shared .
her liver makes oil .
and she was killing the 12,000 sharks at the time by the time they actually just put a hanfseil from the landzunge bay in keem bay .
we know very little about them .
so this tags is going to take place a shark , depending on the time and the sunset , the absolute and depth .
so let &apos;s look at the nukleotide of the things that has been passed to the genes , and we see that basking sharks , compared to the first trial , a third of a factor of low vielfalt than others .
so i started thinking of this research , and found that the size of the 9,000 .
and what was fine . we were wet . no problem .
and i thought , &quot; hey , can i build . &quot;
so if we can tell the gender of the shark , before we take a sample , we can tell the geneticists whether they were from a male or females .
so i decided to give myself the recent option .
their bodies are going to be zerlegt with macheten and are meant to be used for any zaubertrank to make money -- people tell me a lot of these stories .
no business with anybody .
my journalism may not fit in other continents or other countries , in my part of africa , but it &apos;s going to work in a part of africa , and it &apos;s about corruption , &quot; people immediately immediately , &quot; where are the evidence ?
aa thank you .
i was teased in downtown manhattan in downtown manhattan , two blocks from the epizentrum of the punkmusik .
i wouldn &apos;t be a transsexueller durchgegangen .
and they had this people who ever met a victims of their diskrimierung ?
today , you can be in 29 states , in more than half of the country , because of the country &apos;s land being fired .
i realized that my mission is to photograph &quot; gay &quot; to fotografieren &quot; to the parties , because there was a million schattierungen of gay .
at least , i hope that it &apos;s harder to get harder to do their human rights .
first : the world is , and it &apos;s always going to be good and evil , because good and evil , and the yang of the mensch-sein are mensch-sein .
and third , i was access to all the 1,000 images that had made the soldiers .
in three ways , the prevailing species is called &quot; veranlagung .
this is stanley , a jewish boy from the bronx , and he said , &quot; could it be something that could happen , right here and now ? &quot;
&quot; my lord , who is responsible when he happened ? &quot;
stanley , stanley , and i met both of the 1954 cables , on the james school , the james monroe in the bronx .
here &apos;s the guards with the symbols of power and anonymity .
entmenschlichung the other . entindividualisierung self .
alexander solschenitsyn says that the border between good and evil through the heart of one human beings .
and i did the experiment on the next day .
and he said , &quot; i did what everybody could do , &quot; no big deal on the rails .
it &apos;s a puzzle that really really badly really hard .
we have a self .
but on my left , is a delle which is by the red arrow .
there &apos;s only one referenzpunkt , which is the body .
i promise i don &apos;t know anything about it , unless it &apos;s a point .
and the autobiographical self has been extended enough , think , imagination and language is triggered .
thank you . thank you for the invasion -- and anita hill .
now i &apos;m going to tell you this -- i &apos;m going to tell you , and i &apos;m riskiere , because i think feminism is partly the task , to admit , and the beauty and the good news .
we don &apos;t want to do a heroine .
you can see , i don &apos;t have to put me in delhi .
she spoke about vorstandssitzungen , they started friedensorganisationen , she organisierte , they organisierte friends -- all of those daily acts of the same and creativity .
i mean that it &apos;s this selbstwahrnehmung that &apos;s going to be unterscheidet by the homo sapiens of former menschheitsformen .
in fact , this is a sensor for brainwaves that the electrical activity in my brain , while i &apos;m going to be able to hold this talk .
we have a lot of prototypes and products to live , which you can control with thoughts , like gedankenkontrollierte appliances , or a schwebenden chair .
the headset is wireless with a ipad or a smartphone .
how these kids can use their new awareness of their recovery , a lot of the harmful and weitverbreiteten social social networks , people who are diagnosed as a different .
they understood the power of human narrative and that the value we &apos;re looking at people , change , evolviert and growing .
and said , &quot; how do you get to celebrate ? &quot;
my abilities and my possibilities .
vorübergehend , and very unexpected , they gave them .
this specialist didn &apos;t look at it , my eyes .
i walked a track that i know well , i know .
and , very slowly , it happened .
i didn &apos;t really believe me not really , not all of the people who are all the little ichs in all of us .
that &apos;s me . my whole i &apos;m .
what we have , is the same thing , the same thing , but in one of them feel great , and in the other , with just a small change in the posture , feel terrible .
but i think it &apos;s a different debate that has to have to be done to control the amount of control , which we have our power .
for 0,01 percent of this money could install wifi in the trains , which is not the duration of the journey , but what the pleasure and the other things would have gone .
i &apos;m not going to be asking for the entire complete of the other .
sometimes the standard standard , very long .
i think the danger in the world is that the field of economics is being understood as an vorausgehende discipline of human psychology .
so , the average answer is 50 percent .
it &apos;s going to be zugetraut that they don &apos;t have any other , even other hurt .
yay !
they &apos;re 20 , 30 years .
but the reason that i &apos;m not that i have a coin with head on either side .
it &apos;s not hard to solve this problem .
but this is our hülle of the observable universe .
thank you .
with hyperscore , we had a bomb , actually , very severe effects in the world , and now in humans , every people .
it &apos;s a man , rich , successful , powerful , the life forever .
hi . my name is dan ellsey . i &apos;m 34 years old and i &apos;ve got zerebralparese .
this is actually the score of dans , which he has been completely in hyperscore .
odysseus would have said , &quot; well , we do a probelauf .
there &apos;s a first time that &apos;s going on the present self .
i have to write five pages on the day for article , or i had to give five dollars .
it &apos;s not possible that this is going to work . &quot;
and i &apos;m going to show you some of these tools here .
the final thing i &apos;m going to show you is the last verhaltensrelevante machine , is something i made with hal mit , which i made from my coauthor in a previous project called bill sharpe .
it &apos;s pretty good that it &apos;s not about people , because if one of the faces smiles , the other face is going to drein the other face .
this is one of the reasons that we &apos;re using a lot of what we &apos;re doing for western science , math and baukunst , actually , in the first few centuries of our zeitrechnung , arabern and türken .
x is the unknown because it &apos;s not a &quot; sh . &quot;
so , not surprised , if you talk to the other diseases , you probably probably suffer stories of verstecktem suffering , shame and discrimination in almost every other .
a little more than 30 years ago , the nations of the world was going to be in alma-ata and gave this legendary explanation .
what is it ?
if you look at the level of species , you &apos;ve heard about fish .
so you look at this kind of thing , you see that almost 8,000 8,000 8,000 of these dollars are actually subsidies .
this was in the early 2000ern , as india was wollte , as india was wollte , as a means to the recovery -- for the aufschwung of eight , nine percent , nine percent , and he said , why can &apos;t we do it ?
they don &apos;t have to be able to get a happy , but they have the trust and the guts , and say , &quot; that &apos;s what we &apos;ve done .
so , green carbon , the emissions through deforestation and agriculture , and synthetic carbon , 25 percent of our emissions .
richard feynman was a very complex man .
we loved it to win .
i didn &apos;t know what these things are not , dick , not as much as the way by the way .
i liked these intellectual sanctuary .
and he said he could have had the same relationship to his father .
there was a theory .
he did it .
they don &apos;t move , and because they don &apos;t move in the course of the experiment , you don &apos;t have to worry about how they &apos;re moving .
we removed the whole vinyl , and the zolatone color , which is just fantastic aluminiumhülle .
many of these ideas were put into the produced of the produced , for airstream .
if you think about their kids to send their kids to the tinkering , they &apos;ll be with prellungen , kratzern and blutig .
but let &apos;s go under your own conditions and trust me , they &apos;re going to learn to learn things that they cannot learn from dora .
if you want to throw a device , you don &apos;t do it .
i think that &apos;s all that is all . that &apos;s number .
so here you see the sick knee on the left , and here my wife today , four months after , in aspen , in aspen , and in good constitution .
how about a totally bionischem knieersatz , not just share the share ?
this is one of the seven &apos;s still existing sputniks , which is not going to be in all the jar .
and so it came to kaufen westeuropa westeuropa , first , first , first , first , first , first , and then thousands of thousands and hundreds of millions of individual , and finally , to print a little bit of a zettel , which is to take a mitten from the hell of the sky .
but how does our imagination work ?
but we &apos;re never thinking about the hidden bonds .
when the light bulb invented , she looked like this .
you have to be very smart , and even though i don &apos;t have any hochschulabschluss , it doesn &apos;t mean i &apos;m dumb , because you can &apos;t be dumb and it can be able to be in the world .
they literally have the door .
if you listen to the stereogerät of your heimanlage , they both hören both of these heimanlage .
we have the problem that the antenne vibriert .
thank you so much .
and that &apos;s why i &apos;m particularly interested in systems and anordungen .
recently i &apos;ve created some pretty sophisticated anspruchsvolle bordüren aus aus .
and i drew for every person to each person their special map , and wrote her name , she and she &apos;s pouring them .
i &apos;m sure i can see how you errötest .
and i &apos;m convinced that it &apos;s ersterbenswert , my valuable and immediate life on this earth &apos;s surface .
in this mode , he tries to keep his position .
i thought i &apos;m going to tell you a little bit of how nature creates materials .
we &apos;re going to think about future technologies . we start beginning to start the beginning .
and if you zoom in , you see the amino acids with the ph-werten , where they have different charges .
and through a series of auswahl-evolution , you can be a billion fish , which is what you want to do , like a battery or a solar cell .
in this case , you get out of sauerstoffblasen .
if you ask people , where do you go , if you &apos;re going to do something important ?
i sat on my desk , i used my expensive computer .
what happens then -- sometimes you wake up for eight days in the morning , or at eight , or to get seven or the morning , and you say , man , i &apos;m not going to be good .
in the office , most of the interruptions and distractions that people actually work by work , unwillentlich .
we all know that that &apos;s true . you would never experience a spontanes meeting that it &apos;s going to be done by staff .
and managers are now two main numbers in companies , especially in offices .
maybe all the two weeks , or every week , once the week , the one that nobody can talk .
you know , to be honest , i &apos;m going to do this now for seven years and i have no idea how the future will look like .
but if you ask people to the three major things , which is , you know , the culture and what people -- most people , the key , the key , and if you have one , and if you have one , the cell phone .
but , and this is a big but , we have the tendency to forget .
now , i want to give you a practical example of delegation .
they take 10 or 20 percent , and then -- the owner of the system takes 10 or 20 percent , and there &apos;s the rest of the contribution in the rest of my family .
it &apos;s the norm .
and he somehow got a appreciation of the values .
at the same time , with the spread of these mobile devices , we see a expectation of availability .
our current reality is less interesting than the story we &apos;re going to tell about it later .
what we &apos;re talking about ?
dean ornish shares new research that can show us how the aneignung of the aneignung of the genetic level can be designed to be able to make a human way to the genetic level , and it says that if we &apos;re going to live healthier , exercise , and more , you know , our brain actually reproduce .
until i tell you who said it .
and within this context , we can actually feel that many different things .
when i went home after i went home after i had my tattoo , i stayed all the night .
but i want to suggest that there is a fifth .
i mean , even the stupid &quot; response to all of the &quot; -bedauern can go back into qualen .
and as i said , i &apos;m a perfektionistin .
i thought i would try to try to try to try to try to do what i &apos;m trying to do , and how this is what it is to do .
no in india , now at least half of a million active .
and i thought that somebody in this entire world is going to be thinking about the organization of the kollektivgütermärkte .
and so we did this to do that .
listen to that , less than four , a number of a lawyer that were treated , the behandelt , the parties of their medications , or vernachlässigten their treatment .
it &apos;s a try and i think it would be successful .
the pulte are not rechteckig .
if the turbine is deployed , it will produce 8,000 watts of electricity , and night .
and people bring their green industries , hopefully their green restaurants , and they &apos;re going to school with green school .
and in the women of bali , the food food , and they &apos;re using secrets to know their grandmothers .
we need somebody who comes and the studied .
the green school is a model that we built for the world .
my tongue , kehlkopf and vocal and they were not being healthy and not able to do . &quot;
then apple alex , the best voice i &apos;ve heard about .
there was a reason for this , i was .
the sprachfluss is not natural .
but that &apos;s not .
and the internet was a hilfreiches tool . now , it &apos;s something that i &apos;m looking for my real life , including life .
&quot; it &apos;s human , the disease .
you all know the test of the test for artificial intelligence , the turing .
i was a architect , and my grandmother asked me , &quot; what are you ? &quot;
we had two gegenüberstehende sites as a single side , because that &apos;s what the readers will be true .
so what is the lesson behind ?
and one day , my grandmother said , &quot; no , this time you &apos;re getting off .
it &apos;s schäumte and horrible stuff with me .
everybody lost hope in my recovery .
so she went to their lagerräumen and all the capitol furniture -- they gave me an töpfe and pfannen , bettlaken .
you don &apos;t know how far away is that , you know , if you &apos;re going to go and you know if they &apos;re going to go and walk around and forth cars , and they had a terrible accident , and they had a terrible accident , which is that you have done it .
i thought that , for some reason , the time are left and only for family and friends .
for example , the understanding of the brain is molecular structures .
he took me to the tempeln of nikko .
can we say we would have discovered all the symmetries of the alhambra ?
i can &apos;t turn it because i &apos;ve added a little hurdle , not true ?
when i put a magical train and then one another , you get a third .
galois has a series of policies that these tables , these symmetries , interact .
so , a symmetry called symmetrie .
instead of all , instead of all , i want to call all the mess , i want to know how many digits you do . ok ?
i need your name . symmetrical objects have basically basically -- please , please .
first : schlechtere diet , maybe shorter lebensspannen .
thomas edison had been very wohlgefühlt in a software age .
the penicillin was discovered , but even in fact , not a 1940 , and created medizinisch doses of it .
it was the origins of the xerox-kopierers , the last year of his 50th birthday .
for me , the lesson of unintended consequences that chaos is going on . we do the best of this .
in every computer , and browser . minus negative , minus , minus and the text .
you don &apos;t need to do it too .
and therefore , a kind of open-source to inspire me , i &apos;m going to take my mind , my real desk .
a means of a way of a rasteranordnung , so you get more traditional desktop , so you get the more traditional desktop , and the things are on me .
now , i &apos;m going to get to my music with my music , and there &apos;s no frontiers .
but i think the point is , it &apos;s metaphor with a nice , and with a biss , i want to suggest that we &apos;re going to suggest that we &apos;re a little bit of a überdenken -- not just finanzmathematik , but math in general .
and he said , &quot; well , there are 2,000 physicist at the wall street , and i &apos;m one of you .
you can find them here , this is a book about flying , which you may have to be in amazon .
these are not finanzdaten ; that &apos;s culture .
you can actually do it very , very far .
and it &apos;s not the money that actually is so interesting .
here we go . go shake .
i want to tell you a secret .
so , intersections , no lower traffic , so with stoppschildern , save many lives , but there &apos;s a remarkable disaster of them .
the answer is , cars , to allow cars from this side of the street .
warren buffet had this idea : honestly , to say , &quot; honestly , and what not , and what it is not to do .
in fact , we &apos;re looking at the gencode that the only known disease is because of the only known disease in africa , even more easily have been herausgebildet in africa , to have multiple things to avoid the malariatod .
this means that the economy in these areas , because it &apos;s so much possible .
but there &apos;s no one more handlungsplan .
not only is it , it &apos;s faint ; it &apos;s getting weaker .
a teacher of the top quartile is the achievement of his class -- measured in prüfungsergebnissen -- in a year in a year in a year .
but it &apos;s not a relationship to be a better teacher .
&quot; what happens here ? &quot;
and this hospital doesn &apos;t just have a lot of classes that could be available in the internet , but you can also make dvds available everywhere to make any of the allerbesten teachers .
now , traditional vessels , like this cup , eight to 10 hours .
the sculptor richard serra is talking about how he thought as young artists , he was a painter and he lived in florence .
and when i look at these pictures , i put the smoke back to my graduate student when i went home at my family .
my parents had great fun . they said , &quot; we know you &apos;ve got scared , but let &apos;s just go tomorrow .
but is it so bad for us to keep ourselves ?
this is an general general in boston .
the pathologist takes the box , friert it , zerschneidet it , put it under the microscope and then he puts it down the operating room .
so , in this particular one , a solution with these dreiteiligen molekülen , together with a dye , injiziert , injiziert in the vene , and can be normal tissue in the moleküle .
with farbmarkierten lymph nodes as part of our current space is looking for the surgeon , the lymph nodes where cancer begins .
if nerves are damaged , they can make them gradually , and pain .
if we put these two samples ...
we know that this is feasible , and we &apos;re hardwired to realize that this is what we &apos;re hoping .
and this cell is a very fancy different zellarten of the zellarten that we learn .
it &apos;s going to affect the normal circuits as the kranken they want to fix .
and in the summer in 2004 , we tried it , and it &apos;s got it first time .
we &apos;ve shown that already a short number of these cells are enough to learn this .
and it &apos;s going on . now .
i want to end with a story , which we believe might be clinical application .
now you can see that the animal actually corresponds to the walls and the little platform and your eyes can use .
buildings are colonized with the air that befindlichen microbes through the windows and mechanische through mechanical belüftungssysteme .
and if you &apos;re out outside , then the air passes the air that &apos;s going to be associated with the general and the schmutz .
obviously , i &apos;m a physically very strong person as you see , so i didn &apos;t have a concern , that this thing had a lot of 20 blocks .
the same applies to the question of who was after 9 / 11 in my neighborhood ?
and you can get a list .
one of those things that i &apos;ve been experimenting with is something called google , basically you just take a abstract term and addiction in google , and then you searches to see in those 10 years of somebody .
this is britney britney . i mean , interesting .
if you have the second side here , you &apos;re playing one .
what for us all over the years of us , 40 years ago , the tell stories between generations -- is rare .
in the year , the movie is older than most of our members of our members .
was the story good ?
why don &apos;t we do that we don &apos;t see this with the same passion as it is ?
in california , they &apos;re going to be sent to a warnhinweis warnhinweis , &quot; this product is actually chemikalien chemicals from the establishment of the global california , and the other fortpflanzungsschäden .
so maybe we could develop a änderungsstrategie , which is erfordert , and for my profession , it &apos;s a architekt , it &apos;s a terrifying that the words &apos; &quot; bescheidenheit &quot; and &quot; architect &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot;
i don &apos;t know if you remember his answer , but it was , &quot; the stone didn &apos;t actually hit the stones . &quot;
and that can be o.k. , but we habens it into houston , and all the windows are closed , and with all the products that aren &apos;t going to be in areas of the areas that are actually not for the use of the innenräumen , which is actually a vertical gaskammer .
if we look at the word competition , i &apos;m sure most of you are using it .
since we &apos;ve got the 4,000 most popular most celebrated , in the most successful industrie-chemikalien of a database that we &apos;re going to be able to put in six weeks .
now we have 160 kg schwere die the internet in the internet .
we started kommerzielle and use of buildings to enable buildings so that all human beings and places where they can regenerate .
and this is the berüchtigte nsa-datenzentrum in utah .
and that &apos;s not true . let &apos;s say that you &apos;re not aware of that , we knew that we didn &apos;t know it , because we didn &apos;t know .
for example , they give you that the datensammlung at microsoft &apos;s 2007 , at the 11th of 2007 , at the 12th of march , at the 12th of march , and then the other one , facebook , skype , apple and so on .
i chose sweden because sweden is similar to the united states .
and whoever told you , he didn &apos;t hide anything about it didn &apos;t know long enough .
their email and she spoke to the un-hauptquartier and said , &quot; if there &apos;s no right on privacy , there &apos;s no way to privacy , there can &apos;t be real fake and therefore , can &apos;t be effective democracy . &quot;
a lot of people see if you look at the first human brain , say , &quot; usually , it &apos;s like a brain . &quot;
all these empty areas , the areas that the structure are doing .
and the nature of a certain cell , his grunde is determined to it , is determined to be determined to what the 25,000 genes are switched on and where they &apos;re turned on .
now experts come into play , and make basic basic power .
we take the markierte material , and we put it on a so-called sogenannten .
so what can scientists learn from this data ?
you look at their whole genomes and try to find the aktivitätsherde , which are linked to the genes .
whether the individual genetic background or your experience , we don &apos;t know .
that we know how we can do poverty , we have to do just do more for this ?
so here &apos;s a couple more questions .
how can you know it ?
so what is the problem ?
okay , before everything else was .
and it was made a lot of experiments that all the same result , that &apos;s why i &apos;m just going to talk about one .
so what is the best ?
we need this kind of information . we need more of it , and we need to steer the politics .
and maybe we &apos;re beginning to start with things where we are sure they &apos;re doing .
poverty is more than more efficient than a scientific process of arbeiten and a lack of data , the question is , and the lack of hilfsmitteln wirft the question , but clark-medaillen-gewinnerin esther duflo says , it &apos;s possible to help out and find out what damage -- and what damage -- with help -- with help .
so we begin to start because africa is in a certain way , in a certain sense .
and the legend argue that alexander durch through this desert .
but you could say , &quot; invest in africa with over 1,000 languages , and it would not move . &quot;
so we look at the landscapes , and the specific materials and data .
i want to talk this from the perspective of the kapitalmärkte .
in tanzania , last week in the standard week was in life .
if i &apos;d like to ask you , &quot; what was the weltbesten of the börsenmarkt council with the world &apos;s world &apos;s face , &quot; would you think there ?
because there &apos;s amazing ways .
&quot; god &quot; is the journey of all of us , to be inspired by being inspired and to feel one with the universe that life celebrates the life .
you &apos;re a switch to you -- there &apos;s electric light .
i don &apos;t know why , but it thought they thought .
i &apos;ll walk that walk , so you can do that , and i &apos;m going to describe my responses when i first saw this .
very carefully .
ok , change you , raise your right hand .
kt : yes .
kt : no , no . i see only on the street .
i couldn &apos;t see through the blindfold .
again , again .
kb : how often do you feel that ?
let &apos;s close your eyes , in five , four , three , two .
only if you want the pressure , they &apos;re going to do a aufwärtsbewegung , so , but only if you want to be the pressure .
do you want to try it ?
so you feel a particular emotion of a empfindung , and if you feel the emotion , i want you to throw the glassstück in the bottle .
there &apos;s one thing that i want to share with you .
ready ?
my hand is here , here , in lebensgefahr .
kb : ok . think you &apos;re here , yes , right ?
first of all , keith barry , how our brains can austricksen our bodies -- with a trick that &apos;s associated with the podcast , and then he refers to the audience in some sort of the magic kunststücke .
i &apos;m aufraffen .
that &apos;s not for one of the four , and that &apos;s for all four .
i watched that both religious people are also being obsessed with morality .
the basislinie is almost zero , if there is no stimulation to the ausschüttung .
so , you get the message from computer , &quot; &quot; person 1 has sent them a lot of money .
we showed that the release of oxytocin were die the generosity to 80 percent .
i just found that molecule .
he said , &quot; what should we do ? &quot;
we have männern testosterone .
that tells us that we invented this ritual to connect us with this new few emotionally emotionally .
and it &apos;s very easy to be able to go to the brain to the oxytocinproduktion .
to get the machine to run , you need a lot of people .
or should you not want it ?
they &apos;re pretty genervt , &quot; you have a device that is just a device that &apos;s just working on english , so we have taught ourselves to be english , so we can use it . &quot;
i decided to destroy my own argument by making a real statement .
absurd . but i had to follow the victorian norm .
how does tomorrow tomorrow ?
we have to be able to make this imbalance , to be able to get to the threat .
i think it &apos;s the focus here .
i have incredible questions -- &quot; when was the beginning of the world ? how do you end ? &quot;
and just a last thing .
maybe we should go to the next piece , because i just lost the thread .
shivdutt went to the local katasteramt in uttar pradesh and found that he was led to the official unterlagen .
so that &apos;s why this is bereich .
polygamie is in the privileged layer of the privileged layer in the position of numbers and multiple haushalte , and several years .
after those four kids , you see a younger sister who was also follow their children who were also killed .
and finally , there was a single one who was sitting for me and later his participation , i had to verpixeln him , so he had to be unkenntlich .
with 16 , the kids have to leave the orphanage , even though they can &apos;t go anywhere .
one of the interesting stuff is , of course , the combination of the naked hand , and of course , and of course , what he said about our young people .
now my career could be more much longer .
and i said , &quot; well , how do you hear it ? &quot;
from him from him from the north resonanzkörper .
or we &apos;re doing this , and believe that &apos;s what blindness is .
rain . not bad . not bad .
individual takt . but why can &apos;t i do that , if i &apos;m doing a piece of music ?
in this sich demonstation demonstation evelyn evelyn evelyn , why this is the taube of music to make music much more than sound to be true to his eardrum .
and it was so large , until the point where it had a festwagen last year in macy jahr , and rick astley gab gab and rick astley , &quot; millions of people in television .
but that &apos;s not what &apos;s interesting about it .
cp : you &apos;re lucky that it &apos;s not being live in live .
and peace and love were mentioned .
cp : yeah , but you still don &apos;t know what to do .
this is 10 times longer than the mammals needed to reach their breath and all the habitats .
we &apos;re very similar to the dinosaurs , and are unusual in our zweibeinigen attitude .
basically , it &apos;s a country that was not a country that &apos;s not a country .
this is a erwachsenes orinoko-krokodil in his jaw .
and i said , paul has never been an ancient thing .
these are all landtiere . there &apos;s a number of possibilities .
i became an artist and started to draw .
the question is -- and we employ ourselves with this question for centuries -- how to make these kids involved in science .
bad news for derartu tulu -- some other ancient had the same idea , including the olympic goldmedaillengewinnerin and paula radcliffe that &apos;s a hugely associated with each other , with each other &apos;s fastest .
show me a animal with schwimmhäuten and gills , it has something to do with water .
we don &apos;t have our physical strength , because we &apos;re the largest squatter in jungle .
now emily baer -- one of 500 läuferinnen and läufern -- it ends up on the front door , among the eighth place , under the achten , even though she &apos;s done at all the erste-hilfe-stationen , and besiegen läufer to defeat -- and denoch 492 of the baby .
that &apos;s all we could do .
but maybe it &apos;s different .
stop the focus on these stadt-marathons , where you failed , if you &apos;ve got four hours .
in the field , it was always about to interact with things , not with people -- with no people , not in a social species , of course , and the people really help us to accept the way to accept robots as part of our daily lives .
the cookie monster is very bad .
the remote-projektmitarbeiter was a experimentator of our group where they were using three different technologies to interact with the participants .
and with this technology , they can become so much in the active participants in your life , in a way that it &apos;s not possible .
and the third option was a simple journal of the paper and pen , because that &apos;s the standard-methode that you normally use when you &apos;re using a diät- and sportprogramm .
another important idea is this idea of the realitätsübergreifenden of the character .
i have style , lache , i &apos;m really hard , because it &apos;s not going to be drum , but geseh .
go away , not far . i fire fire : &quot; bam ! &quot; the narr fällt between two geparkte cars .
if he wrote about a broadway-show , i was front of the door .
i &apos;m going to show a number of photographs and film , but i also do fernsehproduktionen , books and a little bit of a commercials , all the same stuff .
from the photography , this teaser , they &apos;re going to be able to prevent desire and voyeurismus . what you can &apos;t have , you want to have the more .
as you can imagine yourself in the collective consciousness without knowing that we know what happens .
it &apos;s very commercially .
and then you put the photograph on it , and suddenly it &apos;s going to be quite serious and maybe a lot of money .
85 percent of the global health services for cardiovascular is in developing countries -- not in the west -- and yet 90 percent of the resources in the west .
just to treat it . look at the situation that you see in the sea .
but if you told them , we &apos;re trying to do the same in nigeria , then everybody .
it allows the existence of the existence of the existing centers , and we can use the experience very smart .
so , the way to be part of the solution -- that &apos;s important .
and we &apos;re starting a biomedizinisches technical program so we can get local people who can fix the equipment .
autism has a very large bandwidth of very , very massiv -- the kid doesn &apos;t have language -- until to the brilliant scientists and engineers .
freilich love i love the film , how they all my projects have nachgestellt . that &apos;s the spinner in me .
now , what i was early on was because i didn &apos;t know that , because i was not as gesellig , and i didn &apos;t sell my work , and not myself .
another thing is the sensory problems .
in other words , a problem with a top-down kit of a mitarbeiterproblem .
the movie in the film called the film .
i made a praktika during the team . i built things and learned how to do tasks .
another idea of a very simple idea is to be the children of some of the many pensionierten characters , and teach them to teach .
tg : i have passion for that things i do , the world better .
it &apos;s a corresponding reality that uses projections and systems , or just a digital storytellers .
the time i &apos;m standing on this coast , the kubanischen küste. , which i &apos;m looking at on the distant horizon , and i think i &apos;m going to do it , the whole way to be the vast , dangerous wilderness .
but it was deeper , deeper , how much life is there ?
and then there &apos;s our grundregel that you never really says how far it is , we don &apos;t know how far it is .
but frankly , all those talk that i had to have was just to track the schwimmtrainings , they were quite different .
thank you so much , and a lot of fun on the conference .
and this is maybe the tragischste , he lost his self-worth .
he joins the army . the army gives him a rifle .
so what happens if a media suddenly suddenly brings a lot of new ideas ?
they had to synchronize their rasch , which was blinking , but otherwise you couldn &apos;t lead the right kind of discussion .
but there was a programmer that decided that this was not the best way of work .
everybody from you can actually sequence changes , and you can do it zusammenführen nach , even if you knew nothing from the existence of the other than any other than any other .
this is called &quot; diff , &quot; this thing on right here .
something that &apos;s worth a bedeutsames that can happen to a culture is that you can acquire a new streitkultur , schwurgerichtsverfahren , abstimmungen , peer-review , now . right ?
try not try to do what others do , a little bit better , because it doesn &apos;t take very far .
and if you tell somebody that you cannot can &apos;t , then you don &apos;t hear them .
six to nine months to nine months .
but we &apos;ve tested these rovers ausführlich before we hinunterschickten them out there -- or the one that one rover -- and have made sure that it works .
so we have a spacecraft on mars , which is called phoenix . this is a phoenix , and this probe is going to land in 17 days , seven hours and 20 seconds , so you can put your clocks .
and that would be bad .
we &apos;re in this process , as we speak here , the next rover we want to send to mars .
and i know many of you have the last time that this is really cool .
there were two trabanten that were particularly interested in particular .
it &apos;s kind of like the cycle on earth . but because it &apos;s so cold , it can &apos;t be water because water would be frozen .
today i want to talk about how this exponential technologies are really important .
so we &apos;re going to look at how exponential technology is affected by the health technology .
this is an example of this paradigmenwechsels .
there &apos;s wireless waagen .
and i think a lot of these technologies are going to help us with our patients and take us more time to take us on the important elements of medicine , which are expanded through this kind of technology .
the current trend in medicine is but exponential small .
and we &apos;re going to genomics to genomics , when 10 years ago , the first human being done , the cost of a billion dollars .
so thanks to the websites like patients like , and the other way of the data on microsft healthvault is health or google health , it &apos;s always important to use all these possibilities in a way .
we use the cells from the bone marrow to treat patients with heart disease , we realized we have a narrow herzfunktion and higher überlebenschancen , which is the use of your own knochenmarks , the use of your own knochenmarks , to make the herzinfarkt cells in a heart attack .
my poem is called &quot; schmutz . &quot;
their cats , god knows how many , the way they pee to their vorleger , their flure , a widerlicher gestank .
as you cross the zersplitterten of the zersplitterten , at stage the stage to the street , brummt , don &apos;t look like , &quot; can you help me ? &quot;
i was afraid to be a unterdrückter part of me , except , and i would be imprisoned for forever , and i would be imprisoned for always the schockierenden of their gestanks .
but i &apos;m afraid that ricky comes from and i &apos;m showing his hand .
if we love us , she keeps me , around me , i &apos;m there , i &apos;m there .
we &apos;re looking for pictures that are looking at critical issues , images , the grenzübergreifend , the religionen , images that are provozieren , and we &apos;re doing something that we &apos;re trying to do , and to do something , to act with other words .
in the late 1990s , the stigma was a tremendous obstacle to argue about this disease , or they &apos;re only too happy .
jonathan klein : photos that changed the world .
i had read a lot of books and land- and seekarten .
i could see myself as i put the flag on the floor , and i think ... aah , a glorreicher moment , and the music went to a crescendo .
finally , the morning day , we got the startsignal , we got the startsignal . we beluden the helicopter -- two helicopter in the tandemflug -- the rand of the packeises .
i knew there was more open to more open water . and i had a geheimwaffe .
i had the idea , but i had something that was expected .
this was the view from my tent when i got this schicksalsschweren call .
and just from the air , i saw the big picture .
and they were flying around and wanted to go back to shore , and all five died on the rückreise .
and that said , and this is a jewish man , so that &apos;s a lot .
but a few days later , we thought we were doing with our students about it , and we said , &quot; what if this isn &apos;t happened , if this betrunkene guy would have been in this state ?
one day , a day in the jahre mile , km chiles in one of the coast of the pacific ocean , 20 american seeleute seeleute their ship .
but a certain point is , most of the things that are most likely to take some visions and become adults .
they have the same structure .
some of us tend to read their fears more than others .
right , it &apos;s a verblüffendes gift of imagination , a kind of a hellsehen in the everyday , a way to look at the future if time is time to look at her .
nothing happened . none of violence .
we took them in every living in the arab world -- international , global , through our english channel .
they were separated from their people , from the masses and now we see them , one after another .
thank you very much .
because we discovered that people are looking at people , and people want to be informed -- they receive the stream through our internet .
and said , &quot; i &apos;m a 22 thing to be in the row , and i see the needle in me , and there &apos;s blood flow .
you want to be a needle that &apos;s how you want to share a toothbrush , even with someone you &apos;re going to do with someone .
so here &apos;s a overview of all the studies of all the high animals in the united states of the world &apos;s largest animals in the united states , and this is the studies that are being effective , that &apos;s nadel-austauschprogramme , quite many of them .
so , you can see these entsetzlichen images from africa .
i say , well , oh yeah , great präventions-strategie , great präventions-strategie .
ines is a transgender-nutte on the roads . she &apos;s a girl with tail .
she was 105 years old , when i was this photograph of her .
hey , hey , black-eyed susie , hey .
and a little bit of play . here &apos;s a little medley .
we were with the car at gatesville , texas , where i spent my early childhood .
and mother was just like the car .
we &apos;re trying to do it with this old song . i &apos;m singing : there &apos;s a long white robe in heaven , i know .
originally from the gebrüdern dopyera , which was built the dobro , which is a instrument with hölzernem body and metallkonus where the sound fell .
well , this is easier to be done .
we weren &apos;t stupid , we put in about five feet , a piece of sperrholz .
when drumsets were new , i thought , why not , why don &apos;t you take the oldest musikart , the &quot; hambone , &quot; and they combine the latest technology ?
now i think it works because scientists are connected to a ethics .
it &apos;s significant , for something that is in the room , because it &apos;s critical to be in terms of where other things are , but in terms of the absolute idea of the space that was picked up to newton .
and in a relational universe , the only possible explanation explanation was somehow created itself .
and you understand some things as others , and therefore there &apos;s a dauerndes gerempel and giving it policy .
there &apos;s a different tedster who spoke here two years ago , jonathan haidt , who is called his work in three different levels .
and just all there .
and during five months he &apos;s going to experiment with a complete küchenmannschaft .
it wasn &apos;t very successful . and so on .
or a philip glass professor or lou reed or lou reed , or the chemical brothers that played all over the place , they all had their own casa mother &apos;s casa .
after two weeks , three weeks , four weeks , five weeks .
a little bit of a little bit of gemustert .
and it &apos;s a transition that &apos;s just as much as much as much as the identity of living living in the world &apos;s identity like the memory of the dead .
but the büffelopfer and the rituelle of wealth shows the status of the deceased and the family of the deceased .
if we could extend our definition of death , to find life , we could experience death as part of our lives , and perhaps to be a fear of something else .
i wanted to end my show with a dance .
her talk about the water of the apes of apes , and the context , the relationship between darwinism and the fact that we &apos;re all naked , less behaart and that we can swim well .
ok , gordon , come on .
&quot; and now she &apos;s a kater . &quot;
eight years of the united history , eight minutes of my show , are just so cheap .
and jack nicholson says , &quot; well , i want to be a better person . &quot;
&quot; do this world a better place when you can .
so i &apos;ll give you the message in advance , trying not to auszusterben .
where are the little ones ? &quot;
here are people getting back .
as you can imagine , it &apos;s a thing , a beinknochen aufzuschneiden , but if you go into a museum , and you say , &quot; it doesn &apos;t like to do it when i &apos;m wearing your saurierschädel , right ? &quot;
and you could mean that one of the one that gives you a hint .
so we are losgezogen and have a few , and we &apos;ve found a little bit of little animals .
so we now know that torosaurus in reality is a ausgewachsener triceratops .
it looks like it could even be bigger .
we wanted to make a atmospheric architecture .
all the water of the world is coming here , so we thought that after you &apos;re going to be able to water through water , and water , you can also drink the building .
the drill was on a piece of a robotic robotic .
then you get up in this fossil record .
before and after .
this is a guy named salt lake city .
&quot; hineingezogen &quot; -- as if they were seduced to commit a gewaltverbrechen .
it &apos;s not sure that this is so hot if the redakteurin would have been a woman .
by the way , wired , it &apos;s taken to hearts .
and they would crunch the news , they &apos;re talking about something like that , as people do in the new york times .
this particular plant filtert filtert and other elusive chemicals from air .
m most of the time i fell in the morning when i aufstehe , trying to figure out what &apos;s going to happen .
and then -- remember , as a condoleezza , as a condoleezza , was a event that was carried and it was criticized for that ?
pm : are you met resistance as they did this for the grundprinzip of their foreign policy ?
when i was secretary of state , only 13 women in other countries .
thank you , you were today .
malaria : there are eight countries in sub-saharan africa who could reduce their sterberaten to 75 percent .
for daten-freunde , like us , it &apos;s a erogene zone , and it &apos;s fair to say that i &apos;m a lot of erregt .
to be right now , in their capital , some of the most difficult times , in the jenen of the treasury and the treasury and in the process of service , the global fund .
in the contrary , it could save a lot of lives .
if we take this metaphor of a genome as a program , you have to think that chris anderson anderson a computer-erzeugter object , as long watson , craig venter , craig venter and all of us .
you have a little bit like a cell phone , and in very recent language you have this cell phone .
this is normal dna , which is called normal dna .
we heat it , add a little bit of salt , they heat up to the siedepunkt and they heat down to the siedepunkt and use it down the short strands of the langen and it &apos;s forming a structure .
so this is really good , and you can also build patterns , ok ?
you zoom in and you &apos;re only four strands , and you &apos;re sitting on you , you know , you know , you &apos;re sitzen to you , you can sit on other kinds of other kinds of building blocks .
we have a very sensibles computer program where little changes -- tiny , individual mutations -- something that &apos;s a square of a size , and it &apos;s something much bigger .
and the used to work is molekular , and to understand that , and it &apos;s better to get it in the handle , how feynman said , we have to build something .
but as we saw it , we had three kernziele kernziele : a world-class ambulanzdienst ambulanzdienst , which is completely eigenständige einnahmequellen and universal available to everybody , and we &apos;re seeing a medical zugänglich for everyone to be independent of its resources .
in modern time , where time a big good good , and the struggle for survival , is the common glücklose man , and the bribe only to keep .
in my last 18 months , as lawyer , in the battle against little little korruptionsfälle and large korruptionsfälle , the case of india was in geschäftlichen geschäftlichen .
sm : well , the anfallenden cost were less than 200 rupees .
this is the global footprint of all the tedx-talks of the last four years , which is coming around the world , from new york to the edge of the corner .
and at a lot of these things , we &apos;re doing mostly a few things to make it easier .
so we use this netzwerkmotive , to find a unique talks that are unique to find a lot of different areas , such as many different areas , and those who are really creative to schlagen the brücken of the grundverschiedenen .
no wonder that it &apos;s been able to get my colleagues &apos;s going to digest .
the work of the hausmeisters could be as well as a leichenhalle in a hospital .
at ted &apos;s brilliance .
how do these things happen ?
second , the second one of you , nature &apos;s nature of modern american education , and drehbuchartige , step for step .
and said , &quot; would you be willing to have a atommüll-endlager in your community ? &quot;
a way of doing this . teach more ethics than any ethics .
why ? because they are happy to do something that is right .
bill gates talked about the importance of literacy and in the special thinking that &apos;s what &apos;s going to be done . &quot;
barry schwartz makes a passionate call for a company called &quot; gegenmittel wisdom &quot; as a antidote for a company that has lost in the bürokratismus , and he argues that rules often fail , and practical wisdom , everyday wisdom is going to help our world .
&quot; by the way , dean , the arm has to be a 50th percentile of a frauengestalt , so 81 cm from the little fingers , and he needs to weigh less than four pounds .
it takes another nine to it to make it a funktionell and useful . &quot;
he does that , which is me asked me .
boys and girls , you &apos;ve got enough .
it was amazing , how do they all were all .
he wants to help . he told me that he wants to go back to help his buddies .
how do we get out ?
it can be war like a tragedy or a farce .
ford moved . they &apos;re a leg , and then the other .
in london , i lived in a glaskasten tage in a glaskasten .
and i have gezittert . in my first attempt , i don &apos;t even have a minute for my breath .
there are tiefenrekorde where people are so deeply as possible as possible .
he &apos;s 1,95m groß and weighs .
because of movement i &apos;m going to do that i &apos;m oxygen oxygen .
then his hauptkonkurrent came and broke his record .
and there was no way of slow my heart rate .
after 14 minutes , i had this fürchterlichen kontraktionen like this need to breathe .
as a magician , i try to show people things that seem impossible .
congratulations very congratulations . you have the institution .
tamara , you &apos;re going to do that ?
even now , the man may be changing the weltklima of the abfallprodukte of his civilization .
in africa , people have lost 600 million people , and two billion pounds of pounds .
first , even if all the co2 today would be stopped , the global warming continue .
and then we saw a case of the east coast of the united states , and it moved to each year with each year .
today , there &apos;s another movement . the movement of the earth is going to save earth .
pharaoh ramses , the fifth , whose image we see here .
i want to give you a kind of a schnelltour machine to finish what this change is : i want to explain to you what the implications of this change has been in and our biodiversity , but also how much of this culture is affected by culture .
and if it &apos;s just , it &apos;s really interesting .
and that salmon comes out that there &apos;s a genetically bearbeiteter salmon , which is made from the intersection of a gene from a gens and another speisefischs speisefischs , so it grows much faster with much less food .
these are actually kreuzungen and no real animals .
we have this animal took his autonomy . &quot;
in other words , this was the first creatures in the world of this world that had a computer as a computer -- it had not organic parents .
paul root : it &apos;s time to believe the time , to believe the time to question the time to question .
if darwin had passed nasa .
melanin , in its different forms , probably on earth , probably on earth for billions of billions , and it &apos;s always been used by the evolution of evolution , as it happens as often as often .
and only in the last 5,000 years , it &apos;s been steigender for the last mile .
evolution helps us .
tell it .
so old and antik he also may be , so it &apos;s very complicated and very simple , and that &apos;s the same time .
then you measure ... and measure ... and measure ...
i sort of sozusagen myself , a geometry to erdenken things , which actually didn &apos;t actually have geometry .
she was going to be able to get this ereignete from 1875 to 1925 , a remarkable era that was the mathematics of the world .
langwierige measurements , large brownsche movements ... 1,33 .
and this is what it is that is what it is .
this was one of my bedeutsamsten entdeckungen. , which is that these islands are the same same same as the großformatige all the same -- it &apos;s more or less .
should you remove the breast ? should you get ?
right ? it has to be the best , for it &apos;s great good .
anybody ? it &apos;s much harder .
this can happen in a medical environment .
and why not ?
a few months later , she goes back to the market , if prices are the awards on the höchsten -- if dinner is scarce -- because she needs your family and no choice .
that leads to very high school .
almost three years ago , i decided to leave my komfortablen job as a senior economist in washington , and in my geburtsland ethiopia , after the geburtsland ethiopia , after 30 years .
we build a system that &apos;s the integrity , the integrity , the integrity , the integrity , effizienz , efficiency and transparency , and the small farmers that i described to the risks that i described .
we think that these women are requires a political political will , and we have to adapt to the bowl , and even the zugrundeliegenden of the brain .
my answer is a sandsteinerne wall from bacteria , and the bacteria that spread through the desert .
it &apos;s threatened by the existenzgrundlage of millions of people , especially in africa and china .
a problem with the plants of trees is that people are so poor that they &apos;re going to use trees to use them as an firewood .
and , after the einmaligen cost of 60 dollars for the bacteria that you never would pay for the bacteria that would never pay for 11 dollars a cubic dollars .
in a time , in a time , more successful , and we could see that zunehmendem , and that might be the desaströs .
the world shows me , and i chose it .
our goal is a treasure trove of entwürfe , derart and completely , that a single gebrannte dvd is basically a zivilisations-startpaket .
all those eggs , zysten , bacteria , bacteria can travel in one gram of human rights .
it &apos;s a wonderful tool to abfallbeseitigung .
maybe you think it &apos;s very good at a good karma when these men were shit , but it &apos;s also economically useful because they &apos;re saving a billion dollars .
and with the poor she realized there was no toilet .
and the pace of the pace we &apos;re going to do the goal to support people with sanitation , not reaching .
this reef in the discovery bay , jamaica , for 20 years , they were most about 20 years of the world .
he was considering the slaves who were brought on the antillen antillen , which is the song &quot; jamaica &quot; -- &quot; aki rice salt are are are are -- &quot; a sinnbild of the human race in the nordöstlichen canada .
and we have this over the last hundred hundred years to 150 years .
i &apos;ve talked about a million times , but it &apos;s incredible .
the other species of climate change is the ausbleichen of climate change . it &apos;s a lovely image , right ?
that doesn &apos;t sell .
and yet , we &apos;re in our best best to know .
what i saw ? stars , satellites , blinkende planes -- typical himmelschrott .
and what would be behind these gummimasken if there were ?
and i was only in all the time , because i was embarrassed to read the novel &quot; the dune &quot; dune .
and it was so successful that it was even verfilmt .
faro is a vibrant city , and to get to the beach , she said to take a bus and take a boat .
one of them was joseph , and he asked me what i did , and i explained .
and so we &apos;re going to put in the trap .
the companies are providing the money for the food system -- that we are -- and confront us , and that &apos;s still better , so we can do this income for more money and benefits .
the ersparnisrate , nettoersparnisse , nettoersparnisse , was under zero , on the crisis .
you can hear the mind of the five-year-old .
and at the same time , the solution is clear because these aren &apos;t always that nature to change human nature .
we have to actually invest in the idea of a meaningful wealth that are worthy of the possibilities that people are evolving .
first , it &apos;s called economists , so it might be never really , so it might be that they have to be feilen in your own clay .
i painted it directly to the man .
it went to space and light .
this photograph was taken when i went to alaska bay in the alaska 2002 to actually verbrennen the minerals management service in the way , to see ölteppiche in ice .
another aspect is that it spreads when it comes to water .
and that &apos;s actually really pervers .
and then , of course , john d. was rockefeller .
she was also the reason for the national umweltpolitik act of the saubere air , the clean water act .
they have abschlüsse in politikwissenschaft , in economies , they &apos;re entrepreneurs . they don &apos;t want to do what they do .
if you look at people who are going to earn the 50,000 dollars in the years that have two children who might have three jobs or more , and then you have to have them .
we have to all have the whole thing like rationalisieren , and you can find more about these politics .
the first person you know .
here she told me to a filmbericht , &quot; afghan star &quot; of it , as your friends were drawn , because they said they &apos;re going to be the friends of democracy .
last year , when i was here , i talked about my swimming at the north pole .
it feels like someone standing behind you and you &apos;re going to beat your mind with a hammer on your head .
and we put ourselves down there , and we besprachen what went wrong on mt . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest . everest .
bloggt about it , talking about it , talking about it , talking about it , and give a hundred percent . because there &apos;s only very , very few things that can &apos;t be done when we &apos;re going to use our entire power .
this is a zustandsdiagramm . it &apos;s a very simple computer .
can we do some kind of selbst-replizierungs-verhalten ?
so what i &apos;m going to show you here is that we can create a 2d-form -- the b -- aneinandergefügt from a string of the reihung , which extremely simple rules .
these are three minutes .
and if you &apos;ve seen amy smith , she talks about how to get students with the gemeinden in haiti .
and it may be that we may seem to be overwhelming and seem to be overwhelming and so connected to the problems of the problems that we have to solve .
we &apos;re increasingly aware that we don &apos;t have to have the entire stadtfläche economy .
okay . i have a one .
can we bring back to the natural ecosystems , by looking around us by looking for rivers and the renaturieren of the wieder and those renaturieren ?
as you can see , the death rate of 65,000 deaths per conflict , per year , per year , per year , per year per year , per year , per year , a year is so horrible .
because we did something right , and it would be determines what it is .
they want the generika .
if not , if you don &apos;t have to do one of those two , aren &apos;t true ?
developing developing world , the developing world , and water .
and now i have the prokopfeinkommen on this axis .
and they remember the beginning of the last century , which was very bad . until this very late jump .
see how you grows ? and how hundreds of millions and billions of millions of poverty in asia ?
here we are . we have a continuity in the world .
look . this is the world .
they get clean water . they buy food for the poor . they &apos;re rotten malaria .
and we have to look at the way we look at the world with facts .
don &apos;t do it quite africa . they &apos;re not doing a rassenproblem .
it &apos;s not haltbar . and it &apos;s not going to happen in the outside .
and many of you have heard the term &quot; memes . the evolution of technology is something that i &apos;m going to do is very much , you know , one of the first objects you had , you know , was a little handaxt .
my argument is essentially , well , well , nicht-nullsummen-spiele , nicht-nullsummen-spiele , are always part of our lives .
and that &apos;s quite new , and i think it &apos;s a lot worse -- this possibility -- because of the things that are in the middle of the informationstechnik , in techologien , which can be used as biotechnology as biotechnology or nanotechnology .
i do my best , okay .
&quot; yahweh is our erlöser &quot; means &quot; he saved the people &apos;s people , &quot; what was a pretty rough sozialstruktur .
we only have the civil wars in six countries that is called the media reports only about six countries .
so , so we should do our money ?
none of those countries , including africa &apos;s nation , has ever been hearing its information .
during this development , we were to think of the africans in the edge of development , and we &apos;re looking at the politik of our country .
the administration , mostly , mostly vetternwirtschaft , kostet billion .
we would like to interview them , &quot; and i said , &quot; great . &quot;
and now 14 of the diseases of the diseases , two of them are even more heilbar .
in the last 10 years , and as a hope for the future , we &apos;ve seen the beginnings of a science of positive psychology : one science of what makes life worthwhile .
and i think there are three different -- and i &apos;m going to call it different , because it &apos;s possible to create different interventions , it &apos;s possible to have a rather than one another , three different life .
but it showed that there was no policy in there .
you don &apos;t look like debbie reynolds .
and what you find is that if you do something funny , the rechtwinklig .
when i was a 30 years ago , i thought if i was good enough to make someone not depressiv , not afraid , not angry , i would get it .
a polar bear of the arctic swims , taken by paul nicklen .
but this so-called &quot; the &quot; author &quot; when all parts of the pieces and not only the incident , but also my emotional connection comes to the event .
nick -- again with a automatic camera -- thousands of photos of this .
sometimes you can tell a umfangreiche story in the way .
we want to find solutions .
and then they &apos;re going to go all over and jumping .
thank you .
what &apos;s more important is that this is a very powerful process that you can detect in just three seconds : we can actually take emily in a single period of less than a single afternoon in a single afternoon , and we &apos;re going to take advantage of the nachmittag in several different parts of the verschiedenen .
emily : image metrics is a markenfreie , leistungsgesteuerte animationsfirma .
finally , i became obsessed with it .
in the reserve , there &apos;s a couple of nice primates .
but i was from the west and i was working in east .
all over the world has been ständig , animals , the forest , and so on .
here &apos;s coltan , and gold .
one day we met with the oberkommandeur .
the elephant verweste , and they took the stoßzähne .
i don &apos;t think somebody &apos;s google in because google does the right thing to do , even if people use al google to make it possible .
corneille ewango -- a hero of the congo of congo from congo .
we have ourselves , almost without having it , from a very marktwirtschaft .
you don &apos;t have to pay it from your budget .
i should warn you what happened to these experiments .
democracy doesn &apos;t need perfect equality , but it needs citizens to share a common shared life .
the united states as a leader as a leader in the years , where the line is to red .
we have this gift in the 1970s and &apos; 80s , as women are going to be the erwerbsleben .
electricity was helpful .
a remarkable fact for technologie-optimisten is that in the first half of the 20th century , the improving of life expectancy is so fast as fast as the second half of the 19th century .
that was the essay that i was in 11 years and i got a two + recorded .
i have a couple of the ones that kept a long time : between five and 15 and 15 , this was my nebenbeschäftigung and the led to a feeling .
so if i look at creativity , i think , is also that sense , or the unvermögen , the zusammenhänge , which i see in the life of life in life .
this is what the buddhistische fishermen say , because they don &apos;t have to kill the living thing .
and they will be more likely to remember it .
and i had to find what to the story .
how are we going to be festsetzen , what the responsibility and the causes are outside ?
and they have to be in all possibilities , including those who i &apos;ve never been seen before .
i hope you can see me , if i &apos;m going to this examples , because i &apos;m talking about everything you might spend your time .
now there &apos;s magazines about water .
people pay the full price for both , and the only thing that you have in common is that they have nothing in common .
the corners of the abrunden , the middle goals , this is the great market .
this guy is the most primitive of the world &apos;s license .
but you don &apos;t have to be ozzy osbourne -- you don &apos;t have to be completely überdreht .
so what you have to do is to find out who cares .
nine months later , i sprayte the messages of tahrir , and it was a picture i saw in my newsfeed .
thank you .
mostly , the cultural heritage in us to look down and the past .
my first reaction for national geographic , which i noticed that you can &apos;t be a documentary in a documentary about the history of nature , i had sattelrobben .
these are the lions and tigers of the ocean .
and because i love sharks -- i &apos;m kind of obsessed with you -- i wanted to do a different , more positive story about sharks to talk about environmental protection to help .
after i had bimini , i learned that this habitat is going to create a new golfresort .
they &apos;re going to be connected to the fischereigerät .
but the fish came back and again , and again , the population , the population , grew water in the shallow water in the shallow water .
now , she lives in the jungle of sungai wain , and this is matahari , her second son , the son of the second orangutans , i rescued , i &apos;ve rescued .
it was a biological desert .
then you see the yields and starts to measure what comes out .
so how do we do this pin ?
and you need bacteria to bind the nitrogen , and without any of these microbes , no matter will not give it .
the humidity is 10 percent higher .
so we can really change the climate .
in nord-suoahlisi , it &apos;s the genossenschaft , there &apos;s a democratic culture , so you can use the justiz to protect the physical system .
the spiralförmige vortex , who was a paddel on a kanutrip umwirbelt .
i &apos;ll show you one .
reuben margolin shares kinetische sculptures , beautiful work that are going to be bewegen , and moving in the patterns of regentropfen , and in nine minutes he verzaubert us with his meditativen art -- at the same time we &apos;re inspired by math .
every city has their own design .
twenty-three years later , you asked us to come and get this idea .
this is the italian portal , the ukrainische park , the polnische park , the polnische park , the japanische park .
i &apos;m going to talk about consciousness .
either it isn &apos;t , or it &apos;s not something else , or something else , or something , but not a case in science .
people always say that consciousness is hard to define .
you can &apos;t be completely zweifeln in the existence of your own consciousness .
it &apos;s a digital computer program in the brain and to create consciousness , we have to find the right program .
we bring the outside the objectivity and subjectivity than the properties of reality and as the properties of the entitlement .
... don &apos;t you ?
but i also meet people who do what they do , love , love , and they can &apos;t imagine something else .
we teach american history in the u.k. .
no teenager wear no armbanduhren .
maybe , later , not immediate .
no , don &apos;t do it .
i couldn &apos;t get this thing to work , no matter how often i do .
but we need to change from a industrial model to a landwirtschafts-modell shift in which tomorrow is a single person in the morning every single school .
so erez and i wanted to find more about it .
the reason that is that the historical report is being digitized in rasantem speed .
and she went to a light . she said , &quot; okay , so you &apos;re serious .
she introduced a group of students in a protest in the streets .
i stood up , i made a tea , sat down , and i &apos;m here -- still , as i &apos;m happy , but here .
the peace direct gives you the back .
he wrote a book called &quot; the dictatorship of the dictatorship to democracy , &quot; with 81 vorgehensweisen , with 81 resistance .
it &apos;s not a kultisches thing .
in fact , chris was worried about , and he said , &quot; look , show you this photograph , you will think you &apos;re still one of these crazy artists , which not do much . &quot;
it &apos;s a object for the mind .
and the solution i &apos;m doing is , in the largest übeltäter of the largest culprits in this massive misshandlung of earth and the daraus of the biosphere .
so i said , &quot; what would t from the zähler -- we call it t1 , where you &apos;re going to do the effects in the denominator -- call him t2 , where you get the effects ? &quot;
and he was a starker unterscheidungsfaktor on the market that has our revenues and profit .
we won literally marktanteile .
but five days later , back in atlanta , i received a email from glenn thomas , one of my people from the meeting in california .
so , frankly , i &apos;m going to be a lot of us who are working in industry , that the industry are threatened by technology and possibly entformt .
and truly , we need somebody to communicate for us to do so much with a sane person ?
and the arts , whatever you do , the invite us every time you &apos;re looking at , you &apos;re looking at our toward großmut and curiosity .
the three sisters of the drei include hauchen with their passionate new life , and at tedwomen , they start with the fröhlichen and poppigen , and then they &apos;re spielen a hinreißende , verführerische version of astor piazzollas .
the manchester craftsmen &apos;s handwerker genossenschaft is after my pearl book .
he does a bunch of money through the anfertigen of special furniture for rich people .
we basically have a lehrplan curriculum in the american kochinstituts , which is the harvard harvard system , and we kreierten a gourmet-kochprogramm for mothers in the middle of the inner city of inner .
we have noticed that you have to give them flowers and eat sunlight and eat and eat and erwartungen and herbie &apos;s music and so you can fix the spiritual cancer .
these kids who were given from the world to have given the world that are given from public schools , and that &apos;s what they are capable of affection and food and the sun and good music and the good music and the good music and the other music and the good music and the other music and the good music and the other music and the good music and
and it &apos;s very well done well .
and i &apos;m going to allow you to use the concert , and i &apos;ll give you the music , and you have to sell you to sell you a agreement that the money is going to be used to support the money . &quot;
this is a room of the nancy wilson that we &apos;ve been built in our school in our school .
and the thing that &apos;s the building , which is that you &apos;ve looked at you and i &apos;ll tell you where i made my great mistakes .
he came to me . he said , &quot; man , this is a fabulous story .
and so he has a group of people .
bill strickland shares a calm and amazing tale of salvation by art , music and unusual .
and the transducer is going to get the ausgangszellen to the brain , and the result is a netzhautprothese that produces a normal netzhaut-output .
but there was the most popular factor , the problem with the code , and how to make cells better to make the normal reactions , and that was our contributions .
they &apos;re using us with a invisible körperschutzhülle , which is angriffe by the environment , so that we remain healthy .
but if the bacteria grow and double and all of the things that are going to be able to do , and then , the number of these molecules is outside the cell outside the cell .
now we know that all bacteria can speak each other .
this is just a photograph -- a mikroskopaufnahme of your skin .
bacteria are become incredibly powerful , what is the point that we &apos;re killing with antibiotics bacteria .
the fact is that bacteria have a collective behavior , and that they &apos;re going to meet tasks that they could never do as individuals .
it &apos;s a great honor to me to be able to get to this conference .
or the first , the first ones coming in the room .
but , if we think about justice , says , what we think about the justice , which is the real nature of the fraglichen activity and qualities that are worth you , you know , you know , bewundert and anerkennt .
what a reason they would have ?
charlie , what do you tell warren ?
here &apos;s what he &apos;s auslegt .
so aristotle had aristoteles with flutes , golfwägen and the fierce umkämpften , the same-sex frage of same-sex marriage .
michael sandel : the world &apos;s art art of democratic argument was democratic argument .
a lot of people said , &quot; well , you know , städter have told us the opportunity , what we &apos;re going to do with our time .
and i think that &apos;s good -- the future humanity can make a decision .
if that &apos;s what is that mean for us ?
i want to argue that the velocity of the therapieverbesserungen will be .
i &apos;m going to argue that &apos;s nonsense .
we know that there are these threshold , because we don &apos;t get altersbedingten complaints before we get a mittleres age , and that &apos;s the damage since our born .
that means you have to make your homework to understand that this is true .
audience : hi . i read somewhere that the average 20 years of practically every 20 years , every single year of every year , every 10 years .
not one of her media has been doing .
we don &apos;t care about how we do our profit .
they went into the center of reykjavik and setzten frauenthemen .
i can &apos;t have a design-argumente , the schlagkräftiger , the argumente that i have done by economists , epidemiologists and umweltschützern .
the gesundheitsargument is something more ambitious , and probably , you know , you know , you know , part of the piece of the piece .
fourteen , the american americans dying per day , the dreifache menge , and almost everything comes from autoabgasen .
he apparently had meaning for humor .
politicians and marketing-leute have become frightened of davor as &quot; lifestyle-entscheidung &quot; .
second , because we have eradicated them .
so we thought , &quot; we &apos;re trying to do it .
you find some amazing animals .
immediately , the government said , &quot; that will be a little bit -- and the bezahlte , and the bezahlte people who saw it .
he may may be thinking , he would have ever born the baby &apos;s baby , so he needs a little help from outside .
i wondered peter , if something changed . and he said , &quot; no .
we want to talk to africa : the next chapter &quot; and that &apos;s a healthy , lächelnder , beautiful african .
but mostly , you have to be productive in your life , and a kind of productive environment in our countries can do things .
we can do all this ?
we were on the side of the biafra .
i had to crawl between the legs of these people , and i went to find my sister on my back to find a window .
you know , we need to use all well .
and i often don &apos;t see a african employees .
so the question is , how can we use it from all of this good will come from us ?
you &apos;re undiszipliniert . &quot;
we have ibukun awosika in nigeria with the stuhlfabrik .
and with this idea that coke is a product product that is a neurologisches product , i took this thesis , so we can study them , so we can study any other complex neurological process .
the way was done since the 90s since the 90s , to study very complex processes .
i want to try to go to you for you .
and then i &apos;m in the control , here , games in the change .
how do you do a rap scientific scientific ?
there &apos;s a massive brain region that &apos;s involved in bewegunsgkoordination .
i want to say , and it &apos;s called wahrscheinlichkeiten and statistics , that is the math of games and glücksspiele .
it &apos;s very time-consuming and isn &apos;t just pleasant .
but keep the mind for the entire time of the eight seconds .
in play and virtual worlds , for example , your facial facial expressions of course , and intuitively will be used to control a avatar or virtual character .
they &apos;re going to be very quick , and without a very powerful grid , it &apos;s not possible for you to die .
another statement of esther was that we respond when it comes to a tragedy like haiti , but this is a andauerndetragödie .
it &apos;s produced by the malaria-parasiten and it &apos;s a very interesting substance .
we have every street every time every village , almost every square centimeter of madagascar .
in your bluray-player , a very cheap picture is .
audience : yes !
interesting , though , we have the whole time period , we never have it , we never did it , and we never did it in the air .
this is the restaurant house .
and these orangenbaum you see here , actually , in a autoreifen , in a autoreifen , which was taken from outside , and zugenäht .
so , water is a very important aspect .
&quot; metal &quot; and &quot; earth &quot; are .
the idea is not yet .
they don &apos;t even know the show .
thank you .
i could show you this animal here .
once it touches water , you should hear how air was .
once we sequenced these two genomes , we asked ourselves , if this is the smallest genome of a self of themselves , could be the minimal of itself in the same species , because even a smaller genome ?
so , we realized that once that , once that worked , a real chance of the worked , if we could get the synthetic chromosomes to get the bacteria back .
so , more than that is demnach .
the last eventually ended is a quote from robert feynman , &quot; what i can &apos;t do ourselves even , i can &apos;t understand . &quot;
but actually , in the northwest , we &apos;re very close to the actual idea of the koran that the korans of the paradise was the 36 times as &quot; gardens , bewässert by the fließende .
but the more you could actually get more than getting more .
and this number is never going to be a 72 .
this is a nests of a tire of a tire and that &apos;s the nest entrance .
this is a colony which was formed by a queen in the previous summer .
the patrouilleure -- that &apos;s where it &apos;s going to be a magnifying glass -- are a interesting group . they go down to the morning before the first group goes on .
oddly , and interestingly , it looks like roughly half of the things just doesn &apos;t do anything .
the nest maintenance workers take all the time and put them to the äusseren edge of the nesthügels and the length of the nesthügels .
the foragers is somehow not going to be able to survive .
and we &apos;ve done experiments that the longer is a ant &apos;s länger , the more the ones that the simple hydrokarbone hydrokarbone on their surface . so that &apos;s the ants that the ants are now creating different from different kinds of different ways .
they &apos;re going to cover the entire earth , except the other .
here you see that the cost of all of the world is oil in about 89 barrels , and the annual cost cost three trillion dollars .
and we do this for four percent of the world &apos;s population .
that &apos;s not going to do with it .
i think , i think , where we can use natural gas .
and when i was in the windkraftgeschäft of the windkraftgeschäft natural gas .
why does not make it worry ?
so , just 500 million dollars .
it never got the same controversy or something .
tbp : i &apos;ve lost 150 million in the wind .
some have 5,000 . many have a lot of have .
there was dotcom-fieber . and there was hypertext .
ourbeginning.com. life is a event . verkünden it &apos;s the world .
these are working in lower manhattan where you built the first elektrizitätswerke .
and this gave up in maybe six different colors .
i mean , you didn &apos;t want this thing to do is that this thing is besetzte .
a friend of mine told me this story : the didn &apos;t just wait and wait , but then they had to wait the fachmänner , and then they had been finally there , the third time , they had to call somebody .
so i &apos;m going to use a rather clinical language , and so it will not be so hot as much as the heart of the heart of compassion .
and here &apos;s the basic idea that migefühl migefühl to good actions for people are going to be revanchieren for that .
basically , it &apos;s about my enemy , or my rivale , if you &apos;re my friend or my family , i &apos;m not a lot of my family , i &apos;m a lot less to use the golden rule .
so , or so , the results got up . this is a zero-sum game .
every form of the interdependence , nicht-nullsummen-beziehung , zwingt , zwingt , the humanity of other other .
and they then tell you the other person that america didn &apos;t understand that she didn &apos;t catch , and they &apos;re going to dominate the americas .
most diseases of poverty with poverty , but in the case of childhood , the kids who died from the cancer , mostly from the rich families .
a kid died a kid , but nothing changed .
because you &apos;re just not that kind of energy and time , if it doesn &apos;t really work .
so , he didn &apos;t really want to say something .
openness is not the end .
now the dominant krebstheorie would say that there is a single oncogene in one cancer , and that those you &apos;re doing in a krebsopfer .
what does that mean ?
we found a kind of zähflüssiges material that the right extrazelluläre extrazelluläre , we put the cells into the world , and we put the cells in the cells and the other day , and on the right , you see what we have in a culture .
and of course , we &apos;re now going to go now ?
and i want to finish with a poem .
we have a hochkarätigen journalist who was caught up on the abschreiben , a young star-autor , whose book has been quotes so many fingierte quotes , that you &apos;ve taken it from the shelves , a exposé über in the new york times .
it sounds like a weird book , but it &apos;s actually about a new species of lies .
he wrote very , very positive reviews of himself .
you know , you know , i had a person &apos;s point of view of a person .
that &apos;s really bad . why is it so bad ?
i can look at lying ; they were used to be talked and then .
they told them how large it was the bath , or said , the einkaufsmöglichkeiten , and so far from the hotel .
woman 2 : right there . okay , glass , glass , make a picture !
and also , you want to colonize your eyes .
but it really opened my eyes , as often i &apos;ve been excluded from life , social networks and so on , and so on , although it wasn &apos;t really important or dringendes .
i read peter and the wolf with this beautiful band of juillard .
and everybody who &apos;s then umdrehte , i went afterwards .
at least for me , because if i just do the same thing , i &apos;m very , very boring . i &apos;m very quick .
i see myself as myself , i don &apos;t know what i see .
are you going to be nervous , ashleigh ?
im : do you &apos;re going to care ? you look like cute .
how do i &apos;m not saying that it &apos;s good , but only that it doesn &apos;t be langweilt , ok ?
if you have the sahne to the sahne , it &apos;s going to be a buttermilk .
i &apos;m calling it the era of the citizenship -- how people do people do different or more different , but but only as citizens can be equal to the same .
in egypt , i was discovered .
this had studied in london , in yemen , and climbed in amsterdam in amsterdam , an airplane was attacking america .
there are no ideas and narratives and leaders and symbols and symbols who are using the democratic culture of the ground .
as a anecdote , we can show that if poverty is the only factor , well , is a third family &apos;s one of the family members of the family .
what happened there was a political coalition that was going to be a political goal to the political goal , and that was the leaders .
this is the tools that we &apos;re going to be interested in socially with social interesting if they &apos;re going to be a technical moment .
he ermittelt the frontiers of the individual networks and they färbt them .
and because of social networking , chinese vernetzung , chinese students who studied abroad , or companies from the rest of the world in china , there were people in the world that would have the news .
and finally , chinese griffen the chinese .
we are always more media in a media media in media , socially and cheap .
but everything in terms of ziehend , i &apos;m still going to be as much as i can .
my fourth abstecher abstecher zum , zog a comet across the mountain .
this view is the eisbruch , and the first 600 feet of the ocean .
and that &apos;s in camp four , in camp camp .
and there were climbers on this summit .
we also got the bad news that beck weathers , a different climbers , in this storm had collapsed and died .
it &apos;s so ironic that i actually work on the top , sometimes i actually had some syringes in the clothing .
this climber was schneeblind .
and i can only just mutmaßen how he did this .
and so he &apos;s going to turn back into action .
these are sherpas , the wacholderzweige .
and the fourth thing that was very important for me , &quot; ideas , we need to participate . &quot;
but today , for 60 years , by the latest age , the entrepreneurs , entrepreneurs to vorbildern , and they &apos;re in a lot of special effects in society .
it was enige people , the democracy wanted to bring democracy because they were einbringen the ideas of einbringen , from the universal wahlrecht , parliament and the constitution and so on .
the third thing is , and the third thing is to be cities .
the second is the beschäftigungspolitik that we have , which we have to do , to make entrepreneurs to create a entrepreneurs to create , to create something of jobs in companies that 93 percent of the indian jobs are in the genomic sector .
so , if you &apos;re a young country , you have the chance to be an modern rentensystem , so that you don &apos;t have the anspruchsprobleme when you &apos;re older .
you have to have a clear strategy for the world , and important for the world .
so , decides government to make government .
although some people on the left there was no one of the things that was actually the revolution of markets that the losung were the losung , &quot; the government has no idea .
they didn &apos;t fear the masses anymore .
so this whole record of the konstruktive mistrust between the volksvertretern and those who they &apos;re proposing .
dreiundvierzig .
each of these kohorten would statistically captured , for two years after the gefängnisaufenthalt .
david cameron spend 20 million pounds into a &quot; social outcomes fond , &quot; to support this idea .
toby eccles : investing in the social change in social change .
i &apos;m working . &quot;
why ? you &apos;re to get to the wange to get to the wange ?
even if i &apos;m in my friend , i &apos;m here , i say , &quot; i &apos;m all grüße you , jack , jack . &quot;
if you haven &apos;t figured out , my name is tom thum , and i &apos;m a beatboxer . that means i just heard everything you &apos;ve heard , and just with my voice , just with my voice .
and finally , with this one , i can wieder- my sounds , wieder- , wieder- .
our people had to try to try to try to try to try to try to try to find the right thing .
don &apos;t listen to those who you can &apos;t do that . everybody can do this .
on the right , there &apos;s a ultraschallwandler .
and i &apos;ll give you a few examples .
you see the blue beleuchteten .
his wife said , &quot; the happiest day in your life . &quot;
many of these patients are going to get the strahlentherapie .
the results are better than the surgery .
he can stop the surgery and stop .
canal street , i know .
and that &apos;s where they really are really much of their creative inspiration . so , it &apos;s a industry that &apos;s going to be in both directions .
and therefore , you want to go to the next trend , and that &apos;s how it works .
and their jokes , like the modedesigns of a modedesigners , really only in this aesthetic aesthetic .
you need a lot of lawyers and a lot of time in court . and the merchants have decided that that &apos;s much too expensive .
these are the two hauptsächlichen gegensätze in the logic of the urheberrechts .
and i want to thank this place of veronica jauriqui for this place that they &apos;ve created this very modische presentation .
and once again , i got a boat to a remote fjord , and i noticed that the archäologen that i should meet , not aufzufinden .
i think this is one of the most stillsten and robustesten things on the planet .
there are a lot of ancient eiben in the uk , and if you &apos;re going to make a contractor , you &apos;ll notice that the eiben were there .
here &apos;s the klonische creosotebusch , which is about 12000 years old .
i hope that i find that by putting these organisms , helping to make your remarkable robustheit carefully carefully and my part to invest in the future of the future .
so we put it on something else .
and 20 years later , they &apos;re still using mobile phones , but they also make their own mobiltelefonnetze , like this , which is used by the drogenkartells years in all the 31 states .
what did you do with it ?
what could terrorists do that ?
recently , this shows a al-qaida-mitglied in the united states , which this ferngesteuerten drones in transportation drohnen in the united states in the united states .
as we see here , we turn ourselves into it .
now , the mortality rate is 70 percent , if you caught it , but it &apos;s hard .
so , there are so many people who are not killed that the only leistbare funeral in the nicht are not gekennzeichneten in the nicht of the hier of ciudad .
but the other thing i hear people , how do you talk about fear , one of the risk of the risk .
and she was in the u of the u , when she was working in colombia , with the goal of the ziel and language , with two another colleague of the farc of the farc and tortured and killed .
and there &apos;s no group who were held in this kind of manipulation of the manipulation , as young men .
patient capital is uncomfortable for people who are looking for the simple solutions , mild categories , because we don &apos;t think about the bloßes .
but the entire community , all the different sekten , the shia and sunni , and beten . &quot;
because the hochsaison is , if you &apos;re fully in the juice , she &apos;s nice , she &apos;s green , they &apos;re going to take the world , they &apos;re going to go up to the skies . &quot;
but no faces ?
ok , let &apos;s look at these three portraits .
i tried to do my wife a little pleasure , to make a little pleasure .
why i don &apos;t know why i don &apos;t have my wife , not to be able to make local sanitary pad ?
but here &apos;s the problem . because a company makes sanitary pad and it works .
muruganantham : i see this thing in the hands of my wife , &quot; why do you feel so much a nasty ? &quot;
now , can be the 110 country of information . okay ?
and it was so beautiful that i was over the last seven years .
then i got a huge amount of training . i swam in eiswasser and forth .
it was actually happening that the cells in my fingers was einfroren and sich .
and my good friend david saw how i was thinking , and he came up to me and said , &quot; lewis , i know you &apos;ve been 18 years old .
so the prospect that you could be in 30 , 40 years , 40 years , it &apos;s a very furchterregender , 40 .
england , america , japan , japan , south africa .
it &apos;s about 380 trillion gallons of oil consumption on earth today , which can be able to be able to be able to be able to be able to get and nurtured .
now , the end of the story -- okay , we just replace it all with conventional , renewables -- but i think , is that the story is more more .
very special material that the abalone himself had done , millions of abalone , millions of abalone , every day , every year .
and the idea was basically that i &apos;m the paintbrush in the hand of the great personalities , which i would come and interview .
but i wanted to interview the media .
in fact , my first interviewpartner abbott abbott , who was the 97 age of old , and i was also very full of life -- i think you can define it .
we know the big sprüche , we know the great moments , we know what we don &apos;t want to do , and the point of the thing is , nobody &apos;s very ridiculous .
when we were alone , i was a audience .
it wasn &apos;t this armdrücken , but it was a überraschungsmoment for my gesprächspartner .
he said , &quot; but i understand that . i can understand that .
half of the body was weakened , not known .
this is a säuglings-intensivstation in kathmandu , nepal .
i don &apos;t want to make a beautiful stuff .
there &apos;s a certain kind of treatment , it &apos;s called austauschtransfusion .
it &apos;s not the paintings that we had made , but what we actually have .
another example : again , a stupid mother .
thank you .
no , we &apos;re talking about 10 million dollars on the swiss schweizer , on the bankkonten of the schweizer , from the head of the presidents , the hohen civil war .
they &apos;re zollten the even one .
most of the big companies are now restlos convinced that they need very strict policies to take a very strict policies , and so on bribes , for bribes , etc .
if you want to go into a restaurant , if you look at the menu , then you expect to put it all on the map ?
and that was the first time i thought that the expression on your face is actually reflektiert what she thinks from him .
now he was alive to be alive .
this french painter of the 18th century was known for his wife , but also , people also did .
unfortunately , this waise is now a lot of other time with a number of other orphans in the archive , and some of you are beautiful paintings .
the first time i ever got to get it at a aufwändigen dinner that gave us a ehren .
&quot; i &apos;m looking at your neighbor &apos;s marriage , james .
and my dad lived in the most part of his erwachsenenlebens in east africa .
i would like to show you six minutes .
lancelot imasen : but our movies , they are stories that people can do .
so it &apos;s a young man to be really able to think about what can be about things to think about negative things and all this , or any kind of untugendhaftes behavior .
franco sacchi : so many times , so little time .
i think this is really the topic of this event .
so , you know , you &apos;ve described this as a drittgrösste industry .
it &apos;s essentially a cd . a kompaktdisk .
now the student . oh , that was fantastic .
that was really fantastic .
video games can be very profound , even though you &apos;re completely geistlos .
we show up , &quot; portal , because you &apos;re going to put on walls to create new spaces .
so , space , space , aesthetic , and then , most important .
i had to put some bridges behind me .
and everything is refers to the bauherren and students who hit the first meeting that you will have a place .
so i made some sketches in napkins -- little boxes and morandi-artige things that i have .
it &apos;s one of the most beautiful pieces i ever did .
this beautiful object , the swiss army knife will be a beteiligung angerechnet .
and i had a day , i was a -- oh , dear .
i have the verzinkung and the copper very thin , so it was going to be wölbt .
and that &apos;s my cafeteria .
and it &apos;s reminded me why i &apos;m going to do things like my house as defensiv .
she was never done .
the dome was a wish of the bauherrin .
it was a attempt to turn this 2005 of land -- it &apos;s 30 to 76 feet -- in a leader by using these areas and dining area in this magnificent response , with a high space .
they call this &quot; plan coupé . &quot;
here it is .
from the building in the background , it seems like a vorbeigleitender iceberg in the mountains .
our minds don &apos;t want to be galleries , so -- and when we met our new football , he said that this was the right shape .
in barcelona , i asked to make a fish , we &apos;re working on the foot of the ritz-carlton-turms , owings and merrill .
can &apos;t we make a cleaner burning ?
and one of the things they found was that she didn &apos;t brannten .
and this is our hausgemachten briquettes .
and he has the problem of the health effects of the gesundheitlichen wood and coal .
it &apos;s a place where if this is india , in this room , only three of us would have a car .
so , you can &apos;t use the same concepts like in the united states to promote things .
there &apos;s a big difference .
after a surgery , it &apos;s all going to do .
now , it &apos;s not surprising . but we asked them to grading their honesty and intelligence to grade , kindness and aggressivität .
he married . he had a son called jerehmia .
is this business with our facial appearance and our employment that a westliches phenomenon ?
now , i want to tell you a little bit of the surgeries that we &apos;re doing , how far we want to go and where we want .
we can replace the underneath structure , but we &apos;re not very far from the replace replace .
my theme is eating food in schools because here &apos;s social justice .
and the next thing is bio-lebensmittel .
people talk about sustainability , but we should find out what that &apos;s at all .
you know , everybody thinks you &apos;re all going to be more and more food ?
and then they have rausbekommen , hey , hey , we can sell the stuff on kids .
and this is a typical essensplan , the typical essensplan .
the things that we might do to be at home , and for so important , we have to teach kids in schools .
we have to educate the employees .
this eight billion dollars two dollars and 49 cents -- and 49 cents -- so much money , the government is the government for lunch .
as a little girl who was sitting on a hot hot sommertagen with me out in the sun , in the sun .
if i go to a party and people ask me what i &apos;m doing , and i say , &quot; i &apos;m a professor , &quot; your eyes glaze .
i want to know your selbstsicherheit , all over her innerstes creatures , you know -- that you &apos;re a professional in the things of your mind .
don &apos;t do the tension . i want to be verzaubert .
it &apos;s a documentary in terms of consciousness .
when i came closer , i expected all the details of most people , their clothes and so on .
how do you know that it was what they did ?
do you see it ? who doesn &apos;t see it ?
we start fangen . some examples .
now , jeff hawkins has described its efforts to get a good , big theory into the neuroscience .
and the verkehrsplaner in london said , &quot; what do you mean , &quot; who is the charge for atlanta -- &quot; i mean , no one is . &quot;
now , congestion pricing have been eingeführt in the third january of january , and the first picture ; here &apos;s a picture of stockholm , a typical street on the second january .
so , we did this vast survey with a lot of verkehrsbetrieben and trying to figure out who they changed and where they disappeared .
then i went to twenty years of ostwärts -- from eastern europe , through the kaukasus , mittlerer east , north africa .
what do we know from the taliban of the taliban who are going to be genagelt the doors of people who are going to send their daughters to schools like schools in balkh ?
the world changed .
i was in my office , my desk was cleaned , i had the blue trennwand-teppich in the walls .
and there was two of them .
there was really what was really .
how amazing is that ?
now , i want to talk about some other patients that are doing everything in their power to make health care .
and then i realized that the page of the site is to google earth , where we can fly to everybody in each other .
we are , they &apos;re the most unterbenutzte resource in public health .
umkehrosmose umkehrosmose is a membranfiltertechnologie .
here &apos;s the resolution . a beautiful creature , right ?
you don &apos;t take their environment from sound , i &apos;m talking about the flughunden .
in the united states alone , the annual cost of a year has been belaufen by 22 billion dollars , so that &apos;s why we &apos;re going to be able to get us in a lot of time .
why should we have to do with the aging at all ?
if you &apos;re going to go here and look at the night and see this beautiful , flying animal , i wish you &apos;re smiling . thank you very much .
europe had to be gezerrt into the economic development .
the boom of resources pumpt geldmengen in that doesn &apos;t all , but but many countries of the bottom billion .
so what do you do ? why are it that so-called &quot; ressourcenfluch ? &quot;
and so the countries need a very ausgewogene policy .
a few economists are just coming back and said , &quot; why don &apos;t you try to see a auction ? it &apos;s going to unveil the value . &quot;
in this moment , a billion people in the world are a billion people in the world , or scheiternden countries . how can we help them , the economist asks a kühnen plan , which we can get the gap between the arm and rich .
we have no job that they &apos;re going to be made .
here he gives a picture surgeons in africa that basiswissen , which is necessary to durchführung eingriffe .
so we have this : imagine a lecture , and could talk about the same time in the same time in their native language .
&quot; basics of surgery surgery .
14 years ago , i came to this ordinary material , fischnetz , fischnetz , which has been used for centuries in the same way .
he asks me if i could build this as a dauerhaftes piece of the city .
so , we &apos;re going to create a dry atomisierten to create a dry function that is shaped by wind , and in the test , it turns out that he can be shaped by people who can interact with that , and can be able to move to be able to be able to become more naß .
they were in their geschäftsanzügen , which is , the tiniest patterns of windes beside the human genome , they didn &apos;t know , and shared the wiederentdeckung of miracles .
so , i was also given to that , i think , i think , that this is an enormous risk of our society .
when peter bewegt his arm , this yellow blob is the corresponding place to the place that &apos;s verstand in peters .
if you do this , what are you going to control ?
and to say that those changes also can be a statement of death , even a statement of a fact that &apos;s true of a fact , of course , or false .
now , let me ask you , what i don &apos;t say . i &apos;m not saying that science can be garantiert , or that we can have scientific answers to each other &apos;s question .
now why would this would be a objective morality ?
how high is the chance that this is a kind of the human development ?
on the left hand , you see edward witten .
we live in a world of a world of a world of destruktiver technologies and these technologies can &apos;t be un-erfunden , it &apos;s always easier to zerbrechen , when they together together .
but then we have to talk again about wellness in a bigger context .
and what is its natural enemy , what the means of the bio-kontrolle of the good news that we talk ?
she &apos;s a parasite , not a zweibeiniger , but a parasitäre wasp , two millimeters , schlank , a fast and wendige fliegerin .
and if we &apos;re going to put this good blumenwanzen for example , for example , in a paprika-feld , you go to the blooms .
in israel , where we &apos;re focused on a thousand acres -- that &apos;s equivalent to 10,000 israelischen dunams -- biological schädlingsbekämpfung , 75 percent of the pesticides .
and thirdly , to raise the mind of farmers to increase the potential of this summer .
automobilretrofuturismus is one of my favorite spezialitäten .
it &apos;s still fun to do the hirnlosen of the hirnlosen , as a über , and i do that .
&quot; urban absurdism &quot; -- that &apos;s what the new yorker needs .
her einstiger name was fay wray , and so that -- i was not enough to say , &quot; take the drawing . &quot;
or the soviet union , only one of the soviet union was only just a few decades , maybe within one decade , after time , after the soviet union .
because there are 80 percent there , that really eat insects .
they are at the beginning of the nahrungsketten .
why do we actually do this balls in the soup , it &apos;s a fleisch in the soup ?
it &apos;s 25 kilos per person per year .
until now we &apos;re going to decide for a , or to five pounds .
we can increase it a little bit of regenwäldern , but it &apos;s going to be a boundary .
and you may think , well , those aren &apos;t even available .
my three minutes have not begun , right ?
he said , &quot; allison , we have to put them on the table .
and i &apos;ve seen a sign .
even if your kanadier hintergehen , do it in a way that comes in a way that comes to society .
and in this book , the little lewis would find the big idea .
this is a linealwerkzeug . and on the back , there are some other gadgets , messwerkzeuge , messwerkzeuge , and scales to make some measurements . okay ?
right . so , so , the device will be used .
there &apos;s a quality of craftsmanship and precision that &apos;s just amazing and remarkable .
so , the first robot i want to talk about is strider .
this is just to show that if you &apos;ve got cameras , or other sensors , because it &apos;s up , he &apos;s one meter of a meter of a meter size , you can go through obstacles and dererlei .
for example , in this case , although the left and the right wheel in a single axis is connected to a single axis , and that &apos;s why we &apos;re going to turn around .
welcome to romela , the robot mechanik mechanik labor . &quot;
but the cool thing about it is the benutzerschnittstelle .
see how he does it . this was our first trial , and they were .... .
but what is the secret of our success ?
but just from a radio to talk to the imagination , isn &apos;t enough .
so this is a very important thing to do this .
innenstädte , who are going to be geisterstädten .
there &apos;s no diet of good teachers teachers , and only eight percent of the people of the county is about a bachelor- or a higher degree .
there is a complete empty empty capital in the bertie county .
the goal of the game is to have all of the wheels on wheels , then it won &apos;t fix .
in the last few decades , but a lot of money , that was destined to reserve , and it was taken away .
and after that , and you see the neighbors of food for eating and where and where , and why , is a homework .
in this is it &apos;s impossible to create large preservation surfaces .
i want to invite you to invite my journey of the umdenkens and iran .
after four months , it &apos;s hervor and now stand for him eight months before .
here &apos;s a couple of results .
this global act is in the same position to climate change , as it &apos;s fossil fuels , maybe even more than those .
when i learned from those two things , bekümmerte , which is very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very , very reasons for scientific reasons .
it has a very good ausgestattetes augenzentrum , which was partly from the ronald foundation of the ronald foundation .
and after the treatment , we let &apos;s get a series of simple sehtests , to see how to see his sight .
the answer is movement . i want to show you the next video .
i had to discuss a long time with my wife .
we &apos;re tracking these forschungsrichtung and hopefully , hopefully more .
and then , i &apos;ve got these leichtathletikveranstaltungen of the leichtathletikveranstaltungen of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the behinderte of the
but this was the fall of the herbst &apos; 95 and then as the winter anbrach , he said , &quot; you know , you &apos;re good enough .
ss : so , aimee mullins has done aimee mullins , and she &apos;s pretty excited . your family travels with -- it &apos;s a big deal .
i tried everybody who could be able to change the wen , against who , against the former , so i &apos;m going to do here ?
i always won all all the way , and now i thought , what ?
you can be 2,44m . take it off . &quot;
it &apos;s a new way : aimee and the designer will be 2 at ted , and we &apos;ll talk about the design .
they were besorgten someone who came over and the shoes .
but it &apos;s almost impossible to do it , the actual most losses of the economy is , unless we use .
or to have the 75,000 jobs .
and something about math : math is sometimes like math -- like in this example -- and sometimes she doesn &apos;t know it -- like &quot; am i drunk ? &quot;
in math , we &apos;re using about 80 percent of time to teach people how to do three of hand .
when people ask me , right ?
but the automation in cars allow it to separate these things , so that &apos;s the driving thing to something else , as the building of a car and the learning of his favorite .
completely false .
but i think we can do both both these same simultaneously .
and one of the reasons why that is so important -- so it &apos;s very important , the computer in the tests .
it was a winter 2009 , and i was in a year for about a year .
i thought to my dad , who was the verstorben of complications was the most komplikationen of a surgical center .
similarly , just like you , through the handle of the stocks , which can be ertasten the beschaffenheit of the soil , and with the time you &apos;re looking at where you &apos;re a notion of where you &apos;re in .
but when i was erblindet and the broadway , i was going to shake everybody in every corner .
if you have a city in the sense of the blind , there &apos;s a lot of jobs , many jobs .
to give you a sense of this experience , the article called &quot; i feel sick . &quot;
and the rangierten of the famous i knew -- the ten commandments , love your next , is fertile and mehre .
you have money for a good purpose and developing emotionale mental companies .
she &apos;s not a book that was written written by the sky .
so , that &apos;s why i actually saw that for me , the key to me is that the way that the way is not going on here , and i don &apos;t know what the way was the way the stufen stolperte .
that was very inspiring .
so if we want to do this book , we really have to be really happy , and we have to have a einlassen and with him .
so we have this wonderful progress .
the academics that this work was thought of being able to be unseriös , so we developed ernstere applications like this optik-prototypen entwicklungstisch of the kappe of a zahnpastatube on a pappschachtel .
alex was working on a little , something , a little bit of a little bit of the name called report report , and invited us to develop a interface that &apos;s going to be used to be used to be used to the material .
we &apos;re putting these boolesche surgery because we like yellow and tapire on the grünem grass .
let &apos;s take the apart , i put it in explosionsansicht .
we &apos;re as people , are the ones that are designing and we should make sure that our machines are helping us and build it .
john , thank you , which is the science fiction to reality .
what okolloh did was not possible to have digital technologies .
but here &apos;s the point . the albernste creative act is still a creative act .
but the institutions that are going to be portrayed from this black line , said , &quot; we &apos;re going to change this decline .
they &apos;re going to create the members of community for each other .
and like all the good seifenopern , she makes a jump from 20 years , if the audience &apos;s interested in the audience changes .
you don &apos;t always have five days . so , we came to play , and we started playing 50-overs-cricket .
india didn &apos;t want to be in the t20-weltmeisterschaft .
the other was indisches cricket .
was that the new india ? that was another world where you could get from everywhere , as you get the best player for the best price .
we all had games in calcutta but something we had never seen before . shahrukh khan was actually a bengalischen song to a bengalischen song for the jubeln -- for a kalkutta , but for the rest of the .
could you imagine that this day would come ?
i hope i &apos;ve been able to make a sense of a experience of a experience and the game , and hopefully , there &apos;s a longer time to work in this business .
and you know that the anwort dogs is because they have fast in the memory of abgerufen , how often they have dogs and pigs on the highway .
why all of it should play anything in the world ?
on the other hand , if you can go to a developing country , and for 25 dollars a gourmet-menü , it &apos;s a wucherpreis for a big mac .
would you pay attention to 20 dollars for a ticket ?
i &apos;ll give you an example .
and if the way to the other end of the city is worth of the city of the city of the city is worth of the city of the city , it &apos;s not worth the no matter either , but people don &apos;t think .
now , in large , and all , you &apos;re enormous impatient .
watch what happens when we auslassen einge .
dan , i would like to hear more . so you say that our answer to terrorism is , i mean , i mean , is that he &apos;s a kind of mental error ?
there &apos;s no weapons of abgefeuert .
and so , some people look like people to economists as dumb people .
the topic and the variation is one of those spielarten , which requires a certain intellectual activity , because you always are the variation that you &apos;re comparing in the sense .
&quot; in terms in words and fashion , in fashion , the same rule is fantastic to be fantastic , or too much , if you &apos;re not the first , the last one of the old things are still in the old . &quot;
and i woke up one day and said , &quot; well , maybe it &apos;s not that ? &quot;
first , my willingness to be a critical audience to me without being able to do it .
it &apos;s my intention of the poster to begleiten , you should not understand it .
so , in the big part , and so they all have our survival .
jews have often a nasty süßlichen odor .
if the room is , if the space is , we could see that people are more negative attitudes to the schwulen men .
it &apos;s as if i was heimgekommen to talk about what i &apos;ve done in this 20 years .
it &apos;s the spirit and my soul .
they &apos;re shit .
there &apos;s a young director of hollywood , hollywood director , with his friends , other filmemachern , and they talk about what cinema means .
without dinner , i was sick .
we don &apos;t need trouble a trouble that &apos;s going to be a idioten .
our government was corrupt .
so the idea that we have all these kids , it &apos;s a generation , we have a generation of children who have been so much psychological , or damage to the schaden , and it needs to be able to have africa .
through the whole book , they can pull more than an hour of an hour and interactive animations .
what is this business ?
it had the appearance that you &apos;re not going to be , but largely true , largely .
so i thought , &quot; yes , this is a good idea . &quot;
the talk still about it .
when i came from college , i worked in southern california kontextuell , and you &apos;re gewöhnte to the spanish kolonialziegel on the roofs and those things .
rsw : how can you see the schedule ?
the mit-projekt -- they have me to interviewed and have their technischen hilfskräfte for bilbao .
that &apos;s remembered me .
and the guy looked at me and said , &quot; so , &quot; what can i do for you , mr. ? &quot;
if you &apos;re going to be a little bit of a wünschen , the ideas are always getting more and more resilient .
and one thing that i wanted to mention my danksagung was , but somehow missed , it was to thank everybody , to thank everybody who was helped me .
but in the meantime , these things are going to win .
and this is 10 weeks later , by hand .
you see the suits , the blumensträuße .
the most kakophonie and things is remarkable , and this is supposed to be the villen .
it &apos;s a incredible endeavor , 15,000 workers , i think five domes and the sixth will be here .
on this stage , the 1,500 workers .
50 percent of the computers in the world are land in china .
it was quite unusual , so stefan that less than five percent of the ad had a picture of the ad .
and the other thing is three : imax-film , i told myself , i was going to do a do , and i wanted to do something like this .
and it &apos;s increasingly important that we figure out how we can win these resources from these extremely complex abfallströmen .
the traditional ways to separate material , not to work for kunstoff .
the traditional way to produce plastk , is to make oil or petrochemicals .
at the end of this process , we have a gemischte kunststoff-zusammensetzung : many different kinds of kunstoff and many different qualities of plastics .
now i see a lot of grinser out there .
and what we see is that people tend to do mistakes in the exact same way , again and again .
maybe we should study how apes economic choices come and figure out if they &apos;re going to make the same dummheiten as we do .
here &apos;s a little bit more mayday . she &apos;s going to be tauschen to the food and waits happy , and gets your food .
she waits something that is open up the market .
now imagine that i &apos;m going to put a thousand u.s dollars in the hand -- so 10 hundred dollars a hundred dollars .
you can either choose a riskanten loss -- so i &apos;m going to throw a coin . you &apos;re going to lose a lot .
if we put in our little szenarien , the same scenarios , they would be the same things like people do ?
the person on the left is a safer loss .
maybe it &apos;s not only the people on the last stage of development , the stupid of the development .
and that &apos;s the catch .
but if we think about the other hand , they &apos;re only four stories up .
we need to use less with concrete and steel and we need to build higher . we &apos;ve worked in the last time we &apos;ve worked in 30-geschossigen holzgebäuden .
this is much as much as we would have a year in a year , 900 cars in the streets .
kugelsichere curtains verdeckten my window .
maybe even &quot; citizen &quot; because before , it &apos;s been the street to fight the establishment of the food system , the citizens of these networks work together to help each other .
sberbank , the largest bank , and oldest bank in russia , in the ownership of the russian government , uses crowdsourcing , to have been working for employees and citizens in the developing world .
we have heard a lot of talk about people who have their crops to arduino their crops , and mozilla , and mozilla , all over the world , to motivate people to motivate the world and to make video .
and so i began to think that the eternal mother always asks me , &quot; are all kids ? &quot;
that &apos;s compassion .
he asked them to raise a message , and all read in their own language , a central language of the golden rule , which was a version of the golden rule , &quot; what you don &apos;t want to do is not want to do it either . &quot;
a pastor is to be able to take this individual needs .
and we &apos;re going to make this by some fallbeispiele .
there are over 180 messages in washington d.c. , d.c.
the parks is going to be taken by parks and sculptures .
it &apos;s made out of fiber fiber optics .
there &apos;s also a few constraints of his lighting .
the bladder is a anti-denkmal .
i saw my aunt , when i was five .
one of the things i witnessed when i was trying to eat my friend because we didn &apos;t eat the food and we had the 400 .
as a kid , as young and zart , words that i can &apos;t forget , not forget .
that &apos;s my story , in the form of a lesson .
my breakfast , my lunch , i &apos;m going to get on a foundation i founded , because we want to build a school in sudan .
give us tools . give the farmers .
audience : yes !
the third chapter is a more complicated rechtsverfahren called &quot; federal hebeas proceeding . &quot;
that means more than 60 percent are .
we solve this problem by doing this problem by combining death penalty problem .
and even if that happens , it &apos;s not too late .
i remember nothing from time when i was five years old .
the santa claus knows whether you were artig or not . &quot;
but , julie , you &apos;re ready for school . you were ready . &quot;
they looked at each other and the lächelten , which was the right answer . then she said , &quot; do you think we all know that we are all brothers and sisters on this planet ? &quot;
perhaps your bigger capacity to cooperate and adapt to adapt ?
i think this film shows the harshest glimpse of the modern time , &quot; the &quot; the &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot;
in the second world war , we had to produce a lot of stuff .
but we don &apos;t forget that it needs a fundamental contribution , and that &apos;s how many resources we use .
but now , to the good news !
it &apos;s probably latin america .
and at this point , the skeptics and leugner of climate change in phenomenon .
we did a project for a few years ago , a project called the wissenschaftsministerium , it was called the vorsorgeprogramm -- the vorsorgeprogramm -- with many , many people -- a lot of experts were involved -- all the evidence -- a thicker wälzer .
a group of them , they &apos;re going to spend it for himself and the other group to spend it for other people .
when she went to the first building to the second , they went to the second one , and all the time , he was going to be a man who took place and stöhnte , and the question is , was it to be helped and helped them and helped them ?
the word is &quot; pizzled , &quot; a combination of &quot; puzzled &quot; and &quot; pissed off . &quot;
there &apos;s a wonderful book called &#91; unclear &#93; : &#93; the hidden lives are alltäglicher things .
now , now , it &apos;s been four decades -- i &apos;ve been trained with the best of the top in this area , in the world , i had young and old , jung , kollaborierte , kollaborierte , choreographierte , choreographierte , choreographierte , choreographierte , erfolgen and auszeichnungen .
and i found this in my dance , my dance , my strength , my energy , my passion , my real life .
i danced between chemo- and bestrahlungszyklen and drängte , and i met him to adapt to my aufführungsplan .
well , it was essentially frustration .
that &apos;s how it was back .
he put them together , this leads to something interessanterem , and then he put it in this software , which i think she was originally originally his son , and he &apos;s created this wonderful presentation .
there &apos;s little vierecke , little kästen .
i want to suggest -- yes , they make a nice website . how could i say , you don &apos;t have a nice website ?
now , you &apos;re asking the linked data that you have now , 32 hits that everybody in the protein is to be able to look at them .
and that &apos;s what &apos;s about linked data .
all of this will be that every year , every year , two million children die in the last year , last year , than 2000 .
and if it &apos;s so ready to raise feedback , feedback and to give feedback and give to make sure that the promise are really making the outcomes ?
you just show one of the numbers that 5,000 -- is that the number ?
my brothers started to get me to draw and drawing some drawing .
that &apos;s what i was fascinated by this area .
how many of you have a cow on the street , on the road to mysore ?
it &apos;s just so that we &apos;re trained to be trained to be the reality that &apos;s so much , and that makes meaning .
and they said , &quot; go .
can &apos;t you do anything something , you &apos;re a performer ? &quot;
this is a box of wellpappe .
because if we can see somebody that is going to be consistent , we see the footprint .
what percentage of those cells have ausgemacht foreign direktinvestitionen ?
obviously , he was the last hundred years in a cave .
so the auslandshilfe is actually a very good thing to come here , because -- if you think about it , i think , i think , in the economists of economists , i think , is that most of the things that most things are very binnenlastig .
this is the place that i showed you at the beginning .
we &apos;re going to be a little bit more technical .
think of it .
you can &apos;t do it against ankämpfen , so they accept it , and they find it to work with it .
it &apos;s very tough to agree .
it &apos;s wetteifernd and zielgerichtet .
pizza , they get hunger .
there are millions of different beläge .
so remember , if we think about sexual education and activities , they &apos;re in baseball .
it &apos;s the poet yuan chen and goes to the poet , &quot; i can &apos;t get it the bambusmatte .
and , &quot; how much percent of the day you think about this person ? &quot;
over the other societies , people have lost the menschen of this machtvollen gehirnstruktur .
they came with 60-80 percent of the abendessens .
and it really became a strong force .
and i said , &quot; why do you think men are untreuer than women ? &quot;
no time on this was the world war , the women were so educated , so interesting , so different .
she &apos;s she has been she had taken her since she was 13 .
i started to fagen , why you &apos;re more likely to be in love with a person in love with the other .
they &apos;re going to pass as long as long as the human race is in what the shakespeare called &quot; the sterbliche spirale . &quot;
but unfortunately , i know .
most researchers believe that obesity is the cause of insulin resistance .
maybe we should be wondering whether it might be that the insulin &apos;s insulin can be the cause of copyright and adipositas-bedingte diseases -- at least at least ?
others , it &apos;s too much more nahrungsfett , too much of it .
peter attia : what if our beliefs about diabetes ?
my great-grandfather , henry ford , believed that it was the mission of the ford motor company , the life of people to make better and making cars for everyone .
and the good news is that we have the big problems of cars and environment -- not just ford , but in the industry .
i think you can imagine .
but what really inspired me , the possibilities that we &apos;re going to do is to communicate with our cars .
we need a infrastructure that is able to support these flexible future .
this is a minute that &apos;s a minute of a minute .
i think , now , my mom , i &apos;m like a kind of innenarchitekt .
the nurses have to be done data .
that &apos;s really important . it &apos;s a lot .
so what is the heck ?
it was great for us , because we won a lot of awards .
i was infected when i was 17 , and i was a graduate student , i meet the really design-hochschule , i would write the really interesting ideas , and i was viele with me and a lot of tassen chai with me .
now it &apos;s been about the kids . we don &apos;t .
so basically , we gave the kids a simple task .
for our auction , we have a few wonderful images for them for a really good purpose that they &apos;re going to give us to buy the money to buy hearing .
but what i never said , and what i want to do is i want to make it clear that is umweltfreundlichkeit .
in a way , in the elegant , the elegant available available or alternativ product here , we have großzügigerweise mittags here , which we &apos;ve got großzügigerweise mittags , the maxin , which is a kind of development , and inspired by the incredible way of sinnlicher experience .
if you think of the change in our society , the zuzug of the country , the 200 of the country has taken over the same process in 20 years .
it was changing changes , even though those were still unknown .
so we would take the models to the models of a synthetic sky .
i think we have a reduction in altitude of 94 percent .
and how do we do something in this growing world a little bit more labor-intensive , specifically in some places that i talk about -- china for example , that &apos;s going to build a new 10 years .
and this is the focus of the 18-minütigen talk -- there &apos;s no lighting in positive sense , which is healthy and our well-being , not to promote a angemessene .
so in the first office , i showed you to the beginning of the talk , and i showed you this very strange office office , which is the white-gruppe .
behind you , you see the seagram building that was later to a icon of modern lichtdesigns .
i think what you see here is quite puzzling -- how much light in the sky and never reaches the floor .
it &apos;s not very pleasant and behaglich .
they won &apos;t be mixed by the way .
if our innenminister , like a few weeks before , a war in a third of india , about 200 distrikte calls , about 200 distrikte calls , which is unregierbar , it &apos;s the subject of my heart .
and one day -- i don &apos;t know what happened -- while i was at home at home , i would see a honigbiene , or i could see a honigbiene , or it was me to be a honigbiene , life would be wonderful .
ag : but what is it used to use ? what was it used ?
to do what to do ? to break stones .
that &apos;s the only place where you could express their creativity .
they don &apos;t want second option to standards and qualitätsprodukten .
and this is what mansukh bhai did .
i had to be my favorite .
mr. kharai , who lives with a physical challenge , only 50 centimeters .
assam , kanak gogoi .
this is erfreulich .
these are 3,2 billion people .
or failing . it &apos;s just fun and people love it , and people love it to do it and fun things .
so we &apos;ve been very , very hard , but we knew that it would not be so hard to develop technology as the acceptance of what is important and how technology can be deployed .
cars are not made to watch side-by-side ; it &apos;s wonderful machinen to drive between cities and forth , but think about it , we think about it , we have solved all the problems in terms of range and velocity .
so if we could have this box here , we could have a solution to the transport , electricity , electricity , electricity , electricity , and communication , and maybe drinking drinking water in a sustainable package , the 60 pounds of pounds ?
now , a lot of the time , the people who are struggling to die , somehow , in the drug , somehow we &apos;re going to be able to do something that are involved in the drug , and we &apos;re going to take the fact that they either have either or professionell or even both .
and there are a very likely to be in zetas , which is a very likely of psychopaths that are being made fear and the press to the schweigen and the press , and that &apos;s true for most of the most powerful .
and the u.s. and the u.s. , and the u.s. , is now a very exciting organization that has been able to do partnerships with production and worldwide in the global distribution .
but part of it , a month of being magazine -- you live in the future , and we have a long term .
and after they &apos;re running under a critical price , you &apos;re going to be successful , if she &apos;s successful , a critical mass of mass , a breakthrough .
but they &apos;re very , very cheap , and you see the interesting thing . if you &apos;re going to be cheaper , you lose the tokens and so , and the no-names , the apexe , the apexe , you win .
if you look at here , linux is in red , it &apos;s 20 percent .
&quot; it &apos;s the same available is , you know , the gift of the silicon valleys to the world .
because of some of the technologies we &apos;ve talked about .
patient capital work in between and trying to take the best out of the time .
to the second world , it had to be extremely inexpensive .
president obama understands .
because one of the poorest farmers in the world was access to a technology that has allowed to change his life .
and yet , this is exactly the characteristics of men and women were honored by all generations .
you remember , during the wirbelsturms berichtete berichtete in his blog , in the cyclone and aktualisierte him . it was just possible because it &apos;s easy to use it .
i like music , and i like banjos , and i like , i heard steve martin , and i said i told me that i can .
i wrote this post , and i took this thing because einstein &apos;s einstein .
and you see this post .
these little things are .
and maybe i have to schluchzen , because i &apos;m going to be talking about it .
he was convicted for jeher , except from our generation .
we have to use these procedure to use this procedure to get a better understanding of the oceans .
we studied this fish studied . but we just had to learn how we have to keep them .
but the only half of half the size of the planet we ever have .
they come together . that might be sex under the thunfischen . and there it is .
you can be a lure of a auswerfen -- it &apos;s teppichförmig like a seal -- and a white shark will go to this , a neugierige creature that comes up with our 16 feet .
and then we give us a little bit of a encore by helping us .
and the white shark .
i think he thought that the record of my termine is so precise .
they said , &quot; well , from the one that we &apos;ve talked about , they are to be groups to harm the united states ? &quot;
you have to be not going to be true for your energy .
now , who &apos;s now looking at my bankauszüge , i realize that i was there , and white , i was in ninth may für 14.79 in the safeway of the safeway .
all the few moments , i &apos;m going to run a zeitstempel on my life .
when i first started with the project , people said , &quot; why would you want to say , what you &apos;re doing and where you are ?
now it &apos;s normal .
now , you know , you know , you know , you know , this heatmap of paris to see how incredibly fast is the growth .
i looked at thousands of these marktplätze , and trust and improvements are always the last elements .
how do we do think about how trust is to face the face of face ?
i was sort of a spirit in the system .
this page , you get to ask a day of a day , and 80 percent of it is getting an precise answer .
i want to start with a paradox .
and here you see it in the proportion of the degree of inequality , which i showed you , i &apos;ll come back to you .
first of all , the rich developed , developed , and then in a second testfeld , and then in a second testfeld , with the 50 american states -- with the same question : do the growth states in all these scales ?
with a devastating impact , what the use of the world &apos;s benefits of the population .
and in our analysis , we find the same as we are .
the socially einschätzenden urteile , and fear that this guy .
or for example , for example , why violence in education societies is more prevalent , because people are squeamish to be verachtet .
a year , more than three million amputierte a new knee or a ersatzknie .
you remember , like kamal before , i remember the bambusstab .
if you wear it under pants or a rock or a sari , it &apos;s very clear that you &apos;re wearing a prosthetic , and in societies , where disability are associated with a social stigma , people are very sensitive .
so thank you very much .
you want to do a dirty magazine ?
i even bought the vergoldete sondermodell . there &apos;s a little paper clip of this says , &quot; use , they don &apos;t use these saftpresse , to pressen juice .
this is the results of the results of the 20th , &quot; well , google &apos;s just as many &quot; o &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; &quot; o &quot; and &quot; o , &quot; like it is .
very fear of fear .
if you were always done in this state , the job would never done it , because you would suddenly say , &quot; oh , i would say , &quot; oh , i &apos;ve found a new way to do it . &quot;
almost everything we &apos;re doing is subconscious .
it &apos;s about being secure in this world .
if the freizeitpark was born and dignity would fall apart , then you would never use a trip .
it &apos;s a very small action -- you should not be generalisieren .
i &apos;m going to talk about kids and self-organization and a series of experiments that could look at me as an alternative education .
and i had the night that day surften children in the internet .
so i could even choose a cross-section , to make a cross-section , the part of the world &apos;s all the world .
what you see is obviously , there &apos;s a child that uses the computer .
natural systems are all the selbst-organisiert : galaxies , molecules , cells , organisms , organisms -- unless the debate is about the theory of the theory of the smart designer .
and it &apos;s about idealism in idealism in this whole trümmerhaufen .
i bought a nice suit and wearing wearing wearing trug shoes with ledersohle and i had a remarkable access to weltereignissen .
but 2002 , when my tour went to the end , i decided i was not to go to the job that was in london .
i felt that was destroyed something that was destroyed .
and i went to mit . i went through this .
and i went to kosovo and beriet .
independent diplomat is part of a trends that comes from the world &apos;s the world , obviously , and they &apos;re going to be the world that the world is going to change .
it &apos;s horrible that they are these people who are affected , not konsultieren .
this is the politics of the 21st century , and in a certain sense , at a year , independent diplomat , this zersplitterung , this transformation that is happening with all of us .
&quot; hey , could you bring me to me ? &quot;
because if we go to the beziehungskrise , they understood that through these practice , that a simple error can tell what you &apos;re not , or can remind us to remember why you &apos;re doing something .
we feel awe , pity .
here we go .
what is the number one ?
no . in the &apos; 70s , the richtungsweisende show , the 1973 , the 1973 raketenhaft , the 1973 raketenhaft in the top-10 10 , followed by the sechs-millionen-dollar-mann , and &quot; three angels for charlie . &quot;
i can choose from the island .
and i &apos;m delighted to discuss that to you , i come in and say , &quot; can somebody explain to explain the sounds and why it &apos;s so cool ? &quot;
next , this virus-dna stuff that &apos;s the bakterien-dna of the bakterien-dna .
from a number of reasons .
or worse , naturwissenschaftliche education will always be more like the guy who says , &quot; actually ...
but we have so much work and if someone &apos;s involved in science , i &apos;ll ask you to me .
we &apos;re going to get the staircase up and learn a condition .
so many books about war , the same thing , which is that there &apos;s nothing like the war in war .
durkheim believed that everything we could build , a penny of the holiness .
he said , &quot; selbstlose and streitsüchtige people aren &apos;t going to be moved and without any zusammenhalt , no zusammenhalt . &quot;
he &apos;s using the other .
once you all were in a room , they could keep the benefits of cooperation for cooperation .
it &apos;s about connecting to connect to other ideas .
jh : thank you very much .
i quickly realized that männerbereiche is not just the inside .
and right next to the garage he has its own trophäenraum , where he can actually measure his achievements , which is a different role in the männerbereichen .
it &apos;s always been easier to be easier in design , and here &apos;s this riesenflughafen , and my god , i just passed it up .
&quot; the end of print is going to be the fifth time .
this book is called &quot; probes . &quot; it &apos;s a different word for quotes .
this is actually a experiment for a customer , quicksilver , where we made a sequence of six photos and tried to have people to get the gedruckte of the internet in the internet .
they thought they were not liked .
a article on brian ferry -- a really boring article -- so i put the article in the dingbats .
somebody said to me , it would be these things that are the ordner , but i don &apos;t know what this is .
that &apos;s pretty much for most of the jobs .
before everybody was , obviously , no technology . but obviously .
this is not a different planet . these are things that are hidden on our planet .
and finally , i get back to this nacktschnecke .
this is niles eldredge- , he was with stephen gould mitentwickler of the theory of the punktualismus .
we &apos;ve heard about japanern , which are going to give up .
and i think that &apos;s really important . because if you can imagine mozart , the invention of the technology &apos;s invention of the technology &apos;s brilliance -- what this was a loss for society .
octopus faszinierten me for the first time i was very young .
he grabs again , takes a arm a arm , it &apos;s going to go ... &quot; tschk tschk tschk tschk ! &quot; -- the same thing happened .
but the point is , we were a month long , and i wanted to get the animals that we could get used to the animals so that we could see their behaviors , without stören .
and if you go down to down , the lovely blue water will be in the anfang water , which you &apos;re always going to be dunkelblauer and dunkelblauer .
but there &apos;s no sun , there &apos;s no sun , there &apos;s no photosynthesis . it &apos;s a chemosynthetische world down there , it &apos;s so vergänglich .
but i also have the opposite of the opposite .
everybody talks with everybody . then there &apos;s no one more points on a map , it &apos;s a network that we &apos;ve created .
she was hausfrau , and she didn &apos;t go and benahmen us like little girls . she didn &apos;t buy any white identification , but knew , but knew .
my parents had been ließen to scheiden and my sister was arrested .
cities are the schmelztiegel of civilization .
is edinburgh a horse ?
we mean our entire economy , so in the corner of the left , hockeyschläger .
the heartbeat would be in the heartbeat , live longer , diffusion von and nutrients by the membranes , etc .
most important most important is that the exponent , the equivalent of the drei-viertel-rate , bigger than one is -- so about it , as about as much as about this .
they grow and stop , part of our wiederstandsfähigkeit .
looks like a hockeyschläger .
children in the 12th grade , are less excited by political systems .
he had a high school in high school .
my students were made this infografiken as an outcome , a task that we had in terms of the ölpest end of the year .
this is my lieblingsfoto , because it was made in tuesday than i was going to go to the students to go to the election .
and with this , it &apos;s equally .
actually , you could -- -- we don &apos;t go .
it &apos;s a grobkonzept .
and he asked a very important question .
and i &apos;ll show you 15 million dollars .
you see the stem cells back .
many of these patients are hard .
the european union , the same .
and although i don &apos;t have patents , so i &apos;m aware of me today , and i &apos;ll meet some of my inventions .
you know , of course , what that means .
and they have all this progress in the same time in so short time . they &apos;re all so young .
thank you all .
in school -- in fact , i have a organization that makes a führungsding mitgegründet , you know , like you here , you would like it , and so it &apos;s like it .
it was also very popular , but she was so full of ennui .
my daughter -- my daughter wrote that , she said , &quot; start with humor . &quot;
i &apos;m a lesbian . &quot;
i want your hand .
and then i finally got a last year , i finally got a call that i should talk to j.j. abrams .
and i thought if i could write books , and i could have a conversation that could be small and connected , maybe i might perhaps be human for the problems that we all affect us , and they may even be able to get to improving the world .
and john said , &quot; bet on good people doing good .
there was no specific media , which focused on the public interest .
i thought the problem of coming in 30-50 years to us .
i &apos;ve learned that it &apos;s not just a proper way to change .
what do you believe , how many police are on this cab ? you know ? three .
now look at that . this is the anästhesie-gerät .
yes , the medical advice of the vorstandsvorsitzenden , &quot; yes , i told you that , you know , not that you can &apos;t , i don &apos;t know . &quot;
this is our first patient , just from the intensivbehandlung , and now look at this chair .
these are the grundzüge of my apparates , or our apparats .
i have to serve . &quot;
this is in the scottish parliament .
they put them on a very special nährstoffreiche diet and they &apos;re behandelten with great deal .
his app was only wiedereingestellt when he won the prize prize .
but there were a lot of debates about how to be mr. herr .
so we have the situation in the world today where more countries are in the world today , where the relationship between the citizens and the government is mediated by the internet , which is being created by the größtenteils of the internet .
rebecca maxkinnon : bring the internet back .
they &apos;re all gewannen all four years in the gewichtheben and in the same proportion in the olympics . they were the big key key in communism , with a great lifestyle that was going to be the case .
the european union , which was to harvest the fruit of the world &apos;s coming to the world , they &#91; the e.u. &#93; the e.u. was built into the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the age of the history of the age of economic people .
from 1994 , for seven years , for seven years , the adria of the boote die nach to italy , every single night .
let me go to the 1x1 of the organized crime .
i would like to introduce you mr. pringle .
they are shaping our bankkonten , our bankkonten , our bankkonten .
i mean , if i &apos;m a good job , i have to believe that there is a reason .
this was very unbeliebt . they didn &apos;t want to go back to the beginning .
it has been waited since 1960 , as alister hardy , a meeresbiologe , said , &quot; i think our forefathers lived in the water . &quot;
as an absolute connection , it &apos;s only in a direction .
and then the fact that we &apos;re more secure .
for example , professor tobias . he did it .
so if there are coming and if it will happen , who is holding it ?
one : i want to use the zeitig as possible .
yeah , i was hanging up yesterday with a few shillings .
you see , somehow , in the lives of other people , and i &apos;m feeling that i &apos;m going to get a lot of inspiration from the user .
this is called &quot; atheist . &quot;
online online -- you &apos;ve been seen many .
and web-toymaker ze ze frank gives us a very amüsante standup-show , and tells us what he is with passion : people help create little web-programmen and interact .
the answer is pretty strange .
so , the point about : say , you tell people , &quot; if you don &apos;t have the information that i offer my help . &quot;
and every time i talk about what i do is i want to think about at least a moment of why body &apos;s meaning .
so this particular instrument is called the auf-den-bauch-hörer .
they &apos;re shrinking and melt at the same same time -- and some are really gone .
that wouldn &apos;t be a big problem because if we would float in todesgefahr , we would put our naked to all the naked , all the way to do , and you find a way to find it .
this is data from the haushaltsbüro of congress , they show the realistischste prediction of what would happen if the current conditions and trends .
the rock is holy , and when people circle together , they become a little bit of a shared together , they become a einander , you &apos;ll get one .
so the bloods and the crips knowledge know what they need to be voices .
for many reasons , the decades were , for the second world war , a historic time of world war ii .
there we are as a country .
we &apos;re going to be a nation with two classes .
that &apos;s really a social disaster , and the liberals are very worried about it .
but don &apos;t exist . so i have to make them .
they &apos;ve been since in the architecture of architecture .
you see this schaubildern that the protocell actually moved from the light to the dark .
it &apos;s been struck me almost three decades of krankenhäusern , and i &apos;m probably most proud of .
instead , i &apos;m a ordentliche leader for jura , psychology and psychiatry at the beginning of the medical school of law , i have a lot of good friends and a beloved husband , which is also here .
i quote from my writings : &quot; i had been rebel with my classmates and val val in the jurabibliothek , where we wanted to work together in a homework .
then they started to show me poor and legs with a ledergurten .
i &apos;ve never met a psychiatriepatienten , which had this belief that i had .
i could let them einweisen and we could do it very little . &apos; ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha
the american prisons are filled with people who are elusive , and many of you are there because they never have a reasonable therapy .
so we decided to build a different car .
this is four billion hours alone in this country .
in short , there was plenty of water and not very many people .
and the montana brewers have already done much , to reduce their water , but they still use millions of litern .
he &apos;s paid for it to make the water .
i don &apos;t like to have a problem with a problem , without the solution , so i want to highlight this shows , like &quot; mad men &quot; and movies like &quot; brautalarm , &quot; which is weibliche and hauptfiguren and vielseitig .
his name is matthieu ricard is all about compassion .
i know there &apos;s other companies in the world , but google is the environment that i know , because i &apos;m 10 years to use it , so i &apos;ll use google as a case .
so , it turns out google is a company with compassion because , it &apos;s a lot of things that compassion is fun .
and there &apos;s a morning at work , and they have three colleagues that are made out of the heiterem skies , a hospital in india .
there are three steps .
and i hope that compassion is also fun for them to be fun and profit .
but one day , the perfect case was , and it was a gemüseverkäuferin that was sitting in front of her house .
i met with one of the entwicklungsbüros that the training of staatsanwälten and richtern , what the normal bias is in the verteidigern .
people often tell me , &quot; you know , this is wonderful , but it &apos;s highly idealistisch .
in the same context that you sometimes see if you &apos;re in the new york subway subway and reads that beruhigende and easy feeling .
different parts of the world have a händchen for different things .
and at the same time , the great work of takeshi ishiguro , who made this beautiful salz- and pfefferstreuer aus .
but the objects erstreckten from complete minenräum-ausrüstungen to this kind of concrete sterilisierungsstrohhalmen , it was really breit gefächert .
even this chair you open up and then sit , so you put your skin cells , so this beautiful series of objects that are viewed as design as a design of barcelona .
what has the image has to do with this ?
instead , they developed a very interesting approach to my education -- namely , she would send me to a school that they could barely afford .
my final story , and i have to have a bit of a hurry .
and he died , when the ambulance was to get to the hospital .
now , i &apos;m an entrepreneur is a way of how to do that .
just wagt .
and we need to begin to think of africans , our leading politicians to question our leading politicians .
so my cousin was not able to afford the intended , and it &apos;s very smart .
and if you don &apos;t take you , then you can &apos;t take that stuff .
and the country was divided in the politics between politics and religion .
so our political problems .
veränderer and future leaders were shaped .
he helped half in the main section of a birth .
she &apos;s the heart of medical care .
i &apos;m going to sell this simple thing to the world &apos;s world .
now , when i got this , i was -- push the feststelltaste -- completely except me ?
now , in a few weeks , a great girl will be a great girl .
and as you can see , the life expectancy was too short .
life expectancy has increased in 78. 78. .
this is absolutely the best technology for this region .
let &apos;s start with the water .
but they have to share with the world .
the generation y seems to be anzuklopfen .
and 100,000 people are coming up to a nonviolent march and a idiot , or lockspitzel a jerk , guess what &apos;s going to be a stein , and this guy &apos;s a guy .
and it &apos;s also about humor . humor is such a powerful force that can turn the game , and he played in poland , in poland .
now , the 1-million-dollar-frage : how will it go to the arab world ?
and she said , &quot; i saw your talk in the live live stream .
i said , &quot; if 500 to 1,000 or 2000 , is my life over . &quot;
there are nothing verletzlicheres than that .
and i see them .
and everybody broke down in the round of applause and said , &quot; yes ! &quot;
i know your dad was never in luxembourg , he was in a local death .
the other thing you have to know about shame , she &apos;s absolutely organized by the sex .
i said , &quot; yes . &quot;
we want to be with them and you &apos;re going to be .
and if we &apos;re going to go back and forth ...
if i didn &apos;t see a ant in the rice , i couldn &apos;t see it .
this helped us to create a very ethical and very powerful organization , and a system that supports them .
we have a simple digital camera in a retinalkamera , and we do a ferndiagnose in a doctor &apos;s house for every patient .
our erlöse are significantly more quickly than us have a healthy profit , and that &apos;s what we &apos;re doing for many people .
that &apos;s a tough job .
for example , we can use digital content with physical mass .
wouldn &apos;t it be a way that would not be a possibility to make cell more intuitive ?
it was , as they couldn &apos;t see me as if i was invisible .
and also , nobody ever heard before a unterwasser-rollstuhl or seen and this idea , the creation of the schauspiel of the new ways of the mind , and knowledge , because now you have this concept in your head .
like bp , the hole is moving , at least , vorübergehend , but not without a tremendous price .
don &apos;t feel that .
and it &apos;s also the history of modern capitalism , because it was the wealth of this country , the system that the system was a system that is the system that we can &apos;t survive without any stetiges and endlosen .
the oil is not rocket .
now , you may have more headlines than these noticed .
great show . man , that was good !
bf : ... like in the left .
dh : all right , please stand here .
rw : can i hold him ?
dh : power is just jonglier-jungen , say ?
dh : then we go .
dh : the french judge ...
dh : i &apos;ve got it -- -- to take the keule down there with my handle from steel .
bf : from six to seven . dh : this is apple . bf : dh : for us .
he &apos;s less known as the two , because he had this idea , to build mechanical rechengeräte and never building any building .
but if yes , you would see something very , very similar .
this is from a essay that you &apos;re übersetzte .
there are plans .
you know the problem that we don &apos;t want to believe what we know .
we don &apos;t want to believe what we know .
second and julia and julia and julia and panno and panno and diana , and ranjha , and ranjha , that &apos;s love !
shortly after i got seven years to the wheelchair , i &apos;ve done more in the wheelchair in the wheelchair , and i made it in the wheelchair of him .
over generations , we have our kids as the same as a million other species that live with us .
but it &apos;s not a normal movie .
but if i &apos;m not going to have a base of the pixel of the pixel of the auflösung 800 , we would have a 3000 800 , we would take 3,000 screens to take a look at the genome .
what does this mean for medicine ?
and so he pairs the genomes of his children .
it &apos;s because there were somebody in the audience who wants to stop .
imagine , in 2016 , the leading kandidatin not only do their four years of zurückliegenden , but also the personal genome .
and so i &apos;m going to ask you all , aufzuwachen and the genomic revolution that &apos;s going to happen around them .
and we have a flexiblen , angetriebenen catheter in a particular drahtschlaufenspitze , which is within the festen part of the knochenmarks and the train of the hip .
hopefully , it will allow us to allow this technology to see more of these survivors .
on the floor , the rehearsal abstrahlt abstrahlt them a switch of the gas and schrödinger .
so exciting . he can create the appropriate of the earlier possible technology , so we &apos;re going to capture very , very quickly , we &apos;ll be very quickly .
the most famous charge is electrical .
they tell us what changes are allowed to be allowed .
but that &apos;s how this is how it works .
many of the world &apos;s think of the most beautiful structure in math .
the only way to get his spiritual health , in the midst of all the insecurity , and happiness , is to get to preserve the balance and a perspective in life .
the pattern of dots that i showed you , describe , in fact , in fact , in fact , is actually a symmetrien symmetrien , moving , moving and down to the erlebbaren space-time .
and we &apos;ve heard about the story of the story of the bloodline of mankind through genetic dna-profilierung .
in the schimpansengesellschaft , we find lots of examples of compassion , and the vorläufer of love for love and artificial altruism .
most important , i think it &apos;s a little bit of groups of women , to give you the opportunity to give the opportunity to the shot of the recording .
and you know what i mean . i &apos;m talking about pollution .
take the ziegelmauer for all the problems that we have the planet that we have to have the planet in terms of environment and social . it &apos;s a message of hope .
and the way to pregnancies and the way to make the world , and the way of young people hearing better than adults .
this change , this change . change to see the way we care about the future .
working with the plastic , about the first eight years , some of my pieces started to decay and break down into smaller plastikstückchen .
recycling . everybody beendet about his book about erträglichkeit ecology with the idea of recycling .
so i &apos;m here , and i &apos;m going to unveil our youngest , and we &apos;re trying to study the most successful research that &apos;s in the middle of the development .
the author of the book is juan , our vorheriger referent , and it &apos;s going to be judged by amazon .
and at that time , we knew that this was a political thing .
15 years ago , i lost a kid , a second one , when i was 16 .
i know what it is called it , and if a crime happens , an person is going to be called judged and punished . &quot;
but what if that wasn &apos;t that ?
and after a few years of misslungenen , i thought i was going to do this out here , the lifesaver-flasche .
and they add . you know .
okay . the lifesaver-flasche is used by thousands of people worldwide .
or we could use one of these here .
mao tse famously described them as the european civil wars , and this is probably a genauere description .
my mind , my ladies and gentlemen , is probably probably not that the most likely is probably possible .
they start to see the hervortreten of a multipolaren world .
but this is not the case .
the wechselbeziehungen of nations , now we always have .
now , one last thing .
but if you &apos;re today to ask the durchschnittsamerikaner , how the optimal formula is to be a long life , he probably wouldn &apos;t tell you .
it reminds me about my college .
and research shows that this years , that this years would be frei , heart disease , cancer and diabetes .
you have what we want .
currently , we are at half .
and for a while , we looked at the prärien minnesotas , where there are a high levels of 100-jährigen .
instead , they talk about the next trip in nature , tauschen , tauschen , and yes , they pray .
it &apos;s made us gelungen on 9 herunterzubrechen .
they tend to be able to feed themselves .
for the little example that i think here in the hand , we &apos;ve used a berührungssensor , which is using my skin , by this little light .
so often amateurs , no experts , the inventor of the inventor and verbesserer of things like mountain bikes , halbleitern , pcs , flugzeugen ...
and then , the computer was a big animal that was only interested in scientists , and no one of them to have a träumte of it .
you only have your own eyes to come through .
i mean , i mean , it &apos;s been seen .
and we have the driver of the driver &apos;s driver &apos;s driver &apos;s driver and studied .
and i said , &quot; i can &apos;t fix it , but i can bring them into the weightlessness in zero to the zero .
we had four notfallärzte and two nurses in the airplane .
and actually , you can actually show you some images because i don &apos;t want to see on the screen .
no life from the smallest life until all of us , if we can &apos;t , without this little micro-machines .
i duschte on campingplätzen . i went eating eating .
i didn &apos;t change . my i.q. was not completely .
i was a writer .
so , nobody would not be buying the family if your kid doesn &apos;t survive .
and then we decided , why not use religion , because in the philippines , the catholic church are quite strong , and thailänder are buddhist .
we had our first mikrokreditprogramm , and the women who said , &quot; we just want to borrow women to do the family planning .
you can call the coca-cola of the coca-cola if you like . it &apos;s exactly the same thing .
and then aids , in all schools , started in university .
and then here &apos;s the american flag , &quot; don &apos;t go home . &quot;
these are things that are going to be made by the corporate world .
can you imagine , in every starbucks , you can get rid of you too much ?
he doesn &apos;t really know about creepy or creepy .
so i &apos;m going to do a picture .
you can actually simulate this behavior in the browser , which is what romo is here right here .
i want to tell you about my four minutes of the ruhms .
people like you all here in this room .
she went to elegantly , like a giraffe in the african savannah , the flag on their shoulder . i joggte afterwards -- -- on the zehenspitzen , the flag of the ausgestreckten poor , so my head was under the bloody thing .
i have my whole life with women and women .
jenny is clear that the only solution is to get the same solution .
they bring women to plant new trees to plant and wässern , drop up for the floor .
women and children , especially the poor , are very down .
if you sold too early , you get the returns , but if you &apos;re going to go back to long , all the time , the course of the course .
you can see the tips .
the challenge for the most popular player is , whether it &apos;s a fair , the other is fair or that it &apos;s going to be denkt , so he thinks that one or two dollars to each other .
now , i &apos;m going to tell you a few relatives .
we can try it . maybe we &apos;re going to .
so what did we learn today ?
about 10 calories , required to find a food food that we consume in the west .
how do you get a city ?
and the city in east , in cheapside , they &apos;re going to be verkauf , and it &apos;s why it &apos;s called poultry .
and at this point , our relationship is completely changed to both the food and to the cities .
the word of popular thomas was absichtlich moore .
dampfende haufen .
we have to understand that the world is what we eat .
it &apos;s the source of all the morality of all the morality , this fantasievolle act of einfühlung , himself to put itself to another one .
and i see that this is a very cheap intelligence , not just a schnulziges emotion .
in the present fertigungsindustrie , we have a wolkenkratzer -- a half a million parts , a half to a million parts , very complex , new and exciting technologies of steel , concrete .
so the next project is that in question and looking at the passive nature or the passive trying to make rekonfiguration programmierbar .
basically , you have a chain of elements .
when i was in beloit , wisconsin , i gave a public talk from a group of students .
often , we &apos;re looking for erregern as beispielsweise as flu .
there are unknown everywhere around us , and it &apos;s just waiting for it to be discovered .
now , we could please turn off the lights , so we can see it ?
so we are chemical ausblühungen , who are different , our chemical ausblühung .
but i have to say -- and i &apos;m just -- i &apos;m going to apologize , richard -- that i &apos;ve never been very gemocht , and i think we &apos;re going to have a few hundred million years .
everybody is talking about to make a state of abgasmengen to play every prize .
he realized that it &apos;s possible to be able to encourage different laws that are going to enable the economies to have the small profits that are going to have to gain so to gain other clients .
both are dark in comparison to rico , which half a lot of people have the haiti or the dominikanische republic .
one of these zones is the hong kong of hong kong .
people can come to live under the charter , but nobody is forced to live .
and a lot of those who have understood the idea of the sonderzonen , people can participate in rules .
how would we write a system like that ?
you thought in genomics , a little more than 10 years ago , you have to have the end of this year , and five genomes have been sequenced ; it &apos;s already hundreds of the year .
if there &apos;s a lot of chlorophyll , they &apos;re very green light .
the number of common genes has a little bit of a little bit of parasites ; it &apos;s even bigger than we &apos;re in certain kinds of genes , on ungefähr .
it &apos;s a fügt of a genom , which was a bestrahlung , through the chromosomes in little bits of pieces of wood , within the aftermath of 24 hours to reinvent 24 hours .
so let me end with ethical and political studies .
of course , it &apos;s worth waiting for you .
we call them &quot; zukunftsorientiert . &quot; you focus on what &apos;s going to be .
and it &apos;s also me . i grew up as a poor kid in the south bronx . everybody lived in the past and in the present .
let &apos;s take the domain of medicine .
here &apos;s a beautiful picture of the andromedanebels , the largest spiralgalaxie in the unmittelbarer near our milky way .
it &apos;s cold , gespenstisch and neblig , maybe it &apos;s raining , and maybe they &apos;re on the ufer eines randvoll .
i can &apos;t tell you how this was the first images of the spacecraft of the spacecraft &apos;s surface of the spacecraft &apos;s surface , and this was what we saw .
so here we see a movie of the titans äquatorregion , which shows this dunes . these dunes are 100 feet up , and we &apos;re 100 feet up a few kilometers and erstrecken and meilenweit .
until now , the earth is still the only planet where we know it &apos;s going to be .
they would have lost 40 percent of their country and would have been so that they wouldn &apos;t have any free access to the rest of the west .
demonstrant : this is a friedlicher protestmarsch .
so we &apos;re organized a television .
and they only needed four days .
and like the rest of the brain , he &apos;s made of neurons .
in the eingängen of the hippocampus , you actually find cells that are in the hippocampus of hineinprojizieren , which is exactly the wahrnehmen of the limit or the edges of the edges , and the rat or the mouse , if you extend the environment .
and this would be portrayed by the fire of the grenzortungszellen .
he was not the only man who was a america of a america without bürgrechte , and he wasn &apos;t quite sure the only great speaker of his time .
and why would anyone want to be interested in ?
people don &apos;t buy what they do , but why you do it .
the neocortex is responsible for all our rational and analytical thought and language .
it &apos;s always the same three things , so we look at it .
and if you talk about what they believe , they will be the dress that believe what you believe .
the reason that people have bought a iphone in the first six hours , and it was six hours in the queue , and their will , and your will that everybody sees it . they were the first .
people don &apos;t buy what they do , they buy why they do it . and what they &apos;re doing is that we &apos;re just going to do it as proof of what you believe .
and by the way , he gave the dream , &quot; don &apos;t i have a dream that i have a plan .
i &apos;ll never forget how cartoons in dauerschleife über über .
when this was the office office for wirtschaftsförderung in washington , d.c. , the geigers clinic , they were wutentbrannt .
and we decided to use the rezepte of the purpose .
what if we had a waiting room where you &apos;re not just herumsitzt , if you &apos;re sick , but you &apos;re getting sick , but you &apos;re going to be healthy .
and they leave these with the conviction , the ability and the general , our most powerful hopes in health care .
i think that the end of the end of our healthcare system , if we grade our healthcare system , it &apos;s not been geheilt , but they &apos;re being measured , but to the diseases that were going to be treated .
the world is now a real danger in the world , but this is in indian ocean .
we &apos;ve caught it with this low-tech-floß low-tech-floß . at the board , six tons of cocaine , six tons of cocaine .
eighty-five percent of you cannot read , if they &apos;re going to be in the afghan sicherheitskräfte .
multiply the 400.000-mal. that öffentlich-private cooperation with sicherheitskräften , how security is going to be created in the world .
i &apos;m really doing .
remember , remember , a fun of me than the sandworms were , and you know , count the dots for gore , count the dots for bush . count .
the bubbles represent the countries .
some countries had already had statistics .
but we have to have the united states a piece of a piece to find the same health that we have today to the philippines .
that changes .
it looks like a happy history .
what you &apos;re doing here -- you &apos;re going to live on -- it &apos;s the same way .
it &apos;s about food .
it &apos;s a stupid concept of developing countries that we have , and mozambique of 50 years ago , and claims that they evolved .
governance . a government government -- that led california from 1850 .
and i showed the approach , how the seemingly impossible is possible .
and the enemy is pretty lame .
we are -- despite skepticism -- with ease in afghanistan .
&quot; it &apos;s not ideal a world . &quot; &quot; &quot; and your government leads us to be a step . &quot;
how would you look like this ?
what we need to do is also need the back , is a kompetente sytemadministratur .
do you want to do a better system ?
and the doctor told him , he doesn &apos;t just move that way .
&quot; who allowed us , the end of the world . &quot;
the leviathan is only going to be seldom from his pen .
it &apos;s hierum .
luftwaffe , strategic luftbrücke beiderseits .
so thomas barnett shows a new way to peace to peace .
i don &apos;t want to do it too much .
here you see the pinatubo in the early 90-zigern , who brought a lot of sulfur into the stratosphere , with a kind of a atombomben cloud .
this report landed on president jonsons desk , when i was two years old .
but we say , you have sunlight that &apos;s the way we meets the particles , and it &apos;s ungleichmäßig .
i don &apos;t think that &apos;s going to happen . it &apos;s not very likely .
so since we went on this scenario and keep from the present to the present .
not just about how we do it better , but what are the risks and side effects ?
here you see a fish with a fish , pulsierenden eyes .
really incredible . here &apos;s two males here .
and so i came up with their focus on just two days ago .
but if you look at the literature in east and west , they &apos;re going to find incredibly different definitions of happiness .
so , a deeper sense of serenity and fulfillment , and a state , which is a state of the chemical tools and you &apos;re going to be zugrundeliegt. and sorgen the freuden and the sorgen .
and we know that we know that we can actually be in something like a little paradise called &quot; a little paradise , and i would have to be completely unhappy .
the mirror allows you , but the mirror will not be able to make it , it &apos;s not going to be able to translate it by this images .
if you do that again , your tendency will be the tendency to get back to the anger , and you &apos;re going to go back to each time , because it &apos;s going to go back .
of course , we do the training with the training .
we &apos;re ready to go for 15 years to our education .
it &apos;s really a riesenproblem for us .
it &apos;s a schätzenswerter place . it &apos;s good .
you can see exactly what happens is at night , at night , at night .
not just blumenbeete , not just a cartoon of the sierra nevada .
this is actually a television , the ununterbrochen , &quot; we &apos;re normal .
we &apos;re going to -- we have a eisenbahnnetz whose bulgarians would be at the bulgarians .
a final thing -- that &apos;s been for years to have me , but i think it &apos;s particularly important for this audience .
at this point , we &apos;re about two days from the entrance .
this is atmungssystem with geschlossenem kreislauf -- -- kreislauf .
the ice can be between five and 25 miles .
the sensorstrahlen look at the same time looking at the same time , and back , so that it can do new sondierungen while it &apos;s still going on the eye .
for this , they would pay 10,000 dollars in orbit .
and the says that you &apos;re moving 10,000 feet faster than you want to get back to the gas .
and with the right support of support , that &apos;s done in seven years .
i &apos;m assuming you &apos;re not going to throw me from the turtle , because it &apos;s the question .
and she also formed a few companies where the brand doesn &apos;t work so well .
rb : no , no , no .
we have a video that shows what they &apos;re planning , and virgin galactic in the air .
he wanted to jump , or he said , &quot; he said , &quot; i &apos;m going to go ? &quot;
ok , that &apos;s not hard .
i mean , here are a lot of people who have kids , and we have this dilemma to have the dilemma .
rb : our kronzeuge , that it actually , in fact , &quot; forget the priester , here are the sex pistos . &quot;
and 15 people are coming up our paper and said they would try it .
no , i want my life in all of life .
